2. Land Use Elemen
This page intentionally left blank
Chapter 2. Land Use
INTRODUCTION
Purpose and Function
T
        he overarching purpose of the Land Use Element is to guide the
        future development of Highland. It designates the distribution,
        general location and building intensities of land uses such as
residential, commercial, office, industrial, open space, recreational and
institutional uses. But most importantly, the Land Use Element translates
the City’s vision from a long-range narrative to a land use plan and
policy document that organizes the physical environment into a logical,
functional and aesthetic pattern consistent with the Highland Vision.
To accomplish this broad scope, the Highland General Plan study area is
composed not only of the acreage within the existing City limits, but
includes the areas within the City’s sphere of influence. Therefore,
General Plan policies for land uses which may have the potential to be
included within the City in the future, and areas for purposes of physical
coordination, such as regional roadways, aircraft hazards, regional
drainage, utilities, etc., will need to be taken into consideration when
future land use decisions are made.
Related Plans and Programs
Other Elements
Of all the General Plan Elements, the Land Use Element has the broadest
scope. Since it governs how land is to be utilized, virtually all of the
issues and policies contained in other Elements relate in some degree to
this Element.
For example, the Circulation Element defines policies for the accommo-
dation of vehicular trips generated by the population and employment
associated with the various land uses permitted by the Land Use
Element. Similarly, the location and intensity of uses prescribed by this
Element are influenced by policies for the protection of environmental
and recreational resources in the Conservation and Open Space
Element. The Community Design Element complements the Land Use
Element by providing policies that promote quality development,
City of Highland General Plan                                              2-1

                                                HIGHLAND…A Great Place to Live
    enhance community character and preserve historic resources and
    neighborhoods.
    Development Code
    The City of Highland Development Code sets forth the City’s standards,
    guidelines and procedures concerning the development and maintenance
    of land use. These regulations are intended to implement the goals,
    objectives, and policies of the General Plan; protect the physical, social,
    and economic stability and vitality of Highland residents and their
    property; reduce or eliminate hazards to the public; and enhance the
    City’s physical, social and economic advantages through comprehensive
    land use and resource planning.
    East Highlands Ranch Planned Unit Development
    Much of the development that has occurred in the areas of Highland
    east of SR-30 was shaped by the East Highlands Ranch Planned Unit
    Development. This plan provides detailed land use guidance, develop-
    ment standards and conditions of approval that have guided, and will
    continue to guide, the development of East Highlands Ranch. The final
    section of this Element, Community Policy Areas, provides an exhibit
    that depicts the boundaries of this area.
    City of San Bernardino General Plan
    Due to the proximity of San Bernardino and the irregularly shaped
    boundary lines that are shared between San Bernardino and Highland,
    the City must carefully monitor development and land use changes in
    San Bernardino that could impact Highland. The City of San Bernardino
    General Plan provides the City of Highland with an understanding of the
    long-range future development of San Bernardino and allows the City to
    plan accordingly and cooperate with San Bernardino to ensure land use
    compatibility, improve efficiencies in the provision of public services
    and facilities, and provide buffers where visions between the two cities
    may differ.
    San Bernardino International Airport
    The San Bernardino International Airport (SBD), located just outside the
    City’s southern boundary, has the capacity to provide regional air traffic
    for domestic and international service, both commercial and cargo, along
    with the necessary support facilities for major and smaller airlines. As the
    Airport grows, it has the potential to affect economic growth and quality
    of life for Highland residents and businesses. The City will actively
    participate in future Airport planning activities and work with the San
    Bernardino International Airport Authority (SBIAA) to enhance economic
    opportunities and protect Highland’s quality of life.
2-2                                        March 2006 | City of Highland General Plan

                                                                                                  2. LAND USE ELEMENT
Element Components
The Land Use Element is organized into four sections:
     •    Introduction. As indicated above, this section states the purpose of
          the Element and briefly discusses other plans and programs that
          affect the future development of Highland.
     •    Land Use Plan. This section graphically depicts the land use
          patterns of Highland, highlights key objectives of the Plan and
          provides a statistical summary for the future buildout of the City.
     •    Citywide Goals and Policies. This section provides a discussion of
          general land use issues that apply to more than one area of the
          City or apply Citywide. Each of the issue discussions is followed
          by a series of goals and policies.
     •    Community Policy Areas. This last section of the Element identifies
          a number of specific areas of the City that require special
          attention and necessitate the creation of goals and policies
          unique to those areas.
Setting
The City of Highland is located in the eastern portion of the San
Bernardino Valley, east of the City of San Bernardino and north of the
City of Redlands. As evidenced in Figure 2.1, Regional Vicinity Map,
the City’s western boundaries are very irregular as a result of previous
annexations into the City of San Bernardino, prior to Highland’s
incorporation. Growing sentiment in response to the easterly expansion
of the City of San Bernardino prompted the residents within the
Highland area to preserve the area’s identity through incorporation, and
Highland incorporated in November 1987 as San Bernardino County’s
eighteenth City.
Although Highland is a relatively new city, the community of Highland
has a long history. The earliest attempts to establish an agricultural
settlement in the Highland area occurred in 1858, when the Cram and
Van Luevan families constructed a ditch to bring water from the Santa
Ana River to their lands in East Highlands; the ditch extended as far as
City Creek, east of the present Highland village townsite. By the early
1880s, agricultural development was increasing, most notably the
planting of citrus orchards. The construction of the North Fork Ditch
began in 1881, bringing water from the upper part of the Cram and
Van Ditch west along the mountain front, crossing City Creek, and              The remnants of rock-lined irrigation ditches
                                                                               are still apparent in Historic Highland.
terminating near the present intersection of Palm and Highland Avenues.
Evidence of the early rock-lined ditches can still be seen along the west
City of Highland General Plan                                                                                                2-3

                                                                                             HIGHLAND…A Great Place to Live
                                                 side of Church Avenue below Pacific Street, and on the west side of Palm
                                                 Avenue, north of the former Santa Fe rail right-of-way.
                                                 Prompted by the construction of a rail line through the area, the original
                                                 Highland townsite was surveyed in 1891 and recorded in 1893. It
                                                 consisted of the area south of Pacific Street between Palm Avenue and
                                                 Church Avenue, including the south side of Main Street. Additional
                                                 development occurred on unplatted lands on Pacific Street west of Palm
                                                 Avenue. After construction of the rail line, packing houses aligned
                                                 themselves with the rail line, creating a diagonal swath (“packing house
                                                 row”) through the center of the town. In the 1890s, a narrow-gauge
                                                 railroad connected Highland to San Bernardino and Redlands. This line
                                                 was later widened and upgraded for electric rail service. In 1911, the line
                                                 was acquired by the Pacific Electric Railway, which provided passenger
                                                 service until the mid-1930s. Many buildings remain from this significant
                                                 period of the townsite (through 1938).
                                                 By 1903, the town of Highland had a population of over 1,000,
                                                 expanding into previously undeveloped acreage south and west of the
                                                 intersection of Palm Avenue and Pacific Street, recorded as “Cole’s
                                                 Addition” in 1904. The local economy was firmly rooted in the citrus
                                                 industry, and was thus susceptible to the fluctuations of that industry.
                                                 The 1920s were years of prosperity, with new packinghouses being
  Highland’s agricultural roots are evidenced by constructed, and the town expanding to the north.
    citrus orchards that remain along Greenspot
                          Road in east Highland. By the mid-1930s, a number of changes began to signal the end of
                                                 Highland as the closely knit citrus community it had been. Although
                                                 the strength of the citrus industry somewhat buffered the effects of the
                                                 depression, the increasing importance of the private automobile yielded
                                                 a noticeable shift in community focus from internal to external concerns.
                                                 The increased mobility of residents, the loss of the Pacific Electric
                                                 Railway, the sale of the local bank to a statewide organization and the
                                                 beginning of the decline of the citrus industry, coupled with natural
                                                 disasters, including a disastrous freeze in 1937, led to the economic
                                                 stagnation of the Highland area.
2-4                                                                                     March 2006 | City of Highland General Plan


                                          HIGHLAND…A Great Place to Live
    This page intentionally left blank.
2-6                                   March 2006 | City of Highland General Plan

                                                                         2. LAND USE ELEMENT
Suburbanization of the Highland area began as early as 1943 with
the establishment of the San Bernardino Army Air Depot (now San
Bernardino International Airport). Citrus groves were removed and
replaced with housing. As the suburbanization process accelerated in
the postwar population explosion period, area packinghouses lost their
support base and were largely converted to various industrial uses. This
early suburbanization moved east from the San Bernardino area,
stopping at City Creek. Suburban development east of City Creek did
not occur until much later, primarily spurred by the development of East
Highlands Ranch in the 1980s.
In 1988, the Secretary of Defense established the Base Realignment and
Closure Commission for the purpose of recommending the realignment
or closure of military facilities. In 1989, the Commission approved the
closure of Norton Air Force Base. Base operations were discontinued in
September 1993, and the facility was officially closed in March 1994.
The impacts on surrounding areas and the City of Highland were
immediate. When the military left, many of the residential areas
experienced severe vacancies. Residential developments that were
known for their quality and attractiveness quickly deteriorated from a
lack of maintenance and an infiltration of crime.
Since that time, the San Bernardino International Airport Authority
(SBIAA) was established to manage and develop the airport facility into
an operating international airport. The SBIAA is a joint powers agency
made up of the Cities of San Bernardino, Colton, Loma Linda, Highland
and the County of San Bernardino.
As Highland has begun its growth into the new millennium, new
opportunities have matured and will wield even greater influence:
completion of Interstate 210 (I-210) over the next several years;
development potential in the easterly canyon portion of the City,
including the Seven Oaks Dam property; continued infill development in
the western portion of the City; gradual expansion of the San Bernardino
International Airport; and increasing housing demand, especially in
higher value housing. These and other potentials, such as the
enhancement of commercial retail opportunities and expanding
Highland’s employment base, have provided much of the stimulus for
the direction established by the Land Use Element.
Existing Land Uses
Highland is predominantly a residential community; over 60 percent of
the City’s 11,948 acres of land is planned for residential development.
The dominance of residential lands can be attributed to the circum-
stances surrounding the City’s incorporation. Before incorporation,
Highland’s land area was in the City of San Bernardino’s sphere of
influence. Much of the property that would naturally have hosted
City of Highland General Plan                                                             2-7

                                                                                              HIGHLAND…A Great Place to Live
                                                   Highland’s retail or industrial uses was annexed to San Bernardino,
                                                   leaving only those areas that logically could be developed in residential-
                                                   based uses. Additionally, more than 20 percent of the City is designated
                                                   primarily for open space, due primarily to the City’s proximity to the
                                                   San Bernardino Mountains, the San Bernardino International Airport,
                                                   the Santa Ana River Basin and City Creek and Plunge Creek running
                                                   through the southern part of Highland.
                                                   LAND USE PLAN
                                                   As required by State law, the General Plan must identify land use
                                                   designations and permitted development intensities. General Plans are
                                                   also required to include a diagram of the location of these uses. These
                                                   components, as well as a series of planning objectives that serve as the
                                                   foundation for the Land Use Plan (Figure 2.2), are included in this
                                                   section of the Land Use Element.
                                                   Land Use Designation System
                                                   Land use designations define the amount, type, and nature of future
                                                   development that is allowed in a given location of the City. The
                                                   following section defines each of the land use designations shown on the
   Special Note on Maximum                         Land Use Plan, as well as the density and intensity standards required in
   Densities and Intensities                       accordance with State law.
   The determination of precise density or
   intensity is also influenced by site location,  Each of the General Plan land use designations is typically implemented
   topography, compatibility with surrounding land
   uses, the development standards contained
                                                   by a defined set of zoning designations included in the City’s Develop-
   in the Development Code, and other City         ment Code. The Development Code contains the detailed regulations
   policies, regulations and ordinances. These     pertaining to permitted and conditional uses, site development standards,
   other considerations may mean that the
   maximum density established by the General      and performance criteria that serve to implement many goals and policies
   Plan land use designation may not be            of the General Plan.
   achievable on each potential development site.
                                                   Each of the residential use designations includes a range of allowable
                                                   densities. The maximum density defines the maximum number of
                                                   dwelling units per gross acre at which development can occur within
                                                   a given residentially designated area. Any portion of a residential
                                                   lot designated on the Land Use Map as Open Space or any other
                                                   nonresidential designation should not be included in calculating density.
                                                   Building intensities for nonresidential land uses are measured by floor
                                                   area ratio (FAR). An FAR is the ratio of total net floor area of a building
                                                   to the total lot area. An FAR describes the intensity of the use on a site
                                                   and not necessarily the building height or site coverage. It does not
                                                   include the area within parking structures used for parking and circulation
                                                   or open outdoor storage areas. Figure 2.3 illustrates the concept of the
                                                   FAR calculation.
2-8                                                                                      March 2006 | City of Highland General Plan


                                           HIGHLAND…A Great Place to Live
     This page intentionally left blank.
2-10                                   March 2006 | City of Highland General Plan

                                                  2. LAND USE ELEMENT
Figure 2.3: Floor Area Ratio Example (FAR = 0.50)
City of Highland General Plan                                     2-11
                                                 HIGHLAND…A Great Place to Live
     Residential Designations
     Highland offers a wide range of housing densities and products to meet
     the demand of current and future residents with varying lifestyles. In
     addition to the characteristics described below, it should be noted that
     other uses may also be allowed in residential areas, such as schools,
     parks, child care facilities and other public/institutional uses that are
     determined to be compatible with and oriented toward the needs of the
     immediate neighborhood.
     Agricultural Equestrian (AG/EQ)
     Areas designated as Agricultural/Equestrian are appropriate for rural and
     equestrian-oriented residential development. The Agricultural/Equestrian
     land use category permits and protects the keeping of large animals, as
     well as the ability of landowners to carry on light agricultural activities.
     Maximum Intensity:            2 dwelling units per l .0 acre
     Low Density (LD)
     The Low Density designation limits land uses to single-family detached
     residential, and mobile homes, subject to applicable General Plan
     policies and ordinance provisions of the City of Highland.
     Within the portion of Highland west of State Route 30 (SR-30), the
     development of second units and attached dwelling units behind the
     primary residential structure is permitted within Low Density areas,
     provided that the maximum density is not exceeded, that infrastructure
     is available to support such additional dwelling units and that the
     additional dwellings are architecturally compatible with the primary
     dwelling unit and the predominant character of the neighborhood.
     In addition, within the same portion of the City west of SR-30, those
     second units and attached dwellings that were constructed pursuant to
     valid permits issued prior to the effective date of this element should be
     permitted as being consistent with the General Plan Land Use Element,
     even if the resulting density of a site would be greater than the maximum
     allowable land use intensity in this area.
     Maximum Intensity:            6 dwelling units per 1.0 acre
     Medium Density (MD)
     The areas designated Medium Density are either committed to low-
     intensity multiple-family land use, or are required to provide transitions
     between higher intensity commercial and apartment uses and lower
     intensity residential and open space uses.
2-12                                         March 2006 | City of Highland General Plan

                                                                             2. LAND USE ELEMENT
Within the Medium Density designation, land uses are limited to small lot
single-family detached residential, attached residential development and
mobile homes subject to applicable General Plan policies and ordinance
provisions of the City of Highland.
Maximum Intensity:            12 dwelling units per 1.0 acre
High Density (HD)
The High Density designation is intended to provide a quality multiple-
family living environment with design amenities, such as private open
space or recreation areas, business services, swimming pools, etc. Within
High Density areas, land uses are limited to attached residential
development, subject to applicable General Plan policies and ordinance
provisions of the City of Highland.
Areas designated High Density provide good access to major
transportation routes, are located in close proximity to neighborhood
serving commercial facilities, and will not negatively impact single-family
residential areas.
Maximum Intensity:            18 dwelling units per 1.0 acre
Planned Development (PD)
Within the Planned Development designated areas, all residential land
uses are considered to be appropriate, as are support uses (i.e., open
space and recreation, public facilities, commercial, and all employment-
generating uses) that may be appropriate subject to applicable General
Plan policies and ordinances of the City of Highland.
Development within areas designated Planned Development are
processed through the use of a specific plan pursuant to Government
Code Section 65450, a planned unit development, a conditional use
permit or a similar device.
Planned Development projects must provide a greater level of
community amenities and cohesiveness, achieve superior design and
create a more desirable living environment than could be achieved
through conventional subdivision design and requirements.
Maximum Intensity:            The maximum overall intensity of areas
                              designated Planned Development shall be
                              consistent with the provisions of the Highland
                              General Plan or determined through the
                              development review process. In all cases, the
                              overall intensity of Planned Development
                              areas, and each portion thereof, shall be
                              compatible with adjacent existing and
                              planned land uses and shall address natural
City of Highland General Plan                                                                2-13
                                                   HIGHLAND…A Great Place to Live
                                    features of the site. Restricted lands or lands
                                    unsuitable for development shall not be used
                                    for transfer of development rights purposes.
     Commercial Designations
     General Commercial (GC)
     The primary purpose of areas designated General Commercial is to
     provide appropriately located areas for the general shopping and
     commercial service needs of area residents and workers. These include
     freestanding uses, as well as those within commercial centers of six acres
     or more.
     Within the General Commercial designation, and subject to General
     Plan Policies and ordinance provisions of the City of Highland,
     appropriate land uses include a broad range of commercial, retail and
     service uses. Typical uses include general retail, markets, commercial
     services, restaurants, automotive repair and service, hardware and home
     improvement centers, commercial recreation, professional and business
     offices, financial institutions and automotive sales.
     Maximum Intensity:             0.50 FAR
     Neighborhood Commercial (NC)
     The primary purpose of areas designated Neighborhood Commercial
     is to provide appropriately located areas for the daily shopping and
     commercial service needs of area residents and workers. These areas
     typically include centers of three to six acres.
     Within the Neighborhood Commercial designation, subject to applicable
     General Plan policies and ordinance provisions of the City of Highland,
     appropriate land uses include a range of common retail and personal
     service uses. Typical uses include markets and drug stores along with
     supporting uses in a shopping center setting, eating and drinking
     establishments, automotive service stations and financial institutions.
     Maximum Intensity:             0.50 FAR
     Planned Commercial (PC)
     The primary purpose of the Planned Commercial designation is to
     provide a means for the development of mixed-use commercial/office
     projects that recognize the site-specific constraints of designated parcels.
     Within Planned Commercial areas, uses consistent with the General
     Commercial and Office Professional Categories may be appropriate,
     subject to General Plan policies and ordinance provisions of the City
     of Highland.
2-14                                          March 2006 | City of Highland General Plan

                                                                             2. LAND USE ELEMENT
Development within areas designated Planned Commercial must be
processed through the use of a specific plan pursuant to Government
Code 65450, as a planned unit development, a conditional use permit
or a similar mechanism.
Maximum Intensity:            The uses and development intensities within
                              Planned Commercial areas must provide
                              appropriate transitions to adjacent land uses
                              and be consistent with the provisions of the
                              Highland General Plan or subject to
                              development review.
Office Professional (OP)
The primary purpose of areas designated Office Professional is to provide
areas for the establishment of office-based working environments for
general professional and administrative offices, as well as necessary
support uses.
Within the Office Professional designation, subject to applicable
General Plan polices and ordinance provisions of the City of Highland,
appropriate uses include administrative and professional offices and
business-related retail service functions (restaurants, health clubs,
financial institutions, medical and health care facilities, and vocational
and trade schools).
Maximum Intensity:            0.50 FAR
Business Park (BP)
The Business Park designation allows for a variety of light industrial,
research and development, and office uses that provide pleasant and
attractive working environments. The designation also allows business
support services, anchor retail developments and individual commercial
uses that support the employees and clientele of the area.
Within the Business Park designation, subject to applicable General Plan
policies and ordinance provisions of the City of Highland, appropriate
uses include light manufacturing, wholesaling and warehousing
conducted within an enclosed building; administrative and professional
uses; business support uses; eating and drinking establishments; personal
services; and retail sales of durable goods, along with general retail sales
in areas designated to be retail anchors of a larger Business Park
designated area.
Maximum Intensity:            0.45 FAR
City of Highland General Plan                                                                2-15
                                                   HIGHLAND…A Great Place to Live
     Industrial Designations
     Industrial (I)
     The primary purpose of areas designated Industrial is to provide for light
     industrial, research and development, and office uses for firms seeking an
     attractive and pleasant working environment and an advantageous
     location with proximity to the San Bernardino International Airport and
     freeway access.
     Within the Industrial areas, subject to applicable General Plan policies
     and ordinance provisions of the City of Highland, appropriate uses
     include those uses which can be made compatible with other uses within
     Highland in terms of generation of noise, dust, odors, vibration, glare, air
     pollutant emissions, traffic generation and transportation, storage use and
     the creation of hazardous materials. Policies for compatibility with other
     uses are further addressed in the Community Design Element.
     Typical uses include light manufacturing and assembly, small scale
     warehousing and distribution, and research and development. In
     addition, administrative offices supporting the primary industrial use
     of the property may be permitted.
     Maximum Intensity:             0.45 FAR
     Special Designations
     Mixed-Use (MU)
     Areas designated as Mixed-Use are designed to function differently
     from the typical patterns of individual, segregated land uses. Uses and
     activities are integrated to create a dynamic urban environment that
     serves as the center of activity for the surrounding area.
     The designation provides opportunities for an integrated mix of
     residential, retail, service, civic, entertainment and office opportunities
     in a pedestrian-friendly environment. Because of their more intense,
     compact development, Mixed-Use areas encourage the use of transit
     service and other forms of transportation, including pedestrian
     and bicycle travel.
     Continuous commercial street frontage on the first and, perhaps, second
     floors, supported by residential and/or office uses above, is the typical
     pattern of vertically mixed land use. Uses may also be mixed in a
     horizontal, or multi-use, pattern. For example, freestanding structures
     may consist of a single use adjacent to structures with different uses on
     the same or adjacent parcel. Stand-alone uses within a multi-use project
     need to be integrated into an overall project design and connected to
     other adjoining uses by plazas, promenades and landscaped corridors,
2-16                                           March 2006 | City of Highland General Plan

                                                                                2. LAND USE ELEMENT
and should include common architectural themes and signage. Typical
residential uses could include apartments, live-work units, town homes,
flats and artist-style lofts. Residential development in these areas
emphasizes quality and offers a variety of amenities.
The scale, density, size and mixture of uses in the mixed-use areas vary
based upon the character of the surrounding area.
Maximum Intensity:             18 dwelling units per 1.0 acre, or 1.0 FAR
Public/Institutional (P/I)
The primary purpose of the Public/Institutional land use designation is to
provide for the construction of public and institutional activities including,
but not limited to, local state and federal agencies, special districts, public
and private utilities, and regional institutions.
Within areas designated as Public/Institutional, subject to applicable
General Plan policies and ordinance provisions of the City of Highland,
appropriate uses include City facilities, public and private schools, fire
stations, parks, hospitals, libraries, post offices and other public, quasi-
public and institutional uses.
To the extent possible, institutional facilities should be clustered to
support other similar uses and benefit from access to various modes of
transportation.
Public/Institutional uses designated on the Land Use Plan are either
existing facilities or known planned facilities. Additional uses, including
assembly areas and day care facilities, may be developed in other land
use designations under the procedures established in the Development
Code. The maximum intensity reflects the potential for office uses used
by governmental or quasi-public agencies. Additional intensity
provisions are addressed in the Development Code.
Maximum Intensity:             1.0 FAR
Historic Village District (HVD)
Within the Historic Village District area, as shown on the land use map
and subject to applicable General Plan Policies and ordinance provisions
of the City of Highland, appropriate land uses include a wide variety of
commercial uses, emphasizing specialty retail and office uses, and low
density residential uses.
The primary purpose of commercial development is to provide for the
establishment of commercial and office-related land uses that recognize
and are compatible with the historical small town nature of the original
Highland Townsite, as well as to preserve architecturally significant
residential structures within the village area. Typical uses include
City of Highland General Plan                                                                   2-17
                                                                                               HIGHLAND…A Great Place to Live
                                                 specialty retail (e.g., handcraft shops, art galleries, book stores,
                                                 curio/antique stores and flower shops), commercial services, professional
                                                 and business offices, restaurants, cultural facilities, financial institutions,
                                                 vocational and trade schools, and bed-and-breakfast inns. The village
                                                 area should emphasize uses that contribute to the vitality of the whole,
                                                 creating pedestrian traffic and interest.
                                                 Within the residential areas, land uses are generally limited to low density
                                                 residential uses subject to applicable General Plan policies and Historic
                                                 District requirements and guidelines, along with applicable ordinance
                                                 provisions of the City of Highland. Residential structures of historical
                                                 merit may be preserved to a state that is true to the era when the
                                                 structure was built. Residential uses limited to congregate or residential
                                                 care facilities for senior citizens are also appropriate uses.
                                                 Adaptive reuse of historic residential and commercial structures may be
                                                 considered in areas adjacent to the historic commercial core area.
                                                 Proposed projects would need to demonstrate that parking and
                                                 circulation issues and impacts to surrounding residential uses would be
     For policies regarding the Historic Village addressed and mitigated and architectural character would be preserved.
     District, please see the Community Design
     Element.                                    New construction throughout the District must respect the significance
                                                 of the older structures in the district by incorporating similar scale and
                                                 proportion and architecture that reflects the district’s historic traditions.
                                                 Maximum Intensity:              6 dwelling units per 1.0 acre, or 0.50 FAR
                                                 Open Space Designations
                                                 Open Space (OS)
                                                 The primary purpose of the Open Space land use designation is to
                                                 preserve natural open space, utility corridors, water conservation
                                                 facilities, sensitive habitat areas, and passive recreation areas for the
                                                 protection of environmental values, natural resources, views, recreation,
                                                 aesthetics and public safety.
                                                 Maximum Intensity:              The maximum land use intensity of Open
                                                                                 Space lands is governed by the open space
                                                                                 purpose of the land so designated. These
                                                                                 areas are not intended for urban or rural
                                                                                 development.
                                                 Parks (P)
                                                 The Parks designation allows for active and passive recreational uses
                                                 such as parks, trails, athletic fields, interpretive centers and golf courses.
                                                 Discussion and policies regarding the provision, acquisition and
2-18                                                                                       March 2006 | City of Highland General Plan

                                                                             2. LAND USE ELEMENT
maintenance of parks is provided in the Conservation and Open Space
Element.
Maximum Intensity:             The maximum land use intensity of the Parks
                               designation is governed by the recreational
                               purpose of the land so designated. These
                               areas are not intended for urban or rural
                               development.
Plan Objectives
The Highland Vision articulates a number of community values and
desires that serve as a foundation for the Land Use Element and the
Land Use Plan. The primary objective of the Land Use Plan is to set the
land use direction of the Highland Vision, while reflecting the results of
economic and demographic trends, market positioning and economic
development opportunities.
The following objectives summarize the general land use objectives that
guide the development of the Land Use Plan and set the foundation for
the goals and policies section of this element. It is important to note that
many other important and related objectives, such as keeping Highland
a safe place, maintaining high levels of community services and ensuring
quality design, are addressed throughout the other elements of the
General Plan.
To further the Vision, the Plan seeks to:
     •    Plan for future growth;
     •    Provide clarity in land use guidance;
     •    Maintain a mix of development with urban, suburban and rural
          character;
     •    Create places for people to live, shop, work, learn and recreate;
     •    Protect and enhance Highland’s neighborhoods;
     •    Provide new housing opportunities;
     •    Strengthen commercial opportunities;
     •    Expand the employment base;
     •    Ensure land use compatibility; and
     •    Preserve natural resources.
Each of these objectives is described in further detail in the Goals and
Policies section at the end of the Element.
City of Highland General Plan                                                                2-19

                                                HIGHLAND…A Great Place to Live
     Land Use Buildout Analysis
     Providing a blueprint for the future development of Highland is one of
     the primary purposes of the General Plan. The Land Use Plan, which
     includes areas within Highland’s sphere of influence, identifies 6,395
     acres of residential land uses, including Planned Development; 58 acres
     of mixed-use land uses; 754 acres of employment-generating land uses,
     not including commercial uses allowed in Planned Development areas;
     and 3,570 acres of open space and park uses. Assuming a probable
     intensity for each of the land use designations, the land use plan provides
     for 20,910 dwelling units (see Table 2.1). Based on a factor of 3.45
     persons per household, the estimated buildout population of the Land
     Use Plan would be 72,137 persons.
     Of the employment-generating land uses, the Land Use Plan provides for
     a total of 198 acres of General, Neighborhood, Base Line, Village and
     Planned Commercial uses; 13 acres of Office/Professional uses; and 338
     acres of Business Park and Industrial uses. Combined with the office and
     retail employment generated by the Mixed-Use designation, the Land
     Use Plan would generate approximately 19,492 jobs using the probable
     intensity factors (FARs) for each nonresidential land use designation (see
     Table 2.2).
2-20                                        March 2006 | City of Highland General Plan

                                                                                                                          2. LAND USE ELEMENT
                                   Table 2.1: Residential Buildout Estimates
                                        Probable                        Dwelling        Persons per
    Land Use Designation                 Density           Acres           Units         Household           Population
Agricultural/Equestrian                     1.0              955             955              3.45                 3,293
Low Density                                 4.6            3,044          14,059              3.45                48,504
Medium Density                              8.0              398           3,187              3.45                10,996
High Density                               14.0                24            336              3.45                 1,159
Village Residential                         4.6                22            101              3.45                    349
Mixed Use                                   16                 58            311              3.45                 1,071
Planned Development                    See notes           1,962           1,961              3.45                 6,765
Total                                                      6,463          20,910                                  72,137
Notes:
Acreages include sphere of influence areas.
Approximately 20 acres of the Mixed Use areas are assumed for residential uses at an average density of 16 dwelling
units per acre.
Densities for Planned Development areas vary and typically range from 4.6 to 12.0 dwelling units per acre. The assumed
density for the Seven Oaks Planned Development area assumes 1 dwelling unit per 5 acres.
The East Highlands Ranch PUD comprises 1,655 acres. The individual land uses have been disaggregated and included
in the above totals.
                                 Table 2.2: Nonresidential Buildout Estimates
                                          Probable                                   Square               Square Feet
    Land Use Designation                   Intensity              Acres             Footage             per Employee
General Commercial                               0.35                 75            1,148,024                        500
Neighborhood Commercial                          0.35                 32              490,921                        500
Base Line Commercial                             0.35                 14              213,444                        500
Office/Professional                              0.35                 13              204,296                        250
Business Park                                    0.30                184            2,407,126                        600
Village Commercial                               0.35                 10              158,558                        500
Mixed Use                                See notes                    58              729,511               250–1000
Planned Commercial                       See notes                    67            1,013,859                 250–500
Planned Development                      See notes                 1,962              611,444                 250–500
Industrial                                       0.30                154            2,007,245                     1,000
Public/Institutional                             0.35                205            3,125,430                     1,000
Parks                                             N/A                 48                    N/A               435,600
Open Space                                        N/A             3,522                     N/A                      N/A
Total                                                             6,344            12,109,858
Notes:
Acreages include sphere of influence areas.
Approximately 20 acres of the Mixed Use areas are assumed for commercial areas at 0.50 FAR; 5 acres for
office/professional uses at 0.35 FAR; 10 acres for civic uses at 0.50 FAR; and 4 acres for public spaces (or a total of
39 acres for nonresidential uses)
Since the Planned Commercial designation allows both commercial and office/professional uses, the total acreage of
66.5 acres assumes 53.2 acres of Commercial at 0.35 FAR and 13.3 acres of Office/Professional uses at 0.35 FAR.
Only one Planned Development area includes nonresidential land uses. The Golden Triangle area assumes
approximately 25 acres of Commercial at 0.35 FAR and approximately 15 acres of Office/Professional at 0.35 FAR.
The remainder of this area (117 acres) is designated for residential uses.
The East Highlands Ranch PUD comprises 1,655 acres. The individual land uses have been disaggregated and included
in the above totals.
City of Highland General Plan                                                                                                             2-21

                                                 HIGHLAND…A Great Place to Live
     GOALS AND POLICIES
     This section of the Land Use Element describes land use goals and
     policies that, in conjunction with the Land Use Plan and accompanying
     density and intensity standards, guide future land development and land
     use decisions in Highland. Goals and policies are divided into two
     subsections: those that apply Citywide and those that apply to specific
     Community Policy Areas.
     In addition to these goals, it is important to note that additional land use
     direction is provided through other General Plan Elements, the
     Development Code and redevelopment efforts.
     Citywide Goals and Policies
     Creating Places for Social Interaction
     An important principle of the Highland Vision is to create places for
     residents to live, shop, work, learn, recreate and get to know one
     another. The Mixed-Use and Planned Development designations
     provide excellent opportunities where all of these functions can occur.
     In particular, the Town Center and Golden Triangle encourage a mix
     of residential, retail, entertainment and employment uses.
     Policies tailored to each of these areas and their development are
     provided in the Community Policy Areas section. Additional policies
     that guide the physical development of these places are found in the
     Community Design Element.
     GOAL 2.1
     Create opportunities for a diverse population to interact, exchange ideas,
     and establish and realize common goals as a unified community.
     Policies
         1) Actively plan and promote the development of the Town Center,
              Golden Triangle and other designated mixed-use areas.
         2) Ensure that the Town Center and Golden Triangle promote safe
              and convenient pedestrian environments for residents, employees
              and visitors through the implementation of Land Use and
              Community Design Element policies and guidelines and
              Development Code standards.
         3) Retain and provide a hierarchy of community gathering places,
              including the Town Center, park lands, a community center and
2-22                                        March 2006 | City of Highland General Plan

                                                                             2. LAND USE ELEMENT
          plaza areas within new commercial, office and industrial
          complexes.
     4) Encourage future development to provide functional public
          spaces that foster social interaction.
Protecting and Enhancing Neighborhoods
Neighborhoods are a major source of pride for Highland residents and
are defined by the quality of their homes, the diversity of their residents,
the beauty of their streetscapes, the views of the natural landscape, and
the availability of and access to open space and recreation opportunities.
Many of the City’s neighborhoods provide a high-quality living
environment, but as neighborhoods age, it is important for the City to
proactively create partnerships with residents, apartment owners and
other stakeholders. As such, Highland has and will continue to place a
high priority on its neighborhood improvement program.
GOAL 2.2
Preserve and enhance the quality and character of Highland’s existing
residential neighborhoods.
Policies
     1) Maintain the integrity of existing residential neighborhoods by
          preventing through traffic wherever possible, prohibiting
          encroachment by incompatible uses, and providing appropriate
          buffers between residential and nonresidential uses, as well as
          between single- and multiple-family areas.
     2) Where conversion of a residential area to nonresidential uses is
          proposed, ensure that such conversion occurs in an orderly
          manner with minimal disruption to adjacent residential areas.
     3) Ensure that all new development is designed in a manner that
          preserves the quality of life in existing neighborhoods.
     4) Continue to implement the City’s neighborhood improvement
          efforts in working with neighborhood stakeholders to create and
          implement long-term plans.
Providing New Housing Opportunities
Growth projections indicate that Highland will grow from a population of
44,668 in the year 2000 to a population of approximately 67,000 by the
year 2030. As indicated in the Land Use Buildout Analysis section of this
City of Highland General Plan                                                                2-23

                                                 HIGHLAND…A Great Place to Live
     element, the Land Use Plan provides enough capacity to accommodate
     nearly 21,000 units and over 72,000 residents.
     As the City continues to mature, it must continue to offer a wide variety
     of housing opportunities for Highland’s increasingly diverse community.
     Through the General Plan, Highland offers opportunities for estate
     homes in the eastern portions of the City, suburban single-family
     neighborhoods throughout the City, as well as a diversity of multiple-
     family neighborhoods in a variety of settings, including the new mixed-
     use Town Center.
     GOAL 2.3
     Provide a variety of urban, suburban and rural housing opportunities that
     are adequate to meet the City’s share of regional housing needs.
     Policies
         1) Provide a broad range of, and encourage innovation in, housing
             types that incorporate high quality design and construction.
         2) Maintain residential areas that provide for and protect rural
             lifestyles, and protect natural resources and hillsides in the rural
             areas of the City.
         3) Maintain residential areas that provide for a suburban lifestyle,
             including ownership of single-family housing.
         4) Ensure that new residential development provides appropriate
             community amenities, including common open space and
             recreation areas.
         5) Continue the innovative use of land resources and development
             of a variety of housing types and sizes within the City by using
             the Planned Development designation.
         6) Require the preparation of a specific plan, planned unit
             development, conditional use permit or similar mechanism
             for residential development within areas designated Planned
             Development.
         7) Require that Planned Development projects provide a greater
             level of community amenities and cohesiveness, achieve superior
             design and create a more desirable living environment than could
             be achieved through conventional subdivision design
             and requirements.
         8) Encourage provision of low- and moderate-cost housing, as well
             housing for other identified special housing needs groups,
2-24                                        March 2006 | City of Highland General Plan

                                                                               2. LAND USE ELEMENT
          consistent with the other provisions of the General Plan and the
          City’s Redevelopment Agency Plan and housing goals.
     9) Review the zoning and subdivision codes and include clear
          incentives for the provision of housing to meet the needs
          identified above, including, but not limited to, density bonuses
          of up to 25 percent over the densities indicated in the Land Use
          Element.
Strengthening Commercial Opportunities
Because it is an older established community, Highland’s service costs
may increase beyond Highland’s ability to generate public revenues to
maintain and provide for City services and infrastructure. Attention to
land uses that generate public revenue sources for capital facilities and
operations and maintenance will be important to providing a high quality
of public services and facilities.
Much of the market demand for retail opportunities in Highland is met in
areas outside the City. As a result, Highland generates a relatively low
level of retail sales tax per capita compared with other nearby
communities. Maintaining competitiveness through retail revitalization
of existing centers, maximizing the economic advantages posed by the
proximity of San Bernardino International Airport, and new retail
development that provides a wide range of retail goods and services will
be necessary to enhance taxable retail sales. The City needs to identify
and preserve strategic areas for future retail-oriented commercial uses
and pursue economic development strategies that facilitate their
development. The goal is to provide retail sites that encourage residents
to spend dollars within the City and attract non-residents to shop within
the City.
GOAL 2.4
Provide lands for retail and service commercial uses in sufficient quantity to
meet the needs of Highland residents.
Policies
     1) Maximize sales-tax-generating uses through the strategic location
          of commercial areas, particularly at freeway interchanges, at
          major intersections, and within the Town Center and Golden
          Triangle (see also Town Center, Golden Triangle and Victoria
          Avenue Corridor Community Policy Areas).
     2) Consistent with maintaining an image of the City of Highland as
          a quality residential community, reserve vacant lands at heavily
City of Highland General Plan                                                                  2-25

                                                HIGHLAND…A Great Place to Live
             traveled locations that are not appropriate for residential use for
             commercial, office, mixed-use or other nonresidential uses.
         3) Prevent future strip commercial development by encouraging lot
             consolidation within commercially designated areas and by
             limiting commercial designations to areas of sufficient size to
             accommodate larger scale, quality development.
         4) Establish minimum increments for the design of commercial
             development, permitting individual commercial lots to be
             developed while ensuring that the benefits of large-scale, high-
             quality developments are realized.
         5) Specifically encourage the consolidation of individual parcels
             along Base Line to provide a sufficient land area for vibrant
             commercial uses.
         6) Designate areas for Planned Commercial uses to provide a
             means for the development of mixed-use commercial/office
             projects that recognize the site-specific constraints of designated
             parcels.
         7) Require that development within areas designated Planned
             Commercial be through use of a specific plan pursuant to
             Government Code Section 65450, a planned unit development,
             conditional use permit or similar mechanism.
         8) Ensure that uses and development intensities within Planned
             Commercial areas provide appropriate transitions to adjacent
             land uses and are consistent with the provisions of the Highland
             General Plan.
         9) Require development in areas designated Village Commercial
             to establish commercial and office-related land use types that
             recognize and are compatible with the historical, small town
             nature of the original Highland townsite.
         10) Establish a clear preservation plan for the Village area, along with
             a historic preservation ordinance.
     Expanding the Employment Base
     Given Highland’s size and the predominance of built and planned
     residential development, Highland will never serve as a major regional
     employment hub. However, given the City’s participation on regional
     boards such as the San Bernardino Association of Governments
     (SANBAG) and the San Bernardino International Airport Authority
     (SBIAA), Highland will have an important influence over the manner in
     which the surrounding East San Bernardino Valley’s industrial and office
     economies develop. Highland’s participation in these organizations will
2-26                                        March 2006 | City of Highland General Plan

                                                                              2. LAND USE ELEMENT
be particularly important because the lack of land in San Bernardino
County’s west end is now forcing large industrial and commercial project
to consider the East San Bernardino Valley.
Though the amount of land in Highland designated for employment-
generating uses is limited, the City has a clear stake in the development
of jobs in the East San Bernardino Valley since many of its residents
would be able to avoid long commutes by working locally. In addition,
the expansion of the industrial sectors will bring money from the outside
world to the East San Bernardino Valley, including Highland, generally
buoying the local economy.
Additional policies for the 5th Street Corridor, which serves as a major
gateway to the Airport and will become the major employment center of
Highland, are provided in the Community Policy Areas section.
GOAL 2.5
Promote a mix of attractive employment-generating areas with a mix of uses
that provide a sound and diversified economic base and that are compatible
with the community’s overall residential character.
Policies
     1) Require development in areas designated for Office Professional
          uses to provide areas for the establishment of office-based
          working environments for general, professional and
          administrative offices, as well as necessary support uses.
     2) Require development in areas designated for Business Park uses
          to provide for light industrial, research and development, and/or
          office-based firms seeking a pleasant and attractive working
          environment, as well as for business support services and
          commercial uses requiring extensive land areas.
     3) Require development in areas designated for Industrial uses to
          provide for light industrial, research and development, and office-
          based firms seeking an attractive and pleasant working
          environment and a prestige location.
     4) Work with the San Bernardino International Airport Authority to
          ensure that future airport planning activities promote Highland’s
          economic development objectives.
City of Highland General Plan                                                                 2-27

                                                  HIGHLAND…A Great Place to Live
     Ensuring Land Use Compatibility
     With Highland’s diverse mix of residential, commercial, mixed-use,
     industrial and office uses, achieving land use compatibility can be a
     challenging process. Unmitigated or poorly designed uses, such as
     industrial uses or transportation facilities, can have potentially adverse
     effects upon adjacent residential neighborhoods, schools and habitat
     areas.
     Site planning, orientation of uses on site and buffering between adjacent
     properties will all be necessary to maintain land use compatibility in
     Highland. As such, it should also be noted that policies related to the
     integration and buffering of land uses are also incorporated into the
     Community Design Element.
     GOAL 2.6
     Maintain an organized pattern of land use that minimizes conflicts between
     adjacent land uses.
     Policies
         1) Require that new development be at an appropriate density or
              intensity based upon compatibility with surrounding existing and
              planned land uses.
         2) Where a question of compatibility exists, require the new use to
              conform to the lower intensity use.
         3) Ensure that residential infill development respects the design
              character of the surrounding neighborhood by balancing the
              provision of density incentives with appropriate design concepts.
         4) Ensure that land uses develop in accordance with the Land Use
              Plan and Development Code in an effort to attain land use
              compatibility.
         5) Promote compatible development through adherence to
              Community Design Element policies and guidelines.
         6) Require developers to consider and address project impacts upon
              surrounding neighborhoods during the design and development
              process.
         7) Require new or expanded uses to provide mitigation or buffers,
              including greenbelts or landscaping, between dissimilar uses or
              existing uses where potential adverse impacts could occur.
2-28                                        March 2006 | City of Highland General Plan

                                                                               2. LAND USE ELEMENT
     8) Prohibit future multiple-family development in existing single-
          family designated neighborhoods.
     9) Require landscape and/or open space buffers to maintain a
          natural edge for proposed private development directly adjacent
          to natural, public open space areas.
     10) Aggressively review planning efforts of other jurisdictions to
          minimize potential incompatibilities with City land uses and
          preserve economic vitality.
Preserving Natural Resources
Many, if not most, residents of Highland moved here because of the
City’s extraordinary environmental setting, which provides recreational,
ecological and scenic value. The City’s natural resources are one of the
primary defining aspects of Highland’s livability and character.
Poorly planned growth and development would threaten to degrade or
eliminate this essential feature of the City. The Conservation and Open
Space Element addresses this issue in greater detail. The policies below
relate directly to preserving and enhancing open space and the City’s
natural resources through land use related methods.
GOAL 2.7
Encourage natural resource and open space preservation through
appropriate land use policies that recognize their value and through the
conservation of areas required for the protection of public health and safety.
Policies
     1) Within the eastern portions of the City, utilize lower densities to
          protect agricultural lands, scenic resources and topographic
          features.
     2) Preserve agricultural lands within the eastern portions of the City
          as commercial operations if possible, or within residential
          developments if not. Utilize Planned Developments with joint
          ownership or agricultural uses or placement of low density
          housing within an overall grove setting.
     3) Permit mineral extraction activities and expansion of existing
          operations only where the following findings can be made:
          •   Potential significant impacts related to loss of significant
              biological resources have been mitigated to an acceptable
City of Highland General Plan                                                                  2-29

                                                  HIGHLAND…A Great Place to Live
                  level, as have potential significant impacts of noise, air
                  pollutant emissions, dust and hazardous materials;
              •   Significant impacts will not be created on lands used or
                  planned for residential use;
              •   Public health and safety will be protected;
              •   Haul routes have been identified, and will be utilized, which
                  will not create significant impacts within residential areas and
                  will not negatively impact access into commercial/industrial
                  areas;
              •   The municipal revenue-generating characteristics of the
                  proposed operation are such that a positive fiscal benefit will
                  accrue to the City of Highland and to its residents; and
              •   The analysis of fiscal benefits shall account for the
                  incremental capital and maintenance costs for the area
                  circulation system created by the high intensity of truck use
                  associated with the operation.
          4) Preserve areas designated as Open Space to provide for
              recreation, preservation of scenic and environmental values,
              managed production of resources (agriculture, water reclamation
              and conservation, mineral extraction) and protection of public
              safety.
          5) Promote joint development and use of open space resources with
              adjacent jurisdictions.
     Maintaining a Regional Perspective
     Because of the interdependence of land uses between the various
     jurisdictions within the area, establishment of a clear policy regarding
     regional cooperation in managing land use and development is
     necessary. Such a policy includes instilling recognition that the land use
     decisions made by each agency may have far-reaching implications for
     the others. This is particularly true for development decisions made by
     the City of San Bernardino to the west, where jurisdictional boundaries
     between the two cities are inconsistent and result in inefficiencies of
     public service provision, and the County of San Bernardino within
     Highland’s sphere of influence, where a development pattern has yet
     to be established.
     As can be determined from the boundaries of the General Plan study
     area, planning issues related to the City of Highland are not always
     confined to the existing city limits. School districts, public utility service
     areas, and various special districts do not necessarily parallel City
     boundaries, even though they may have a significant impact on the
     development of the local community and its ability to provide services.
2-30                                         March 2006 | City of Highland General Plan

                                                                              2. LAND USE ELEMENT
Highland’s General Plan must reflect these realities by including areas
both inside and outside the City limits within the study area. It is
therefore necessary to resolve these potential conflicts by obtaining a full
understanding of other agencies’ concerns and integrating such potential
issues into the General Plan process (Government Code Sections
651 03(e)(f), 65351 and 65352).
GOAL 2.8
Coordinate land use planning programs between local, regional, state and
federal jurisdictions.
Policy
     1) Notify neighboring jurisdictions and adjacent developments when
          considering changes to the City’s existing land use pattern
          adjacent to City boundaries.
     2) Cooperate with neighboring jurisdictions through review and
          comment on proposed changes to existing land use patterns that
          could affect the City of Highland.
     3) Establish regular lines of communication with local, regional,
          state and federal agencies whose planning programs may affect
          Highland residents and businesses.
GOAL 2.9
Establish and maintain logical City boundaries that reflect existing service
capabilities, social and economic interdependencies, citizen desires and City
costs and revenues.
Policy
     1) Work with the Local Agency Formation Commission (LAFCO),
          the City and County of San Bernardino, and area residents to
          promote the establishment of better-defined boundaries that
          would facilitate more efficient provision of municipal services and
          an economically viable community.
     2) Consider annexation of such areas where the following findings
          can be made:
          •   The proposed annexation is consistent with goals and
              objectives of the General Plan.
          •   Significant benefits will be derived by the City and affected
              property owners and/or residents upon annexation.
City of Highland General Plan                                                                 2-31

                                                   HIGHLAND…A Great Place to Live
               •    There exists a significant social and economic
                    interdependence and interaction between the City of
                    Highland and the area proposed for annexation.
           3) Work with the City of San Bernardino to provide buffers in areas
               where existing or planned land uses in one city are incompatible
               with adjacent areas in the other.
     Community Policy Areas
     This section provides goals and policies focused towards individual areas
     of the City. As part of the Land Use Element, these policies focus on
     land use issues. Together with the other Elements of the General Plan,
     the Development Code and ongoing neighborhood and capital
     improvement programs, these goals and policies will help create,
     preserve and enhance these community policy areas.
     Town Center
     There is one place, more than any other, where residents and visitors
     gain an impression of Highland. It is the land along Base Line on either
     side of SR-30. The reason is very simple: this is the primary entry to the
     center of the community. It isn’t that other entry points are unimportant;
     it is just that this one is so prominent.
     To the east, the contemporary suburban nature of the East Highlands
     Ranch area is well established and speaks for itself. To the west, a clear
     image is yet to emerge. Roughly between the freeway and the City Hall
     along Base Line is an area designated as the Town Center. It is not
     envisioned as a traditional downtown, largely because Base Line is so
2-32                                           March 2006 | City of Highland General Plan

                                                                                2. LAND USE ELEMENT
wide and busy that it creates a barrier between opposite sides of the
street. It is not a particularly pedestrian-friendly street. Moreover, there
was no evolution of this area as a downtown. The early downtown
was a quarter mile to the north. Yet, there is an emerging mixture of
activities in this part of Highland, many of which are typically found in
downtowns. They include retail businesses and offices, traveler-serving
uses, places to eat, civic uses and institutional uses such as churches and
schools (immediately adjacent).
Further north and south these uses merge with existing or potential
residential neighborhoods. Each of the four quadrants formed by the
intersection of Base Line and Palm Avenue contributes a unique set of
opportunities for the future Town Center. The southeast quadrant is a
mix of institutional, residential and commercial uses. The southwest
quadrant emphasizes public uses. The northwest quadrant emphasizes
retail uses. The northeast quadrant is a cluster of mostly vacant land,
one of the City’s most significant. The first three quadrants will achieve
their potential through infill, intensification, rehabilitation and even
redevelopment. The largely vacant quadrant will be the focus of totally
new development.
The following policies specifically relate to the land use aspects of the
Town Center. A host of design-related policies are provided in the
Community Design Element.
GOAL 2.10
Create a new Town Center where Highland residents, employees and visitors
can live, shop, work, recreate and socialize in a vibrant, safe and pedestrian-
friendly environment.
Policies
     1) Ensure quality design through adherence to the Town Center
          design guidelines and policies in the Community Design Element.
     2) Ensure that the Town Center maintains a mix of uses attractive to
          broad segments of Highland’s population and that stimulate
          activity during day and evening hours, every day of the week.
     3) Provide access to multiple modes of travel, including pedestrian,
          bicycle, transit and automobile.
     4) Work with property owners to implement the Town Center
          Vision.
     5) Protect surrounding single-family neighborhoods from
          incompatible uses.
City of Highland General Plan                                                                   2-33

                                                 HIGHLAND…A Great Place to Live
          6) Provide transition areas/buffers between land uses within the
              Town Center and with surrounding neighborhoods.
          7) Connect the Town Center physically and visually with the
              Historic Village District with pedestrian connections, historically
              compatible architecture, signage, landscaping and other
              streetscape elements.
          8) Explore opportunities to relocate historic structures onto the
              Town Center site in prominent locations.
          9) Require new development to provide for public plazas and other
              gathering places.
          10) Prohibit freestanding drive-through commercial structures and
              convenience commercial uses, except at the major intersection
              of Palm Avenue and Base Line.
     Base Line Corridor
     Base Line is the principal east/west corridor through the City, and its
     primary commercial area. It is bounded by residential, commercial,
     public and industrial uses. The corridor suffers from poor visual quality.
     Commercial lots are shallow, often extending not more than 100 feet
     from the street frontage, and are generally narrow. Most parcels along
     Base Line are too small to effectively support a vibrant commercial
     operation. These factors have led to the development of small-scale
     freestanding business establishments that lack landscaping and adequate
     off-street parking. There are some multiple and single-family residential
     developments among the commercial uses.
     To revitalize the corridor, the Land Use Plan redesignates many of the
     mid-block commercial uses to Medium Density residential uses. This
     change provides new housing opportunities in the western half of
     Highland and simultaneously provides additional retail support with new
     residents and added income to the area.
2-34                                         March 2006 | City of Highland General Plan

                                                                             2. LAND USE ELEMENT
Because of the nature of the Base Line Corridor and its function as a
major transportation thoroughfare, residential development will need to
be carefully designed and sensitive to noise and safety issues associated
with Base Line. Policies for the design of Base Line Corridor residential
development are found in the Community Design Element, while
development standards are provided in the Development Code.
GOAL 2.11
Revitalize the Base Line Corridor by concentrating commercial uses at
strategic intersections and by redeveloping aging, mid-block commercial
areas with new residential development.
Policies
     1) Revitalize the Base Line Corridor with infill development of
          vacant land and redevelopment of aging commercial areas with
          residential development, consistent with the Land Use Plan.
     2) Specifically encourage the consolidation of individual parcels
          along Base Line to provide a sufficient land area for vibrant
          commercial uses.
     3) Prohibit the development of parcels not fronting on Base Line
          for commercial use except as part of an integrated commercial
          project that will take its access from, and focus on Base Line.
     4) Limit new access for commercial uses to Base Line, Del Rosa
          Drive, Sterling Avenue, Victoria Avenue, Central Avenue, Stoney
          Creek and Boulder Avenue.
     5) Consolidate existing access to accommodate future medians.
     6) Facilitate conversion of existing residential parcels along the rear
          of commercially designated areas along Base Line on a block-by-
          block, rather than on a parcel-by-parcel basis.
     7) Ensure quality commercial and residential development through
          adherence to the Community Design Element policies and
          guidelines and Development Code standards.
Golden Triangle
Nestled between the City’s two creeks and Boulder Avenue is a unique
collection of vacant and agricultural lands that offer tremendous
economic development opportunities. As a result of the borders and
potential of these properties, this area came to be known as the Golden
City of Highland General Plan                                                                2-35

                                                  HIGHLAND…A Great Place to Live
     Triangle. The Golden Triangle enjoys several key advantages that bolster
     its development potential: access, visibility, size and location.
     Direct freeway access is provided at the southwestern portion of the
     Triangle at the 5th Street exit, while Boulder Avenue provides major
     arterial access for the northern and eastern portion of the Triangle.
     Additionally, visibility of the properties is very high for traffic traveling
     in any direction along the surrounding roadways. This visibility is
     accentuated by City Creek and Plunge Creek, which serve as visual
     resources and natural buffers, both insulating the Triangle from
     competing land uses and highlighting the area as an island of
     development.
     Another key advantage of the Golden Triangle is sheer size. At 165
     acres, the area is prime for a master-planning effort that could result in
     a purposeful, cohesive and successful economic center. Although the
     presence of multiple property owners may be a concern, the majority of
     vacant or agricultural lands are very large and located adjacent to each
     other. Together, these properties form a great location to meet the City’s
     employment and retail needs. Finally, as with the Corridors, the Golden
     Triangle is located within Highland’s Redevelopment Project Area, which
     should facilitate the properties’ full development.
     Success is not guaranteed, however, since any economic development
     would face competition from businesses in neighboring Redlands.
     Additionally, increasing congestion on 5th Street may negate the
     Triangle’s advantage of good freeway access. Similarly, the benefits of
     visual resources and natural buffers provided by City Creek and Plunge
     Creek may also preclude significant development because portions of the
     Golden Triangle fall within the City’s flood hazard area. If Highland can
2-36                                         March 2006 | City of Highland General Plan

                                                                               2. LAND USE ELEMENT
successfully mitigate these constraints, the Golden Triangle should offer
economic success equal to its name.
As such, the General Plan intent for this area is to facilitate a master-
planned, mixed-use type of development large enough to cater to
residential, retail and office uses within a well-coordinated group of
individually designed projects. Residential and employment-generating
land uses would be interconnected with a system of landscaped trails,
pedestrian pathways and local streets.
For purposes of the buildout projections identified earlier in the element,
it is assumed that approximately 115 acres would be devoted to
residential uses, 25 acres for retail uses, and 15 acres for office uses, with
the remainder being used for public spaces, including recreation areas,
trails, plazas, etc.
GOAL 2.12
Create a signature, mixed-use master-planned community that integrates
commercial, office and residential uses in a unique environmental setting.
Policies
      1) Require commercial designs within this area to relate to adjacent
          major roadways and the freeway.
      2) Concentrate office and big box retail uses along 5th Street.
      3) Provide adequate transitions and/or buffers between residential
          and nonresidential uses within the area.
      4) Require residential development to provide adequate amenities
          such as common open space and recreation areas.
      5) Require commercial development to provide functional public
          spaces and/or plazas for shoppers and visitors.
      6) Land use intensity will be determined upon the adoption of a
          specific plan, planned unit development, conditional use permit
          or similar mechanism.
      7) Ensure quality design through adherence to the Community
          Design Element policies and applicable Development Code
          standards.
      8) Orient uses along City Creek to take advantage of views of and
          connections to open space and recreational amenities.
City of Highland General Plan                                                                  2-37
                                                HIGHLAND…A Great Place to Live
          9) Actively participate in future San Bernardino International Airport
              planning activities to minimize potential negative impacts on
              Highland’s economic development opportunities and quality of
              life.
     5th Street Corridor
     Lack of available industrial land west of Interstate 15 is forcing industrial
     development to move eastward towards Highland. Looking ahead, the
     movement of blue-collar jobs into the region surrounding Highland and
     the San Bernardino International Airport (SBIA) is forecasted to bring in
     12,190 new jobs between 2003 and 2009. In turn, the energy that these
     new jobs will add to the economy will support an additional 12,190 jobs
     in sectors such as retailing, consumer services and health care.
     With its strategic location between SBIA and the SR-3/I-210 corridor, the
     5th Street Corridor represents an excellent opportunity to capture some
     of this potential employment growth. To position Highland to take
     advantage of this increased demand, the Land Use Plan for the 5th Street
     Corridor is dominated by Business Park and Industrial land uses.
2-38                                        March 2006 | City of Highland General Plan

                                                                            2. LAND USE ELEMENT
GOAL 2.13
Transform the 5 Street Corridor into a major employment center and
                   th
gateway to the San Bernardino International Airport.
Policies
     1) Continue to coordinate with the City of San Bernardino and the
          San Bernardino International Airport Authority for future
          planning on and around the airport.
     2) Continue to plan and promote the 5th Street Corridor as the
          major industrial entryway into the San Bernardino International
          Airport.
     3) Develop a comprehensive design and branding program for the
          5th Street Corridor, promoting it as a unified, business-friendly
          employment center.
     4) Ensure exceptional circulation through adherence to the policies
          of the Circulation Element.
     5) Protect and enhance the integrity and desirability of industrial
          sites from nonindustrial uses.
     6) Improve landscaping along the edges and median of 5th Street
          and the boundaries of the corridor.
     7) Ensure quality development through Development Code
          standards and the Community Design Element policies and
          guidelines.
     8) Until nonconforming residential uses transition out of the area,
          provide adequate transitions and/or buffers between existing
          residential neighborhoods and industrial or other incompatible
          land uses.
     9) Work with San Bernardino International Airport Authority to
          ensure that future planning activities encourage consistency with
          adopted City land use plans and minimize impacts on Highland’s
          economic development opportunities and quality of life.
Victoria Avenue Corridor
As the primary passenger entryway into the San Bernardino International
Airport from I-210, new land use patterns will need to be established to
take advantage of future commercial opportunities, improve traffic and
provide future development opportunities along Victoria Avenue.
Currently, single-family residential uses and scattered strip development
maintain individual access points to Victoria Avenue, which create
City of Highland General Plan                                                               2-39

                                                 HIGHLAND…A Great Place to Live
                      significant traffic congestion. Furthermore, to
                      accommodate future traffic volumes, Victoria Avenue
                      will need to be expanded and could impact current and
                      future development along the corridor. To ensure
                      quality development opportunities in the future,
                      individual parcels will need to be consolidated.
                      GOAL 2.14
                      Establish the Victoria Avenue Corridor as the major
                      entryway into the San Bernardino International Airport.
                      Policies
                           1) Concentrate commercial uses along Victoria
                               Avenue at Base Line, Pacific Street and Highland
                               Avenue.
                           2) Allow for a mix of commercial and residential
                               uses in appropriate areas through the Planned
                               Development land use designation.
                           3) Provide residential opportunities in mid-block
                               areas between 9th Street and Pacific Avenue.
                           4) Encourage the consolidation of parcels to
                               promote quality, planned development.
                           5) Consolidate access points along Victoria Avenue
                               to improve traffic flows.
                           6) Create a major business park node at the
                               southern terminus of Victoria Avenue to
                               maximize employment opportunities adjacent to
                               the airport.
     Seven Oaks Area
     Located east of the Santa Ana River, the property known as the Seven
     Oaks area represents Highland’s most significant prime residential real
     estate opportunity. The 1,900-acre property, annexed by the City in
     2000, is designated as Planned Development, which ensures that the
     area will be planned comprehensively to ensure quality development
     that functions as a whole.
     The site could accommodate hundreds or even thousands of high-end
     housing units, depending upon a variety of natural and infrastructure
2-40                                         March 2006 | City of Highland General Plan

                                                                             2. LAND USE ELEMENT
constraints. This housing would enhance the City’s housing stock and
provide homeownership opportunities for affluent residents both from
within and outside the City of Highland. Future residents would enjoy
large lots and an elevated view of the Santa Ana River Wash, the San
Bernardino Mountains, and surrounding jurisdictions. Although the
property was acquired as a borrow site for landfill for Seven Oaks Dam
construction and has been heavily disturbed, the property configuration
is highly amenable to residential development. It occupies a strategic
location between the Santa Ana River and Mill Creek with a
commanding view of the Santa Ana River downstream of Seven
Oaks Dam as well as the surrounding San Bernardino Mountains.
However, the site has limited access, with Greenspot Road providing the
sole connection to the western part of Highland and with future access to
Bryant Street to the east via an extension of Greenspot Road. Additional
access is available from the south via the City of Redlands. Given the
outlying location and limited access, future development on the Seven
Oaks property will need to be able to operate with a significant degree of
autonomy. The site should be master planned to ensure adequate
development of recreational amenities and other public facilities and
services. However, prior to any further planning or development
activities, the City should revisit and refine their strategy for the Seven
Oaks property.
Because of its access limits and adjacency to the City of Redlands, future
planning will require close collaboration between the two cities.
GOAL 2.15
Create a one-of-a-kind, high-quality, master-planned estate community in the
Seven Oaks area that incorporates substantial scenic, open space, recreation
and trail amenities.
Policies
     1) Ensure trail connections to existing or planned local and regional
          open space and trail systems.
     2) Provide extensive open space linkages within the site to connect
          to adjacent open space resources.
     3) Continue to collaborate with the City of Redlands, the County of
          San Bernardino and property owners.
     4) Ensure that sufficient access, including emergency access, is
          provided to support future development.
City of Highland General Plan                                                                2-41

                                            HIGHLAND…A Great Place to Live
     5) Ensure that adequate public services and facilities keep pace with
         future development.
     6) Provide appropriate habitat corridor linkages in collaboration
         with applicable habitat conservation planning.
     7) Implement future development guidance of the Seven Oaks area
         by means of a specific plan or similar mechanism.
     8) Require that hillside development minimize alteration of the
         natural landforms and natural vegetation, while maximizing
         viewshed protection.
     9) Limit grading to the amount necessary to provide stable areas for
         structural foundations, street rights-of-way, parking facilities and
         other intended uses.
     10) Minimize import/export associated with grading.
     11) Consider clustered development, especially in connection with
         such recreation amenities as a golf course, in future planning
         activities for the site.
     12) Maintain the Greenspot Agricultural Preserve until such time
         future development is proposed or more detailed planning is
         initiated. In the event that proposed development would impact
         the Agricultural Preserve, the City shall evaluate the viability of
         incorporating the Preserve into the development, consistent with
         the City adopted Rules and Procedures for the Administration of
         Agricultural Preserves and Contracts.
2-42                                   March 2006 | City of Highland General Plan

3. Circulation Elemen
This page intentionally left blank
Chapter 3. Circulation
INTRODUCTION
Purpose and Function
A
         s development continues in the City of Highland, traffic on its
         roadway systems will increase. To protect the City’s unique
         character and ensure the safe and efficient movement of people
and goods, careful planning of the roadway network is essential. As the
City’s road system nears its capacity for handling traffic in a safe and
efficient manner, the potential for delays and the risk of traffic accidents
increase. The Circulation Element addresses current transportation-
related issues and future challenges associated with the growth posed by
the General Plan. In addition, the Circulation Element analyzes future
traffic impacts to the City due to the planned growth of Highland’s Land
Use Plan and the inevitable growth region-wide. The purpose of the
Circulation Element is to develop an efficient, cost effective and
comprehensive transportation management strategy, consistent with
regional plans and local needs to maintain and improve mobility, and in
a manner consistent with the goals and character of the community.
The Circulation Element provides specific implementation programs,
which address the existing traffic conditions in the General Plan study
area, and are designed to prevent future deterioration of roadway
capacity in the community. California Government Code describes
conditions and data to be researched, analyzed and included within a
General Plan Circulation Element. Government Code Section 65302(b)
states that the General Plan shall include the general location and extent
of existing and proposed major thoroughfares, transportation routes,
terminals and other local public utilities and facilities.
Related Plans and Programs
Other Elements
The Circulation Element is an outgrowth of City and regional land use
planning. It also affects and is affected by a variety of community and
environmental factors. The element has a direct relationship with the
City of Highland General Plan                                                3-1

                                                HIGHLAND…A Great Place to Live
    Land Use, Public Services and Facilities, Open Space and Conservation,
    Noise, Economic Development, and Community Design Elements.
        •   The circulation system is a primary determinant in shaping land
            use patterns specified in the Land Use Element and, conversely,
            its capacity is designed to accommodate the Land Use Element’s
            land use distributions and intensities.
        •   The various community facilities and services addressed in the
            Public Services and Facilities Element, including fire and police
            services, public and private utilities and educational facilities, are
            all affected and served by the circulation system.
        •   Traffic impacts on air quality are well known. Strategies to
            address this issue are discussed in the Open Space and
            Conservation Element.
        •   The roadway network and travel patterns define noise contours
            along roadways and, as such, shape the goals and policies of the
            Noise Element.
        •   An efficient, safe and effective circulation system is an essential
            component to the economic health of any city. Its ability to move
            employees, visitors and goods has a direct correlation to the goals
            and policies of the Economic Development Element.
        •   While mobility is an important overarching goal of the Circulation
            Element, preservation of City character and pedestrian safety
            must be maintained. The design of local streets and places where
            people congregate must ensure public safety. As such, the
            Circulation and Community Design Elements are inextricably
            linked.
    Regional Planning
    The Circulation Element is also the result of coordination with the
    Regional Transportation Plan (RTP) and state and regional agencies,
    including the California Department of Transportation (Caltrans), the San
    Bernardino Association of Governments (SANBAG), and the Southern
    California Association of Governments (SCAG). It is also influenced
    through close coordination with neighboring local jurisdictions, such as
    the Cities of San Bernardino and Redlands, the San Bernardino
    International Airport Authority, and San Manuel Band of Mission Indians.
    In addition, federal and state transportation planning must be
    coordinated with local planning pursuant to Section 134, Title 23 of
    the U.S. Code and California Government Code Section 65080(a),
    respectively.
3-2                                       March 2006 | City of Highland General Plan

                                                                            3. CIRCULATION ELEMENT
Protection of air quality is also associated with growing traffic volumes
and infrastructure demand, and requires careful analysis and planning to
protect the community from unnecessarily high levels of locally generated
pollutants. Vehicular emissions will increase with expanding population,
miles traveled and less efficient travel conditions. However, the
maintenance of adequate traffic flows, the prevention of traffic
congestion caused by inadequate and/or failing roadways, and enhanced
vehicle efficiencies will help preserve the air quality in the community.
SCAG Regional Transportation Plan
DESITINATION 2030 is the 2004 Regional Transportation Plan (RTP)
for the six-county Region in southern California, including Los Angeles,
Orange, San Bernardino, Riverside, Ventura and Imperial Counties—
home to 17 million people. The Regional Transportation Plan (RTP) is
the culmination of a three-year effort with a focus on improving the
balance between land use and the current, as well as future,
transportation systems. SCAG is required to develop, maintain and
update the RTP on a three-year cycle.
DESTINATION 2030 is a multimodal plan representing the regional
vision for a better transportation system, integrated with the growth
pattern for the region over the Plan horizon of 2030. The Plan provides
the basic policy and program framework for long-term investment in the
vast regional transportation system in a coordinated, cooperative and
continuous manner. Transportation investments in the SCAG region that
receive state or federal transportation funds must be consistent with the
RTP and must be included in the Regional Transportation Improvement
Program (RTIP) when ready for funding.
The Highland General Plan has been developed with SCAG Regional
Transportation Plan in mind. The implementation of the General Plan’s
goals and policies are designed to incorporate policy to achieve the City’s
role in regional transportation planning.
CIRCULATION PLAN
The Circulation Plan describes the approach to be used in implementing
the Circulation Element’s goals and policies, as well as the location and
extent of circulation facilities and services.
As a comprehensive transportation management strategy, the Circulation
Element has been developed based upon an analysis of existing
conditions within the City, and future development as set forth by the
General Plan Land Use Plan and growth projections. Growth in traffic
has been projected based upon the East Valley Traffic Model (EVTM),
administrated by City of San Bernardino and especially updated for the
City of Highland.
City of Highland General Plan                                                                   3-3

                                                                                                 HIGHLAND…A Great Place to Live
                                                  Roadway Classifications
                                                  Based upon existing and projected traffic demands generated by buildout
                                                  of the General Plan, each major roadway has been assigned a specific
                                                  design classification. The need for and appropriateness of each
                                                  classification has been based upon modeled future traffic volumes and
                                                  overall community design goals set forth in the General Plan. Each of
                                                  the classifications corresponds with the typical street cross-sections
                                                  illustrated in Figure 3.1, Roadway Cross-Sections. While the cross-
                                                  sections represent typical street widths, refinements may be required at
                                                  intersections or entrances to development projects, which could include
                                                  the need for additional travel or turn lanes, as well as provisions for
                                                  transit improvements.
                                                  There are seven categories in the City roadway hierarchy, ranging from
                                                  higher capacity primary arterials to lower capacity collector streets.
                                                  These categories are described below:
                                                       •    Collector Street. This category of roadway is intended to carry traffic
                                                            between residential neighborhoods and the larger street network.
                                                            They are, generally, two-lane roadways which have a mixture of
                                                            residential and commercial land uses along them. Collector
                                                            streets are 44 feet, curb-to-curb, within 66-foot rights-of-way.
                                                            Examples of collector streets are Church Avenue and Weaver
                                                            Street. Cunningham Street is wider (more than 50 feet) than the
                                                            typical cross-section for most of its segments.
                                                       •    Special Collector Street. Palm Avenue is designated as a special
                                                            collector street in the area between the Base Line and Pacific
                                                            Street. This section of Palm Avenue serves as the primary
                                                            connection between the Town Center and Historic Village District
                                                            and, in some areas, is constrained by existing historic structures in
                                                            the area. This is a two-lane roadway with a 52-foot roadway,
                                                            curb-to-curb, within a 66-foot right-of-way. Restrictions on the
                                                            amount and design of on-street parking within the Historic Village
                                                            Area are anticipated. It is also expected that the increase in
    Looking north on Palm Avenue, a Special                 pedestrian movement in the area may necessitate the installation
       Collector Street, in Highland’s Historic             of pedestrian crossings or signals, which will reduce the efficiency
                                Village District.
                                                            in this section of the roadway system.
                                                            If on-street parking is eliminated, a narrower curb-to-curb cross-
                                                            section could be utilized, allowing the available right-of-way to be
                                                            used to augment pedestrian amenities (e.g., wider sidewalks with
                                                            room available for street furniture and other enhancements).
3-4                                                                                         March 2006 | City of Highland General Plan


                                          HIGHLAND…A Great Place to Live
    This page intentionally left blank.
3-6                                  March 2006 | City of Highland General Plan

                                                                                               3. CIRCULATION ELEMENT
          Because of the location of the intersection of Palm Avenue and
          Pacific Street and right-of-way constraints within the Historic
          Village District, consideration may be given to alternatives to
          traffic signals as a method to achieve acceptable levels of service
          (LOS). Alternatively, the City may accept a reduced LOS to
          retain the historic character of the District.
     •    Special Secondary Highway. The portion of Base Line between
          Church Street and Greenspot Road is identified as requiring
          special secondary highway status. This section of roadway is
          designated as containing a 66-foot roadway, curb-to-curb, within
          a 104-foot right-of-way. This section provides more space for
          pedestrian and landscape improvements.
     •    Secondary Highway. Secondary highways provide more local access
          than major arterials, but also provide some nonlocal through-
          traffic service. This classification includes a four-lane roadway
          with a raised median and has a typical right-of-way width of
          88 feet and a curb-to-curb pavement width of approximately
          64 feet. Del Rosa Drive, Tippecanoe Avenue, Pacific Street,
          9th Street and Church Street are examples of secondary
          highways.
          The alternative secondary highway cross-section does not include         Looking east on Base Line, identified as a
          a raised median but enhances the opportunity to provide bike             Special Secondary Highway, at its intersection
          paths and/or parking lanes. Table 3.1 summarizes the different           with Church Street.
          cross-section configurations for all secondary highways in the
          City of Highland.
                           Table 3.1: Secondary Highway Configuration
                   Roadway             Median         Bike Path       Parking Lane
           Pacific Street                 No            Class II           No
           9th Street                     No           Class III          Yes
           Tippecanoe Avenue              No            Class II           No
           Del Rosa Drive                Yes              No               No
           Highland Avenue               Yes            Class II           No
           Church Street                  No            Class II           No
           Orange Street                 No             Class II           No      Looking east on Base Line at Central Avenue.
                                                                                   This portion of Base Line is identified as a major
                                                                                   highway.
     •    Major Highway. Major highways provide service to nonlocal
          through trips, as well as providing limited local access. Ideally,
          curb cuts are minimized on major arterials, although historically
          such access control has been difficult to achieve. Major highways
          are designated as four-lane, 80-foot roadways (including a
          12-foot median) curb-to-curb, within 104-foot rights-of-way.
City of Highland General Plan                                                                                                    3-7

                                                                                             HIGHLAND…A Great Place to Live
                                                        Base Line (west of Church Avenue and between Boulder Avenue
                                                        and Church Street) and most of Greenspot Road are examples of
                                                        major highways. Base Line, from the western City limit to Palm
                                                        Avenue, will retain a 72-foot curb-to-curb cross-section. The
                                                        median on Base Line from Browning Road to Church Street will
                                                        have a reduced width due to local topography.
                                                    •   Primary Arterial. Primary arterials are limited access facilities which
                                                        provide service to nonlocal through trips with a minimal level of
                                                        direct access to adjacent land uses. They are designated as
                                                        96-foot roadways, curb-to-curb, within a minimum of 112-foot
                                                        rights-of-way, and carry up to three lanes of through traffic in
                                                        each direction. An example of a primary arterial is 5th Street
                                                        between Palm Avenue and Boulder Avenue.
                                                    •   Modified Primary Arterial. Boulder Avenue north of Greenspot Road
                     th
    This portion of 5 Street is identified as a         is designated as a modified primary arterial. The modified
                            Primary Arterial.           primary arterial is designated as a four-lane divided roadway plus
                                                        a Class I bike lane, with a typical right-of-way width of 135 feet
                                                        and a curb-to-curb pavement width of approximately 98 feet with
                                                        a raised median.
                                                Typical cross-sections for roadway classifications are provided in Figure
                                                3.1, Roadway Cross-Sections. Actual cross-sections may vary somewhat
                                                from the indicated measurement standards, but in order to provide
                                                maximum capacity, as well as right-of-way protection for landscaping,
                                                bike lanes and future roadway improvements, the typical roadway cross-
                                                sections are recommended as future minimums.
                                                Regional Roadways
                                                State Route 30 (SR-30) represents the backbone of Highland’s circulation
                                                system and must be considered in any significant changes to land use or
                                                design.
                                                The process to add SR-30 to Interstate 210 (I-210) began in 1998, when
                                                the designation of SR-30 was legislatively changed to California 210
                                                (AB 2388, 1998). In 1999, the state of California submitted California
                                                210 for inclusion in the Interstate Highway System. The American
                                                Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials (AASHTO)
                                                rejected this proposal because the freeway segments were not complete;
                                                however, the freeway will be resubmitted for approval once it is
                                                complete. The City of Highland and surrounding jurisdictions may also
                                                seek funding and approval for the freeway’s expansion from four to six
                                                or more lanes to accommodate the expected increase in future traffic.
                                                The connection of I-210 with SR-30 construction will be completed by
                                                the end of 2007. The regional long-range projections indicate that SR-30
                                                through Highland will need to be widened to six lanes. Measure I, the
3-8                                                                                    March 2006 | City of Highland General Plan

                                                                                                                        3. CIRCULATION ELEMENT
local funding source for building new freeways and widening existing
routes, includes a widening project for SR-30 from I-215 to I-10. The
SR-30 widening will include an additional general use lane in each
direction.
Levels of Service
The available and utilized capacity of a roadway is typically characterized
as “Level of Service.” Level of Service (LOS) is a qualitative measure                                           The V/C ratio is the ratio of existing or
                                                                                                                 projected traffic volumes to an intersection’s
describing the efficiency of the flow of traffic. LOS includes the range of                                      design capacity.
alphabetical connotations “A” through “F,” used to characterize roadway
                                                                                                                 Peak hours include those times of day
operating conditions. LOS A represents the best (free flow) conditions                                           where the traffic volumes are the highest;
and LOS F indicates the worst (system failure). Level of Service can also                                        typically they are in the morning and
                                                                                                                 evening hours when most people are
be represented as volume to capacity (V/C) ratios, or vehicle demand                                             traveling to and from their places of
divided by roadway capacity. Therefore, as the ratio approaches 1.00,                                            employment.
the roadway approaches LOS F.
Table 3.2 describes the quality of traffic flow associated with each level of
service.
                                                        Table 3.2: Level of Service Description
                                                                                              Average Total Delay
   Level of                                                                                  Per Vehicle (Seconds)
   Service                            Quality of Traffic Flow                            Signalized            Unsignalized                    V/C Ratio
                 Represents free flow. Individual users are virtually unaffected
      A                                                                                  0.00–10.00              0.00–10.00                    0.00–0.60
                 by the presence of others in the traffic stream.
                 In the range of stable flow, but the presence of other users in
                 the traffic stream begins to be noticeable. Freedom to select
      B                                                                                 10.01–20.00             10.01–15.00                    0.61–0.70
                 desired speeds is relatively unaffected, but there is a slight
                 decline in the freedom to maneuver.
                 In the range of stable flow, but marks the beginning of the
                 range of flow in which the operation of individual users
      C                                                                                 20.01–35.00             15.01–25.00                    0.71–0.80
                 becomes significantly affected by interactions with others in the
                 traffic stream.
                 Represents high-density but stable flow. Speed and freedom
                 to maneuver are severely restricted, and the driver
      D                                                                                 35.01–55.00             25.01–35.00                    0.81–0.90
                 experiences a generally poor level of comfort and
                 convenience.
                 Represents operating conditions at or near the capacity level.
                 All speeds are reduced to a low, but relatively uniform value.
      E                                                                                 55.01–80.00             35.01–50.00                    0.91–1.00
                 Small increases in flow will cause breakdowns in traffic
                 movement.
                 Used to define forced or breakdown flow. This condition exists
                 wherever the amount of traffic approaching a point exceeds
      F                                                                                 80.01 and up            50.01 and up                  Above 1.00
                 the amount that can traverse the point. Queues form behind
                 such locations.
  Note: The criteria used to evaluate LOS conditions vary based on the type of roadway and whether the traffic flow is
  considered interrupted or uninterrupted.
City of Highland General Plan                                                                                                                                  3-9

                                                HIGHLAND…A Great Place to Live
     This Circulation Element establishes that the LOS should be LOS D or
     better for major intersections in the City. For peak operating periods,
     LOS D is considered acceptable. Therefore, any City of Highland
     intersection operating at LOS “E” or “F” is considered deficient.
3-10                                       March 2006 | City of Highland General Plan


                                           HIGHLAND…A Great Place to Live
     This page intentionally left blank.
3-12                                  March 2006 | City of Highland General Plan

                                                                            3. CIRCULATION ELEMENT
GOALS AND POLICIES
The following section identifies critical transportation issues and
circulation components, maps various circulation network components,
and provides goals and policies that support the City’s vision of an
efficient transportation system that serves all of Highland’s residents,
businesses and visitors.
Roadway Mobility/Transportation Demand Management
As the San Bernardino Valley and the community continue to grow,
transportation demand and systems management is necessary to
preserve and increase available roadway capacity. Highland must
provide and maintain a roadway system with adequate capacity and
acceptable levels of service to accommodate projected travel demands
associated with the buildout of the Land Use Element. This can be
accomplished by establishing minimum service levels for the designated
roadway system and implementing Transportation Demand Management
(TDM) strategies.
TDM involves the development and implementation of policies, plans
and programs designed to encourage the use of a wider range of
transportation alternatives, including public transit and bicycles. In
addition to an emphasis on alternative travel modes such as carpooling,
van pooling and mass transit, TDM can also include employee flex time
as an important component that reduces peak hour travel and associated
traffic congestion.
In response to state mandates, SANBAG prepared a regional Congestion
Management Plan (CMP), which required City of Highland and other
cities to prepare TDM ordinances or risk the loss of federal transportation
funds. The City adopted its TDM ordinance in April, 1992.
GOAL 3.1
Provide a comprehensive transportation system that facilitates current and
long-term circulation in and through the City.
Policies
     1) Require new development proposals to ensure that all mid-block
          street segments operate at LOS “D” or better during the peak
          hours of traffic. (Note: Because of the location of the Palm
          Avenue/Pacific Street intersection within the Historic District,
          consideration will be given to alternatives to traffic signal
          mitigation. Alternatively, the City may elect to accept a lower
          LOS to retain the historic character of the District.)
City of Highland General Plan                                                                  3-13

                                                 HIGHLAND…A Great Place to Live
          2) Ensure that all intersections operate at LOS “D” or better during
              the peak hours of traffic.
          3) Ensure that the City’s street system be designed and constructed
              to accommodate the traffic generated by buildout of the General
              Plan land use designations.
          4) Maintain flexibility in the cross-sections and configuration of
              streets within topographically rugged or environmentally sensitive
              areas as long as mid-block street segments and intersections
              operate at LOS “D” or better.
          5) Design and employ traffic control measures (e.g., install traffic
              signals, provide access restrictions, etc.) to ensure city streets and
              roads function as intended.
          6) Periodically update the General Plan master traffic study to
              maintain its relevance and correspondence to the General Plan
              land use designations and the design and construction of new
              and existing City streets.
          7) Monitor the intensity of land use to keep traffic on any arterial in
              balance with roadway capacity.
          8) Require development proposals with the potential to generate
              traffic volumes or other impacts not adequately evaluated in the
              Circulation Element and the General Plan Program EIR to
              prepare a traffic analysis consistent and compatible with the
              City’s Master General Plan Traffic Model.
          9) Restrict the number of access points and intersections along
              arterials to preserve mid block and intersection capacities and to
              maintain public safety.
          10) Encourage major employers to reduce vehicular trips by offering
              incentive concepts discussed in the General Plan Circulation
              Element, including but not limited to reduced transit passes and
              preferential parking for ridesharing.
     Roadway System Maintenance
     A carefully planned, designed, constructed, maintained and operated
     street and highway system facilitates the movement of vehicles and
     provides safe and convenient access to various areas of the City.
     Roadways also need to be built with sufficient capacity to accommodate
     long-term growth. Maintenance of mobility, safety, convenience and
     efficiency are all issues that must be considered when operating a
     roadway system.
3-14                                        March 2006 | City of Highland General Plan

                                                                                         3. CIRCULATION ELEMENT
GOAL 3.2
Provide a well-maintained roadway system.
Policies
     1) Maintain and rehabilitate all components of the circulation
          system, including roadways, sidewalks, bicycle facilities,
          pedestrian facilities and traffic signals.
     2) Establish and maintain a roadways pavement management
          program (PMP) that sets forth budgeting, timelines and schedules
          for maintenance of existing roadways in the community.
     3) Continue to study the need and feasibility of providing additional
          all-weather crossings along critical roadways, and develop an
          implementation plan and schedule, if appropriate.
     4) Coordinate maintenance or enhancement of transportation
          facilities with related infrastructure improvements.
     5) Develop and implement programs and policies that require
          additional improvements or mitigation from industries or entities
          that generate heavy truck traffic and pavement impacts.
Scenic Roadways
The existing roadway system is primarily designed to be an efficient
circulation system to move people and goods. Enhancement and
viewing of aesthetic and scenic resources were not factors which
contributed to the design of the existing roadways.
Scenic resources within the City and its planning area include unique
visual features that provide attractive views within or from the study area.
Major visual resources include topographic features, local flora, and
historic buildings. In general, views of local topographic features, such as
the San Bernardino Mountains or the Santa Ana River area, should be           Both the Santa Ana River and Seven Oaks
                                                                              Dam are prominent visual features along
considered in any roadway design. Roadway development in the                  Greenspot Road in east Highland.
north/central part of the City must be sensitive to existing, and potentially
significant, historical resources included in the Historic Village District.
Because of their importance as community resources, scenic
opportunities should be improved along Boulder Avenue, Base Line and
Palm Avenue. In addition to these proposed scenic routes, the following
local roadways also should be considered as potential scenic routes, due
to the significance of resources which can be viewed from Greenspot
Road and Base Line (from Boulder Avenue to Weaver Street).
City of Highland General Plan                                                                                         3-15
                                                HIGHLAND…A Great Place to Live
     In addition, raised medians at least 10 feet wide are planned for
     Secondary Highways, Special Secondary Highways, Major Highways,
     Primary Arterials and Modified Primary Arterials. The proposed
     landscaped medians for the majority of the arterials are expected to
     beautify the City’s highway system.
     GOAL 3.3
     Preserve and enhance uniquely scenic or special visual resource areas along
     appropriate routes for the enjoyment of all travelers.
     Policies
         1) Designate the following roadways as Scenic Highways and
             establish guidelines that protect visual resources in the
             community and allow for the development of additional
             recreational opportunities:
             •   Boulder Avenue
             •   Base Line (east of City Creek)
             •   Palm Avenue
             •   Greenspot Road
             •   Church Street
             •   Highland Avenue (east of City Creek)
         2) Attractively landscape and maintain Highland’s Secondary
             Highways, Special Secondary Highways, Major Highways,
             Primary Arterials, and Modified Primary Arterials and prepare/
             implement distinctive streetscape improvement plans.
         3) Take such actions as may be necessary to protect scenic routes,
             including but not limited to:
             •   regulation of land use and intensity of development;
             •   detailed land and site planning;
             •   control of outdoor advertising;
             •   careful attention to and control of grading and landscaping;
                 and
             •   careful design and maintained appearance of structures and
                 equipment.
3-16                                       March 2006 | City of Highland General Plan

                                                                                           3. CIRCULATION ELEMENT
Pedestrian Safety
Pedestrian facilities include sidewalks, trails, walkways, bridges,
crosswalks, signals, illumination and benches. In addition, the City
provides crossing guard services to ensure safe routes to school for
Highland’s young students. These facilities and services are an important
part of Highland’s nonmotorized transportation network. Pedestrian
facilities provide a vital link between many other modes of travel. Where
such facilities exist, people will be much more likely to make shorter trips
by walking rather than by automobile, and these can make up a
considerable portion of short-range trips in the community. Pedestrian
facilities also provide a vital link for commuters who use other
transportation facilities such as buses and park and ride lots as well as
those who utilize the City’s recreational facilities and attend City schools.
                                                                                         Parkway trees and landscaping
GOAL 3.4                                                                                 provide a pleasant, safe experience
                                                                                         for pedestrians.
Provide a safe circulation system.
Policies
     1) Establish the local street system within developing neighborhoods
          through a cooperative public/private planning process.
     2) Require new development to install and maintain streets within
          planned residential areas as private streets and in accordance
          with development standards set forth in the Development Code
          and other applicable standards and guidelines.
     3) Promote the principle that streets have multiple uses and users,
          and protect the safety of all users.
     4) Require new development to provide pedestrian paths and
          linkages through projects, locating linkages to avoid conflicts with
          motorized traffic.
     5) Discourage high-speed, through traffic on local streets with
          appropriate traffic-calming measures (e.g., traffic enforcement,
          bulb-outs, lane striping, chokers, etc).
     6) Design access onto major arterial streets in an orderly and
          controlled manner.
     7) Utilize shared driveways in common areas to minimize                   A crossing guard provides a safe street crossing
          disruptions to traffic and pedestrian/bicycle flow.                  at Arroyo Verde Elementary School.
City of Highland General Plan                                                                                              3-17

                                                                                  HIGHLAND…A Great Place to Live
                                           8) Implement street design features such as the use of medians, bus
                                               turnouts and consolidated driveways to minimize mid-block traffic
                                               congestion.
                                           9) Support freeway improvements that remove through traffic from
                                               local streets.
                                           10) Provide adequate sight distances for safe vehicular movement on
                                               roadways and at intersections.
                                           11) Encourage and improve pedestrian connections from residential
                                               neighborhoods to retail activity centers, employment centers,
                                               schools, parks, open space areas and community centers.
                                           12) Encourage barrier-free accessibility for all handicapped residents,
                                               employees and visitors throughout the City’s circulation system.
                                           13) Support the planning of sidewalks of appropriate width to allow
                                               the provision of buffers to shield nonmotorized traffic from
                                               vehicles.
                                           14) Add raised, landscaped medians and bulb-outs, where
                                               appropriate, to reduce exposure to cross traffic at street crossings.
                                           15) When feasible, walkways should include pedestrian amenities
                                               such as shade trees and/or plantings, trash bins, benches and
                                               shelters.
                                       Transit Service
                                       Omnitrans is the public transit agency serving the San Bernardino Valley.
                                       Founded in 1976 through a joint powers agreement, Omnitrans carries
                                       over 15 million passengers each year throughout its 480-square-mile
                                       service area. The City of Highland has several OMNITRANS routes
                                       which run through the City. Existing routes are illustrated on Figure 3.3,
                                       Bus Routes. Generally, bus routes are dictated by need, which in turn is
     This OMNITRANS bus shelter on
 Highland Avenue provides a safe area
                                       generated by land use patterns. As the City develops, it is expected that
                   for waiting riders. the transit system will be developed to meet the need.
3-18                                                                         March 2006 | City of Highland General Plan

                                    3. CIRCULATION ELEMENT
                              Figure 3-3 Bus Routes
                                           Source: Omnitrans.org
City of Highland General Plan               NOT TO SCALE
                                           HIGHLAND…A Great Place to Live
     This page intentionally left blank.
3-20                                  March 2006 | City of Highland General Plan

                                                                                            3. CIRCULATION ELEMENT
GOAL 3.5
Promote bus service and paratransit improvements.
Policies
     1) Continue to support the regional bus system to provide intracity
          service, intercity service to major employment centers, and
          connection to regional transportation transfer points.
     2) Plan for the provision of areas within the City to be used as park-
          and-ride regional bus and car pool facilities.
     3) Work with Omnitrans to ensure that transit services are extended
          to serve residents in the eastern portion of the study area.
     4) Coordinate with Omnitrans to provide safe, clean and attractive
          bus shelters at bus stops and transfer stations.
     5) Ensure accessibility of disabled persons to public transportation.
     6) Investigate new opportunities to finance further transit service for
          the elderly, handicapped and recreational purposes.
     7) Support privately funded local transit systems for commuter
          residents and maintain local transit systems for seniors and youth.
     8) Design transit improvements to minimize impacts on other modes
          of travel.
Truck Routes
The City of Highland has designated a system of truck routes linking
industrial areas with major roadways and freeway connections
throughout the City. The east-west truck routes are Base Line and
5th Street, while the major north-south truck routes are Del Rosa Drive,
Sterling Avenue, Victoria Avenue, Palm Avenue and Boulder Avenue.
These truck routes accommodate commercial, industrial and mineral
extraction uses and can create significant impacts on roadway
deterioration, neighborhood safety, congestion and air quality.
Highland’s truck route system should be periodically reviewed for
                                                                              Fifth Street is a major route for truck traffic
appropriateness and capacity in the context of continuing mineral             through the City of Highland.
extraction operations, expanded activity at the San Bernardino
International Airport, and potential business growth along the Base
Line and 5th Street Corridors.
City of Highland General Plan                                                                                                 3-21

                                                HIGHLAND…A Great Place to Live
     Implementation of the proposed Land Use Plan contained in the Land
     Use Element will ultimately separate industrial and heavy commercial
     uses from residential areas. However, the projected future development
     of industries and employment opportunities, and increased traffic
     volumes will create the need for designated truck routes for specified
     alignments to ensure that congestion created by trucks will be controlled
     to the greatest extent feasible.
     Figure 3.4, Truck Routes, indicates the proposed alignments for truck
     route designations. Each of these alignments traverses through and
     provides links between designated industrial and commercial. For
     example, Victoria Avenue and 5th Street provide access to activities that
     are planned for San Bernardino International Airport. Third Street,
     5th Street, Base Line and Palm Avenue provide circulation into industrial
     areas and provide connections to the freeway. Further improvements to
     or in the vicinity of the freeway interchanges (e.g., truck climbing lanes
     on uphill on-ramps) should also be considered.
     Pavement Impact Related to Industry and
     Heavy Trucks
     New commercial and industrial developments within the City of Highland
     will produce pavement impacts that are related to the heavy trucks
     generated by these facilities. Certain roadways with potential for
     heightened impacts include roads serving mining type uses (5th Street)
     as well as roadways likely to be impacted by the airport (5th Street,
     3rd Street, Victoria Avenue and Sterling Avenue). The freeway
     interchange ramps will also be affected.
     GOAL 3.6
     Provide a circulation system that reduces conflicts between commercial
     trucking, private/public transportation and land use.
     Policies
          1) Maintain designated truck routes for use by commercial trucking
              that link industrial and commercial activity areas with major
              roadways and regional transportation routes and minimize
              impacts on local traffic neighborhoods.
          2) Provide appropriately designed roadways for the designated truck
              routes that can safely accommodate truck travel.
          3) Develop berms and barriers where feasible along truck routes to
              minimize noise impacts to sensitive land uses.
3-22                                       March 2006 | City of Highland General Plan

                                                                               3. CIRCULATION ELEMENT
     4) Provide sufficient loading areas to minimize interference with
          efficient traffic circulation.
     5) Regulate on-street parking of trucks where necessary to
          discourage truck parking on primarily residential streets or where
          they are incompatible with adjacent land uses.
     6) Conduct a study examining the interface between proposed truck
          routes, the complete roadway network, and adjacent land uses.
     7) Evaluate truck route alternatives based on Caltrans Traffic Study
          guidelines.
     8) Require as a part of the development review process for all new
          or expanding mineral extraction and all other heavy industry
          activities within the City, that the following information be
          provided:
          •    A detailed plan of haul roads, indicating measures that will be
               taken to minimize aesthetic, noise, traffic, and particulate
               emission impacts to the surrounding land uses;
          •    A traffic analysis that indicates both the number of projected
               trucks and their associated potential impact to city streets;
          •    A “fair-share” mitigation analysis indicating the impacts and
               associated maintenance costs caused by the potential
               generation of future truck traffic; and
          •    A comprehensive mitigation program, designed to run the
               life of the mineral extraction activity (including reclamation)
               that will:
               f Cover the fair-share portion of surrounding roadway
                    maintenance costs due to the increase in local truck
                    activity, or
               f Provide new or appropriate improvements to existing
                    roadway facilities which in the opinion of the City would
                    mitigate the impacts caused by the increase in local truck
                    traffic.
     9) Work with private mining operators to establish specialized truck
          routes that:
          •    Allow for the transport of raw and finished materials from
               quarries within the Santa Ana River Wash area to the Foothill
               Freeway on paved private haul roads;
          •    Reduce, to the extent feasible, the movement of mining
               transport trucks on City streets; and
          •    Mitigate, to the extent feasible, the noise, dust and vibration
               effects of such transport activities on surrounding land uses.
City of Highland General Plan                                                                     3-23

                                           HIGHLAND…A Great Place to Live
     This page intentionally left blank.
3-24                                  March 2006 | City of Highland General Plan


                                           HIGHLAND…A Great Place to Live
     This page intentionally left blank.
3-26                                  March 2006 | City of Highland General Plan

                                                                                   3. CIRCULATION ELEMENT
Bikeways
The City of Highland has three classifications of Bikeways: Class I Bike
Paths, Class II Bike Lanes, and Class III Bike Routes. These
classifications are defined below and mapped on Figure 3.5, Bikeways.
     •    Class I Bike Path. A Class I Bike Path serves corridors that are not
          served by streets and highways or where wide rights-of-way exist,
          permitting a separation from roadway traffic. These routes may
          serve a variety of users and provide recreational opportunities for
          bicycle, equestrian and pedestrian users. Class I facilities are
          planned on Boulder Avenue from City Creek to Plunge Creek.
          Class I Bike Paths should also be considered on “Old” and
          “New” Greenspot Road south and east of the Santa Ana River
          Trail System.
     •    Class II Bike Lane. Class II Bike Lanes are intended to delineate the
          rights-of-way assigned to bicyclists and motorists, and to provide
          for more predictable movements of each. Bike lanes of this class
          may also help accommodate bicyclists through corridors where
          insufficient room exists for safe bicycling on existing streets. This
          can be accomplished by reducing the number of lanes,
          prohibiting parking on bike lane streets, or striping (see Figure
          3.1, Roadway Cross-Sections, for bike lane street standards).
          This class of bikeway links the bike paths to provide a designated
          system for bicycle commuting to major destination points (e.g.,
          the Town Center, the Golden Triangle, etc.) and the regional
          trails system.
     •    Class III Bike Route. Class III Bike Routes are considered shared
          facilities serving either to provide continuity to other bicycle      This portion of Palm Avenue contains
                                                                                a designated Class II bicycle lane.
          facilities or to designate preferred routes through high-demand
          corridors. Such bikeways are designated using signage along the
          roadway without special street striping.
As opportunities for acquiring lands for bikeways and recreational
resources in Highland are limited, the City will continue to look for new
ways to provide more links from surrounding development to existing
bikeways. Areas such as utility easements and public rights-of-way along
flood control channels and rail lines provide alternatives to streets new
bikeways are planned.
City of Highland General Plan                                                                                       3-27

                                                 HIGHLAND…A Great Place to Live
     GOAL 3.7
     Protect and encourage bicycle travel.
     Policies
         1) Develop a system of continuous and convenient bicycle routes to
             places of employment, shopping centers, schools, and other high
             activity areas with potential for increased bicycle use.
         2) Encourage new development to provide reasonable and secure
             space for bicycle storage.
         3) Provide bicycle racks at all public facilities and along major public
             streets.
         4) Assure that local bicycle routes will complement regional systems
             and be compatible with routes of neighboring municipalities.
         5) Provide linkages between bicycle routes and other trails, such as
             the Santa Ana River Trail, within the City as appropriate.
3-28                                       March 2006 | City of Highland General Plan


                                           HIGHLAND…A Great Place to Live
     This page intentionally left blank.
3-30                                  March 2006 | City of Highland General Plan

                                                                             3. CIRCULATION ELEMENT
Intergovernmental Coordination
With a freeway and an adjacent international airport, Highland plays a
significant role in the regional circulation network. As such, the City must
actively coordinate with a variety of regional and subregional plans and
state, regional and local agencies as described in the Introduction section
of this element. Some of the key issues facing Highland that will require
continuing coordination include the following.
Roadway Classification Consistency with Other
Agencies
San Bernardino County, the City of San Bernardino and the City of
Redlands have different functional classifications for some of the roadway
segments illustrated on the City of Highland proposed General Plan. The
roadway segments with different functional classifications include:
     •    Del Rosa Drive between 3rd Street and Base Line;
     •    Del Rosa Avenue between 3rd Street and Pacific Street;
     •    Palm Avenue between Base Line and Pacific Street;
     •    5th Street between Shirley Avenue and Palm Avenue;
     •    Base Line between Church Avenue and Boulder Avenue;
     •    3rd Street between Sterling Avenue and Church Avenue;
     •    Boulder Avenue between Highland Avenue and Orange Street;
     •    Cone Camp Road extension; and
     •    Greenspot Road extension to Bryant Avenue.
Table 3.3 shows the roadway segments with different functional
classifications among different jurisdictions.
Completion of I-210/SR-30
The construction connecting I-210 with SR-30 will be completed by the
end of 2007. The regional long-range projections indicate that SR-30
through Highland will need to be widened to six lanes. Measure I, which
has been reauthorized for 30 additional years, includes a widening
project for SR-30 from I-215 to I-10. The SR-30 widening will include an
additional general use lane in each direction. Further coordination with
SANBAG and Caltrans will be needed in ensure the timely
implementation of the I-210 and SR-30 project.
City of Highland General Plan                                                                   3-31

                                                                                                             HIGHLAND…A Great Place to Live
                                             Table 3.3: General Plan Circulation Element Comparison
                                                          City of Highland             City of SB           City of Redlands           County of SB
                                                            General Plan             General Plan             General Plan             General Plan
       Street           From               To               Designation               Designation              Designation              Designation
   Del Rosa                                             Secondary Highway             Major Arterial                                   Major Highway
                    3rd Street      Base Line                                                                      N/A
   Drive                                                         (4D)                      (6D)                                              (4D)
   Del Rosa                                                Collector Street                                                         Secondary Highway
                    3rd Street      Pacific Street                                     Not Shown                   N/A
   Avenue                                                        (2U)                                                                         4U)
                                                          Special Collector
   Palm                             Pacific                                           Major Arterial                                   Major Highway
                    Base Line                                   Street                                             N/A
   Avenue                           Street.                                                (6D)                                              (4D)
                                                                 (2U)
                    Shirley         Palm                   Major Highway              Major Arterial                                   Major Highway
   5th Street                                                                                                      N/A
                    Avenue          Avenue                       (4D)                      (6D)                                              (4D)
                    Church          Boulder                Primary Arterial           Major Arterial                                   Major Highway
   Base Line                                                                                                       N/A
                    Avenue          Avenue                       (6D)                      (6D)                                              (4D)
                    Sterling        Church                 Major Highway              Major Arterial
   3rd Street                                                                                                      N/A                 Not Proposed
                    Avenue          Avenue                       (4D)                      (6D)
                                                          Modified Primary
   Boulder          Highland        Orange                                            Major Arterial          Minor Arterial           Major Highway
                                                               Arterial
   Avenue           Avenue          Street                                                 (6D)                    (4D)                      (4D)
                                                                 (6D)
                                                           Collector Street
   Cone Camp Road Extension                                                                N/A                Not Proposed                   N/A
                                                                 (2U)
                                                         Special Secondary
   Greenspot Extension to Bryant Street                       Highway                      N/A                Not Proposed                   N/A
                                                                 (2D)
   Numbers of lanes per designation are identified in parentheses, e.g., (4D); “D” or “U” indicates whether the roadway is divided or undivided.
   N/A – Not Applicable
                                                     Victoria Avenue and the Potential Interchange
                                                     Identified as the major entryway into the San Bernardino International
                                                     Airport and serving as the linkage between the Airport and San Manuel
                                                     Indian Casino and Bingo facility, Victoria Avenue serves as a potential
                                                     new interchange for I-210. Additional study is necessary to determine
                                                     the feasibility of the interchange, its potential configuration and right-of-
                                                     way requirements, the possible deletion of the existing ramps along
                                                     Arden Avenue, and the impact to the nearby arterial roadway systems.
                                                     To preserve adequate rights-of-way for the Airport entry and
                                                     accommodate future traffic, Victoria Avenue is planned as a Major
                                                     Highway on the Circulation Map. Future study will require coordination
                                                     with Caltrans, SANBAG, the City of San Bernardino, the San Bernardino
                                                     International Airport Authority, the San Manuel Band of Mission Indians,
                                                     and the County of San Bernardino.
3-32                                                                                                  March 2006 | City of Highland General Plan

                                                                               3. CIRCULATION ELEMENT
Freeway Bridges and Ramps
The Base Line bridge decks over SR-30, 5th Street under SR-30 and the
ramp intersections need to be widened to accommodate additional turn
lane requirements and to eliminate queuing (stacking) deficiencies at the
intersection locations. Detailed evaluation of future traffic volumes and
the resulting vehicle queues will necessitate widening to provide three
through-lanes in each direction. These efforts will need to be
coordinated with Caltrans.
The basic freeway ramp configurations (“diamond interchanges”) should
continue to provide acceptable operations with the recommended
improvements.
GOAL 3.8
Incorporate consideration of regional transportation implications into
decisions made by the City of Highland and, conversely, incorporate
consideration of the local transportation implications on the City of Highland
into decisions made by other local agencies, as well as into decisions made
by state and federal agencies.
Policies
     1) Participate in a wide range of regional transportation planning
          and programs to improve the capacity, efficiency and safety of
          the shared circulation system.
     2) Participate in all regional transportation committees and regularly
          coordinate with other local agencies regarding their plans,
          programs and services that affect the quality and safety of the
          Highland roadway system.
     3) Coordinate street system improvements and traffic signal
          coordination with regional transportation efforts.
     4) Coordinate signal construction and timing with Caltrans
          improvements in and around SR-30/I-210 off- and on-ramps.
     5) Coordinate transit planning with the Southern California
          Association of Governments, SANBAG, Omnitrans and adjacent
          communities.
     6) Work with the Southern California Commuter Rail Council and
          the San Bernardino Association of Governments and Omnitrans
          to establish a transit connection with the Metrolink Commuter
          Rail System.
City of Highland General Plan                                                                     3-33

                                                  HIGHLAND…A Great Place to Live
          7) Coordinate with Caltrans, the City of San Bernardino, the
              County of San Bernardino, the San Bernardino International
              Airport Authority and the San Manuel Band of Mission Indians
              to study the feasibility of a new freeway interchange at Victoria
              Avenue and to facilitate applicable roadway improvements.
          8) Coordinate with human services agencies and public schools
              to reduce duplicate transportation where feasible.
          9) Prior to permitting connection of roadways from adjacent
              jurisdictions into the City of Highland, ensure that regional
              benefits are not achieved at the expense of Highland residents
              and businesses. Where a potential for negative impacts to
              Highland residents and business exists, ensure that the agency
              proposing the connection provides sufficient mitigation such that
              the connection is not only of regional benefit, but also of benefit
              to the City of Highland.
     Parking
     Most uses within the Highland General Plan study area provide sufficient
     parking facilities either on-site or on adjacent street frontages. Although
     the parking opportunities in the low density residential portions of the
     community are ample, older strip commercial and industrial uses along
     Base Line, 5th Street and 3rd Street often are deficient.
     The Highland historic district has also been identified as being a parking-
     deficient area. Because of the need to create through traffic lanes on
     Palm Avenue, right-of-way which has traditionally been used for parking
     in this historic downtown area is lacking.
     GOAL 3.9
     Ensure adequate parking is made available to City residents, visitors, and
     businesses.
     Policies
          1) Locate new development and their access points in such a way
              that traffic is not encouraged to utilize local residential streets and
              alleys for access to the development and its parking.
          2) Investigate the implementation of Variable Parking District
              Overlays along Base Line, Highland Historic District and other
              areas where appropriate, to encourage the enhancement of
              existing parking-deficient development.
3-34                                         March 2006 | City of Highland General Plan

                                                                           3. CIRCULATION ELEMENT
     3) Assess the adequacy of existing or proposed on- and off-street
          parking as needed, especially in urban and commercial areas,
          to ensure that an adequate supply is provided.
     4) Explore strategies for the management of parking supply, which
          can include parking fees, metered on-street parking and
          staggered work schedules.
     5) Develop strategies for the control of parking demand such as
          improved transit service, amenities for bicyclists and rideshare
          vehicles.
     6) Develop strategies for shared parking opportunities in mixed-use
          and multiple-use development.
     7) Encourage the use of well-designed, aesthetically enhanced
          parking structures as an alternative to large, expansive surface
          parking lots in retail and employment centers.
City of Highland General Plan                                                                 3-35
                                           HIGHLAND…A Great Place to Live
     This page intentionally left blank.
3-36                                  March 2006 | City of Highland General Plan

4. Public Services & Facilities Elemen
This page intentionally left blank
Chapter 4. Public Services & Facilities Element
INTRODUCTION
P
        ublic services and facilities are essential to supporting Highland’s
        quality of life and future growth as well as the community’s health
        and well-being. The importance of public services and facilities
should not be underestimated, as their provision is crucial to new
development. The availability and effectiveness of these resources are
the result of careful planning and coordination between the City, outside
agencies and the development community, in addition to highly
informed decision making and adequate funding. As Highland continues
to grow and change, the public services and facilities necessary to
support new development will need to keep pace and will continue to
require maintenance, rehabilitation and replacement.
Purpose and Function
                                                                               In addition to the services listed here, the
The Public Services and Facilities Element identifies Highland’s goals and     City of Highland also provides street and
policies concerning the adequate provision and maintenance of the              park maintenance, which are addressed
following:                                                                     in the Circulation and Open Space and
                                                                               Conservation Elements, respectively.
     •    General City Services             •   Law Enforcement and            Furthermore, the City provides crossing
                                                                               guard services to ensure safe routes to
          and Facilities                        Equipment                      school for Highland’s students. Policies
     •    Water Facilities                  •   Fire Protection Facilities and regarding pedestrian safety are found in
                                                                               the Circulation Element
     •    Wastewater Facilities                 Equipment
                                                                               Landscaping maintenance is another
     •    Drainage Facilities               •   Educational Facilities         essential service provided by Highland.
                                                                               Not only does landscaping provide a more
     •    Solid Waste Facilities            •   Cultural Facilities and Social aesthetically pleasant environment, it
                                                Services                       improves environmental health, reduces
     •    Private Utilities                                                    energy costs and enhances the
                                            •   Neighborhood Improvement       pedestrian experience. Landscaping
                                                                               policies are found throughout the
                                                Services                       Community Design Element.
This element also identifies facility locations and current service levels,
and offers guidance for decision makers in their review of projects.
Although state law does not require the preparation of this element, the
adequate provision of public services and facilities is vital to the
implementation of goals and policies in required elements like land use
and safety.
City of Highland General Plan                                                                                               4-1

                                               HIGHLAND…A Great Place to Live
    Related Plans and Programs
    Critical relationships exist between the Public Services and Facilities
    Element and other General Plan elements, especially the Land Use,
    Circulation, Public Health and Safety, and Economic Development
    elements. The location and availability of public services and facilities,
    such as water and sewer systems, schools and fire stations, guide land
    use patterns and the type and intensity of growth. Likewise, land use
    patterns influence the demand for and location of public services and
    facilities. Other plans and programs, such as water and sewer plans, are
    also important in determining Highland’s current and future needs for
    public services and facilities.
4-2                                       March 2006 | City of Highland General Plan

                                                                         4. PUBLIC SERVICES & FACILITIES ELEMENT
GOALS AND POLICIES
Planning for Highland’s public service and facility needs relies on an
evaluation of current service levels and facility conditions. Current
conditions determine what improvements will be necessary to ensure that
adequate facilities and high levels of service are maintained to keep pace
with future growth and implementation of the Land Use Element of the
General Plan. This section offers goals and policies to help guide the
development of the City based on the availability and capability of
Highland’s public services and facilities.
General City Services and Facilities
City Hall
The City of Highland is a contract city with a minimum of in-house staff.
City services and departments include Planning, Building and Safety,
Engineering, Public Works, Redevelopment and Economic Development,
Code Enforcement, and General Government services. As a result of the
City’s conservative fiscal management and limited financial resources, the
City contracts out many of its services to other public and private
agencies, while others are provided by special districts. Some of these
services include, but are not limited to, waste management, law
enforcement and fire protection.
The involvement of contract agencies makes active coordination efforts         Since its incorporation in 1987, the City of
                                                                               Highland has been committed to providing a
between these agencies and the City a necessary component to the               variety of high quality community services and
efficient delivery of services. A coordinated effort also allows for           facilities for its residents and businesses.
consistency between the policies and priorities of the City and the service
capabilities of contract agencies. The cost and provision of public
services and facilities should also be coordinated with development
activity. Public services and facilities should meet the City’s performance
standards to ensure that an adequate level of service is provided to the
Highland community.
Despite a smaller staff, as compared to the in-house staff of surrounding
cities, the City of Highland has been able to maintain high levels of
service within the community while keeping the direct cost of
administrative services to a minimum. As the City continues to grow and
new opportunities for revenue are realized, some of the City’s services
might be transferred from contract providers to City administration. This
would occur where consistency can be maintained between an efficient
administrative staff level and the City’s commitment to the best level of
service possible using the most cost-effective funding mechanisms.
City of Highland General Plan                                                                                               4-3

                                                   HIGHLAND…A Great Place to Live
    Library Facilities
    As Highland’s population continues to grow, ensuring that library
    facilities continue to meet the needs of the community will be an ongoing
    challenge. The City of Highland has one public library, the Highland
    Branch of the San Bernardino County Library, located at 27167 Base
    Line (see Figure 4-1). The Highland Branch Library serves residents in
    the City and in the neighboring City of San Bernardino. A new Library
    and Environmental Learning Center located at 7863 Central Avenue will
    replace the current Highland Branch Library (see Figure 4-1). About
    one-third of the library will be devoted to the environmental sciences.
    Funding for the new library and Environmental Learning Center will
    come from the City’s Development Impact Fee fund collected from other
    projects and a variety of state and federal grants. The new library
    building will be situated across from Cypress Elementary School and
    will serve the needs of the school as well as the general public. The
    library will also be located next to the Jerry Lewis Community Center.
    The Library and Environmental Learning Center is scheduled to open
    by 2006.
    GOAL 4.1
    Coordinate and balance the provision of public services with development
    activity to eliminate service gaps, maximize the use of public facilities,
    provide efficient and economical public services, achieve the equitable and
    legally defensible sharing of costs of such services and facilities, and
    maintain adequate service systems capable of meeting the needs of Highland
    residents.
    Policies:
         1) Prior to permitting, ensure that all major extensions of services,
              facilities and utilities are comprehensively reviewed for related
              social, economic and environmental impacts and identify
              mitigation measures as appropriate.
         2) Ensure that proposed development, which requires the extension
              of public services and facilities, will generate sufficient municipal
              income to pay for the operations, maintenance and replacement
              of those services and facilities by the City.
         3) Ensure that existing residents and businesses are not burdened
              with the cost of financing infrastructure aimed at supporting new
              development or the intensification of existing development.
4-4                                           March 2006 | City of Highland General Plan

                                                                                 4. PUBLIC SERVICES & FACILITIES ELEMENT
     4) Continue to ensure that public water, sewer,
          drainage and other facilities needed for a             Public Services and Facilities Performance Standards
          project phase are constructed prior to or
                                                                 Schools                 School capacity available to meet projected enrollment
          concurrent with initial development within that                                of local school districts
          phase, unless otherwise approved by the City.          Water Systems           Adequate fire flow as established by the California
                                                                                         Department of Forestry and Fire Prevention and
     5) Continue to make the project sponsor of a                                        sufficient storage for emergency situations.
          proposed development ultimately responsible            Sanitary Sewers         Restricted flow only during peak-day, peak-hour
                                                                                         conditions.
          for ensuring the timely availability of all
                                                                 Flood Control           Protection of structures for human occupancy from the
          infrastructure improvements (including system-                                 100-year flood; facilities to be provided as required
          wide improvements) needed to support the                                       concurrent with development.
          development.                                           Police Protection       Four-minute average response time for emergency
                                                                                         calls within the City.
     6) Continue to require that deficiencies in                 Fire Protection         Endeavor to achieve a response time of not more than
                                                                                         four minutes, 90 percent of the time.
          existing public services and facilities are                                    • Provide fire department staffing and deployment
          corrected prior to or concurrent with proposed                                     adequate to contain all fires to the structure of origin
          development.                                                                       and to continue to provide fire department review of
                                                                                             proposed development for consistency with adopted
                                                                                             fire codes.
     7) Continue to coordinate with public service and
                                                                 City Facilities         Prepare a Civic Center Master Plan (maintain 1,500
          utility companies to assure the long-term                                      square feet per 1,000 projected population increase)
          provision of services including water,                                         programmed for construction over the next five to ten
                                                                                         years thereafter.
          wastewater, solid waste, electricity, natural gas
                                                                 Libraries               10,000 square feet of library space per 36,000
          and other private utilities (e.g., cable, Internet,                            residents; 18.3 weekly service hours per 10,000
          telephone) for City residents.                                                 population; 2.82 books per capita.
                                                                 Solid Waste             Adequate number of refuse vehicles and staffing to
     8) Continue to direct future growth to areas with                                   maintain once weekly pickup of solid wastes; adequate
                                                                                         number of street sweeping vehicles and staffing to
          adequate existing facilities and services, or                                  sweep all streets on a bi-weekly basis.
          areas with adequate facilities and services            Other Public Facilities Sufficient number and size to provide required
          committed, or areas where public services and                                  services.
          facilities can be economically extended.
     9) Develop a public facility assessment reporting system as part of
          the Capital Improvement Program and in accordance with AB
          1600 to monitor the capacity of existing facilities to ensure that
          new developments do not overwhelm existing facilities. The
          following are guidelines for developing the reporting system:
          •    Identify and understand the demands for services that will be
               placed on Highland by regional demographic and economic
               changes.
          •    Monitor the progress of current local development projects,
               and ensure that public service and facility plans, as well as
               their forecasts and funding mechanisms, reflect changing
               conditions.
          •    Track the status of capital improvement program
               implementation.
          •    Develop a community survey to identify public facility
               deficiencies and usage.
City of Highland General Plan                                                                                                                         4-5

                                             HIGHLAND…A Great Place to Live
    10) Conduct and maintain an inventory of the availability and
        adequacy of public services and facilities in coordination with the
        County and service agencies in the area. Use the information to
        coordinate capital improvement programs and to make
        determinations on the adequacy of community facilities.
    11) Continue to follow the procedures established for the regular
        exchange of information regarding proposed development and
        availability and adequacy of public services and facilities.
    12) Continue to utilize a proactive approach to assuring that the flow
        of information between service agencies is maintained.
    13) Utilize performance standards to determine the adequacy of
        public services and facilities and to establish requirements, fees
        and exactions provided by new development in the City.
    14) Maintain a development review process that places the ultimate
        responsibility on the project sponsor for ensuring that necessary
        infrastructure improvements (including system-wide improve-
        ments) needed to support new development are, in fact, available
        at the time they are needed.
    15) Require the construction of public facilities as a condition of
        approval for a proposed development if the development
        exceeds the capacity of existing public facilities to support such
        development.
    16) Continue to require that project applicants provide sufficient
        information in the application process so that the City may
        comprehensively determine the potential impacts and/or the need
        for improvements to existing services and facilities to support
        project buildout consistent with the City’s performance.
    17) Continue to require that all new development pay the applicable
        Development Impact Fees established by the City Council.
    18) Maintain flexibility in the collection and application of
        Development Impact Fees to permit the construction of master
        planned facilities in lieu of fees when the City determines that it
        is in the public interest to do so.
    19) Continue to require the construction of public facilities as a
        condition of approval where the value of the services and
        facilities needed to support buildout of a proposed development
        exceed established Development Impact Fees, as consistent with
        the City’s performance standards. Require an agreement with
        the developer for reimbursement from future development fees
        for the excess costs. Such reimbursements shall be from future
4-6                                     March 2006 | City of Highland General Plan

                                                                               4. PUBLIC SERVICES & FACILITIES ELEMENT
          fees collected for the specific excess facilities, which the initial
          developer was required to construct.
     20) In the event that the performance standards for public services
          and facilities are not being met, the following conditions shall
          apply:
          •    Where the performance standards are not being met due to
               needs created by existing development, the City Council shall
               adopt in its Capital Improvement Plan a program to ensure
               that the performance criteria will be met at the earliest
               possible date.
          •    In instances where the performance standards are being
               exceeded prior to approval of a proposed development as the
               result of existing development, require that the proposed
               development provide such facilities as are necessary to ensure
               that performance criteria are met for new public facilities and
               services provided to the development, and that existing public
               services and facilities are not further downgraded.
     21) Review the development fee structure, user charges, and
          mitigation fees every five years in accordance with the provisions
          of AB 1600 to ensure that the charges are consistent with the
          costs of improvement and maintenance and that public services
          and facilities are being expanded in a cost-efficient manner.
          Utilize the City’s performance standards for public services and
          facilities as the basis for this review.
     22) Continue to require that planned communities participate in the
          development of public infrastructure, in addition to the payment
          of development impact fees, through the following methods:
          •    An approved development agreement for all new specific
               plan or planned unit development projects that specifies the
               timing of infrastructure improvements in relation to project
               development.
          •    An annual review of improvements conducted for all new
               specific plans and an annual report in a format that can be
               easily included in the City’s infrastructure assessment and
               reporting system.
     23) Continue to proactively monitor and review development
          proposals in surrounding areas to protect City interests and
          minimize impacts on the community.
     24) Continue to work with the County on a system of requiring
          appropriate mitigation to ensure that new unincorporated
          development will not impact services and facilities in the City.
City of Highland General Plan                                                                                       4-7

                                           HIGHLAND…A Great Place to Live
    25) Continue to support an assessment district alternative to
        development impact fees for large-scale developments
        undergoing urbanization when a single owner or small number of
        owners is involved, and when it is in the public interest to do so.
    26) Continue to allow new development and the intensification of
        existing development only where and when adequate public
        services and facilities can be provided.
4-8                                   March 2006 | City of Highland General Plan


                                           HIGHLAND…A Great Place to Live
     This page intentionally left blank.
4-10                                  March 2006 | City of Highland General Plan

                                                                           4. PUBLIC SERVICES & FACILITIES ELEMENT
Water Facilities
The quality and availability of water is a fundamental long-term
constraint to urban and rural development throughout California. Water
availability is likely to be the primary resource issue facing the future of
Highland. The East Valley Water District (EVWD) supplies the majority
of water to the City of Highland. The Arroyo Verde Mutual Water
District and the Eastwood Farms Community Water Users Association
are smaller water districts located within Highland. The boundaries for            See the Public Health and Safety
all three water districts are depicted in Figure 4.2. Highland’s water             Element for peak water demand and
supply is crucial to serving the needs of residences, businesses and               supply for fire protection.
public services like fire protection.
Highland’s water supply sources are local groundwater, surface runoff
from natural watershed and drainage areas, and imported water. The
most cost-effective and main source of water for Highland is the Bunker
Hill Groundwater Basin located under the San Bernardino Valley.
Another water source is the Santa Ana River, originating in the San
Bernardino Mountains. During dry years or times of limited supply, the
EVWD obtains a supplemental supply of water from the State Water Project           State Water Project (SWP)
(SWP) through the San Bernardino Valley Municipal Water District.                  While most of the water from EVWD comes from
                                                                                   the Bunker Hill Groundwater Basin, Highland may
The EVWD manages the water supply through a system of pipelines,                   also receive water from the State Water Project
                                                                                   (SWP). In 1960, California voters approved a
wells, reservoirs, pumping stations, and a treatment plant. This system            billion-dollar bond issue to build the SWP. The
includes approximately 19 active wells, 2 inactive wells, 18 reservoirs and        SWP is a water storage and delivery system of
                                                                                   reservoirs, aqueducts, powerplants and pumping
26 booster stations all located on 39 different plant sites. A plant site is       plants. Its main purpose is to store water and
a facility containing one or more wells, reservoirs or booster stations.           distribute it to urban and agricultural water
Figure 4.2 shows the locations of plant sites and water pressure zones in          suppliers in Northern California, the San
                                                                                   Francisco Bay Area, the San Joaquin Valley,
the City.                                                                          the Central Coast, and Southern California.
                                                                                   Maintained and operated by the Department of
The water distribution and transmission network varies considerably                Water Resources, the SWP makes deliveries
                                                                                   to two-thirds of California’s population and is
throughout the City. Transmission lines (16 to 24 inches in diameter)              operated to improve water quality in the
transport large quantities of water from one area to another. Major                Sacramento-San Joaquin River Delta, to control
transmission lines are located in parts of Victoria Avenue, Sterling               Feather River floodwaters, provide recreation,
                                                                                   and enhance fish and wildlife.
Avenue, Del Rosa Drive, Tippecanoe Avenue, Church Street, Weaver
                                                                                   Source: Department of Water Resources
Street, 9th Street, Base Line, Pacific Street, Highland Avenue, and
5th Street. Distribution lines (3/4 inch to 20 inches in diameter) deliver
water to individual dwelling units. Major streets have the larger
distribution lines whereas secondary or local streets have progressively
smaller lines.
The EVWD currently has a total storage capacity of approximately
30 million gallons of water. The metered maximum daily water demand
for the District’s entire service area is approximately 31.1 million gallons
per day (mgd). The average daily water demand is approximately
19.6 mgd. The EVWD is in compliance with all water supply and
availability requirements established by the California Department of
Health Services (DHS). As development continues within the District’s
City of Highland General Plan                                                                                                      4-11

                                                                                                HIGHLAND…A Great Place to Live
                                                   service area, developers would be required to work with the EVWD to
                                                   meet water supply requirements established by the DHS.
                                                   GOAL 4.2
                                                   Provide a water system that produces high quality water, sufficient water
                                                   pressure and necessary quantities of water to meet domestic demands.
                                                   Policies:
                                                       1) Continue to work with the East Valley Water District to provide
                                                           an efficient and economic distribution of adequate water supply
                                                           and pressure to the District’s service areas in Highland.
                                                       2) Ensure a high-quality water supply that meets or exceeds state
                                                           and federal health standards.
                                                       3) Work with the East Valley Water District and local elected
                                                           representatives to better define the future availability of water for
                                                           the Highland community.
                                                       4) Work with the East Valley Water District to promote water
                                                           conservation and education programs, such as public education
                                                           programs available through the Environmental Learning Center
                                                           in Highland.
                                                   Wastewater Facilities
                                                   Highland was historically dominated by agricultural uses and a septic
                                                   tank system. Following its incorporation in 1987, the City’s urbanization
                                                   and tremendous population growth made the development of a modern
                                                   sewer system an essential component of the community’s health and
                                                   cleanliness. The EVWD maintains Highland’s sewer system and has a
                                                   joint powers agreement with the City of San Bernardino to accept all
                                                   sewage generated within the District’s boundaries. Although the sewer
                                                   system is adequate for existing development in Highland, continued
                                                   growth has the potential to impact the capabilities of the sewer system.
                                                   As with water supply, developers must coordinate with the EVWD to
                                                   meet sewer requirements established by the DHS. These requirements
                                                   help to ensure the continued provision of adequate sewer services in
  Grey Water Recycling                             Highland. Recycling programs like Grey Water Recycling are essential to
  Grey water is washwater or wastewater from a     reducing the amount of wastewater conveyed to the sewage system.
  home, excepting toilet waste and food waste from
  garbage. Dish, shower, sink and laundry water
  generally comprises 50 to 80 percent of          The EVWD has a Sewer Master Plan that addresses the current and
  residential wastewater. This may be reused for   future needs of its service area and delineates the location of the major
  other purposes, especially landscape irrigation.
  Grey Water Recycling has the potential to reduce
                                                   east/west and north/south trunk lines that transport sewage throughout
  residential wastewater by up to 50 percent.      Highland. Highland’s major east/west trunk lines are located in parts of
                                                   Pacific Street, Base Line, 9th Street, 6th Street and 5th Street. Major
4-12                                                                                      March 2006 | City of Highland General Plan

                                                                         4. PUBLIC SERVICES & FACILITIES ELEMENT
north/south trunk lines are located in parts of Webster Street, Palm
Avenue, Central Avenue, Cunningham Street, Victoria Avenue, Sterling
Avenue, Del Rosa Drive, and Tippecanoe Avenue. The sewage from
Highland flows in a general direction from northeast to southwest
towards the San Bernardino Water Reclamation Plant located at
299 Blood Bank Road in the City of San Bernardino. This plant is
operated by the San Bernardino City Municipal Water Department,
Water Reclamation Division. The plant processes an average sewage
flow of approximately 26 to 27 mgd from the City of San Bernardino, the
City of Highland and other areas. The plant has a total sewage capacity
of 33 mgd.
GOAL 4.3
Provide a safe and effective sewer system that meets the needs of Highland
residents, businesses and visitors.
Policies:
     1) Continue an ongoing dialogue with the East Valley Water District
          regarding funding and scheduling of any additional sewage
          facilities needed to serve the City.
     2) Work with relevant agencies to determine the long-term supply of
          reclaimed wastewater and service to potential future uses within
          the City.
     3) Encourage Grey Water Recycling, especially for residential use
          irrigation.
City of Highland General Plan                                                                                4-13
                                           HIGHLAND…A Great Place to Live
     This page intentionally left blank.
4-14                                  March 2006 | City of Highland General Plan


                                           HIGHLAND…A Great Place to Live
     This page intentionally left blank.
4-16                                  March 2006 | City of Highland General Plan

                                                                        4. PUBLIC SERVICES & FACILITIES ELEMENT
Drainage Facilities
Highland has a drainage system of improved, semi-improved, and
unimproved flood control channels and creeks that are intended to
prevent flooding and convey stormwater from the City to the Santa Ana
River and then out to sea. As discussed in the Public Health and Safety
Element, natural creeks of the drainage system include Oak Creek,
Plunge Creek, Elder Creek, Bledsoe Creek, Cook Creek, City Creek,
Sand Creek and Upper Warm Creek (see Figure 6.4). Along with
stormwater, urban runoff or pollutants, such as trash and oil, often enter
the drainage system as a result of its open construction. Maintenance
and improvements to the drainage system are important for protecting
                                                                               This drainage channel helps control rainwater
the Highland community and environment.                                        and prevents flooding.
Seasonal rains have caused channel/creek overflows and north/south
street flooding. To address flood control issues, Highland has adopted a
Master Storm Drain System Plan derived from studies conducted by the
San Bernardino County Flood Control District on drainage and flow
patterns in the area. As Highland continues to grow, an increase in the
amount of impervious surfaces, such as asphalt roads and parking lots,
leaves fewer areas for stormwater to percolate naturally into the ground
and creates a need for drainage improvements. Some important
methods to reduce flooding and minimize stormwater runoff are on-site
retention of stormwater, and site design or landscaping that captures
runoff.
GOAL 4.4
Maintain an effective drainage system that protects people and property
from overflows and flood disasters.
Policies
     1) Continue to improve any deficiencies in the City’s drainage              See the Public Health and Safety
          system and address the long-term needs associated with future          Element and Conservation and
          development to minimize flood damage and adequately direct             Open Space Element for other
                                                                                 drainage-related policies.
          rainfall and subsequent runoff.
     2) Minimize the impact of development on the City’s drainage
          system by reducing the amount of impervious surface associated
          with new development and encouraging site design features or
          landscaping that capture runoff. Encourage on-site retention of
          stormwater and compliance with requirements of the National
          Pollutant Discharge Elimination System.
City of Highland General Plan                                                                                            4-17

                                                  HIGHLAND…A Great Place to Live
     Solid Waste Facilities
     The proper management of solid waste is important to a healthy
     environment and community. Two private contractors, one located in
     the northern portion of the City of San Bernardino and the second in the
     City of Highland, provide solid waste collection and disposal services for
     the City of Highland. The majority of solid waste is disposed at the
     Colton, Mid-Valley and San Timoteo landfills.
     The Colton Landfill is located approximately 10 miles southwest of
     Highland at 850 Tropica Rancho Road in the City of Colton. The Colton
     Landfill is expected to close in 2006. The Mid-Valley Landfill is located
     in the City of Rialto, approximately 14 miles west of Highland, and is
     expected to close in 2033. The San Timoteo Landfill is located in the
     City of Redlands, approximately 7 miles southeast of Highland. The San
     Timoteo Landfill is expected to close in 2016. All of these landfills are
     classified as Class III landfills, making them generally suitable for disposal
     of non-hazardous and general municipal waste. The projected lifespan
     of these landfills could change based on the level of regional growth,
     waste generation, future expansion plans, disposal trends like recycling,
     and the effectiveness of new and existing waste stream reduction and
     recovery programs. The closure of other regional landfills may also affect
     the projected lifespan of the Colton, Mid-Valley and San Timoteo
     landfills.
     As landfills reach their capacities and the opportunities for new landfill
     sites become increasingly scarce, the need to reduce solid waste
     generation becomes crucial. Current state law requires that local
     jurisdictions divert at least 50 percent of their solid waste from landfills
     through source reduction, recycling and composting. The City of
     Highland has developed an array of recycling programs in an effort to
     reduce the amount of solid waste to local landfills. These programs
     include a no-cost citywide curbside recycling program for Highland
     households, office recycling in all City departments, and education
     programs on recycling. Additionally, the City participates in “Merry
     Mulch,” a program sponsored by San Bernardino County that
     encourages residents to provide Christmas trees for mulching at regional
     landfills. This program encourages residents to bring large bulky items to
     a designated location in the City for disposal. Private sector recycling
     programs represent additional opportunities for recycling programs.
4-18                                         March 2006 | City of Highland General Plan

                                                                          4. PUBLIC SERVICES & FACILITIES ELEMENT
GOAL 4.5
Minimize, recycle, and dispose of solid waste in an efficient and
environmentally sound manner.
Policies:
     1) Ensure that solid waste generated within the City is collected and
          transported in a cost-effective manner and protects the public’s
          health and safety.
     2) Continue to support an ongoing dialogue with the County Solid
          Waste Management on the rail haul access and other regional
          solutions for long-term limits on local landfill capacity.
     3) Reduce the volume of solid waste material sent to landfills by
          continuing source reduction, recycling and composting programs
          in compliance with State law and encouraging the participation of
          all residents and businesses in these programs.
     4) Increase the price paid for recycling glass and plastic from private
          vendors.
Private Utilities
The Highland community relies on a continual supply of affordable
energy resources and telecommunication services from various private
companies to maintain a certain standard of living and to support the
functioning of the City’s economy. The utility infrastructure is expected
to expand with growth and new development in the City of Highland.
This growth parallels a growing societal concern regarding the availability
of energy resources.
Private utilities in Highland include electricity, natural gas and
telecommunications. The California Public Utilities Commission (PUC) is             California Public Utilities
responsible for regulating the electric, natural gas and telecommunication          Commission (PUC)
industries excepting cable television. The continued provision of energy            The California Public Utilities Commission
                                                                                    (PUC) regulates the electric, natural gas and
and other utilities in Highland as well as the conservation of energy relies        telecommunication industries through a variety
on coordination between private utility companies and the federal, state,           of actions and policies, such as rate changes,
                                                                                    consumer protections, incentive programs for
and City governments.                                                               energy conservation, the facilitation of market
                                                                                    competition and addressing regulatory
Electricity                                                                         changes required by state and federal
                                                                                    legislation.
Southern California Edison (SCE) provides electricity to the City of
Highland. SCE has a local office in the City of Redlands and operates a
substation in Highland. Electrical facilities are expected to keep pace
with anticipated demand in the City of Highland.
City of Highland General Plan                                                                                                    4-19

                                                  HIGHLAND…A Great Place to Live
     Natural Gas
     The Southern California Gas Company (TGC) provides natural gas to
     the City of Highland. TGC has local offices in the City of San
     Bernardino and the City of Redlands. The availability of natural gas is
     based on current conditions of gas supply and regulatory policies. TGC
     has indicated that it provides gas service in accordance with the
     conditions set forth by the PUC. TGC has no current plans for significant
     improvement or expansion plans for the City of Highland and anticipates
     that an ample supply of natural gas can be provided to the City.
     Telecommunication Facilities
     Telecommunication infrastructure has become a vital part of the success
     and enjoyment of the Highland community. New communication
     technology has and will continue to revolutionize the way residents in the
     City communicate, work and live. What we now think of as standard
     telecommunication facilities such as television and telephone will become
     more interactive systems capable of changing the lifestyles of Highland
     residents and businesses. Other important communication systems
     available to the Highland community are cable, high-speed Internet and
     wireless communication.
     GOAL 4.6
     Coordinate with private utility companies to ensure the adequate provision
     of electricity, natural gas and telecommunication infrastructure to existing
     and new development.
     Policies:
          1) Continue to coordinate with the local gas and electric companies
               on the location and timing of additional energy facilities needed
               within the City.
          2) Coordinate with private utilities to provide Highland residents,
               schools and businesses with an efficient telecommunications
               infrastructure, including telephone, cable and high-speed
               services, such as high-speed Internet.
     Law Enforcement and Equipment
     The protection of the City’s residents, visitors, businesses and property
     from crime depends on the adequate provision of law enforcement
     services, supporting facilities and prevention strategies. The City of
     Highland contracts with the San Bernardino County Sheriff’s Department
     for its law enforcement and police protection services. The Sheriff’s
     Department has one patrol station in the City of Highland, located at
4-20                                         March 2006 | City of Highland General Plan

                                                                            4. PUBLIC SERVICES & FACILITIES ELEMENT
26985 East Base Line nearby City Hall (see Figure 4.1). As a contract
station, its personnel and community have access to several resources
offered by the Sheriff's Department, such as Narcotics, Special Weapons
Attack Team (SWAT), Arson-Bomb, Crimes Against Children, Homicide,
Specialized Investigation Division (SID) and more, if necessary. The City
of Highland also operates under mutual aid agreements with the City of
San Bernardino and San Bernardino County.
The Highland Station is traditionally one of the busiest stations in terms
of the ratio of safety personnel to population, calls for services, arrests per
deputy and so forth. As the number of law enforcement personnel has
grown to meet increasing community demands, line patrol personnel
have more time to interact with the community. Deputies are also highly
involved with local schools and participate in community programs with
children. Additionally, the station sponsors safety programs on various
topics such as computers, water safety and more.
The demand for law enforcement services, facilities, equipment and
personnel are expected to increase in direct proportion to the growth of
the City’s resident, visitor and business populations. The resources
needed to address this growth must be expanded to ensure a safe
Highland community.
Crime Prevention
Crime prevention programs are important tools for reducing crime in
Highland. The protection of the Highland community depends upon a                   Urban Design as Crime Prevention
successful partnership between the public, the City and the Sheriff’s               As described in the State Office of Planning
                                                                                    Research General Plan Guidelines, planners,
Department. Along with education programs, the City has an extensive                architects and law officials have become
Neighborhood Watch Program that encourages area residents to                        increasingly aware of the relationship between
immediately report any unusual activities to the Sheriff’s Department.              urban design and crime prevention. Planning and
                                                                                    design strategies that deter crime include natural
The program has proven to be an effective deterrent to criminal activities          surveillance (eyes on the street), walkable
in many neighborhoods. Urban design can also be an effective strategy               environments (human/pedestrian scale),
                                                                                    demarcated public and private space and mixed-
to help prevent crime through the creation of defensible spaces and                 use development (high levels of activity).
spaces that encourage eyes on the street.
GOAL 4.7
Ensure the provision of adequate law enforcement and police protection
services and facilities.
Policies:
     1) Ensure that police services, response times, equipment, and the
          number of police personnel keep pace with growth and the
          changing needs of the community.
City of Highland General Plan                                                                                                       4-21

                                                                                                HIGHLAND…A Great Place to Live
                                                          2) Maintain and expand crime prevention and other public
                                                              education programs.
                                                          3) Encourage the use of urban design strategies to help prevent
                                                              crime, when feasible.
                                                          4) Ensure law enforcement services are involved in the development
                                                              review process.
                                                     Fire Protection Facilities and Equipment
                                                     Fire suppression, prevention and medical services are critical to the
                                                     protection of people, property and the natural environment. The
                                                     California Department of Forestry and Fire Protection (CDF) provides
                                                     fire protection and emergency medical services to the Highland
                                                     community through a cooperative agreement that provides for CDF
                                                     employees to staff City-owned facilities and apparatus. The City has
                                                     three fire stations: Station 541 located at 26974 Base Line; Station 542
                                                     located at 29507 Base Line; and Station 543 (anticipated completion in
                                                     early 2006) will be located at 7469 Sterling Avenue (see Figure 4.1).
  The City of Highland maintains a cooperative       The City of Highland also has available fire protection services from
   agreement with the California Department of
     Forestry and Fire Protection to provide fire    other area agencies through automatic aid agreements with the cities of
  protection and emergency medical services to       Redlands and Yucaipa, CDF and the U.S. Forest Service. The U.S.
           the residents, businesses and visitors    Forest Service provides fire protection in National Forest lands within the
                                        of Highland.
                                                     City of Highland. Automatic aid agreements provide for simultaneous
                                                     response from the closest resources on the initial report of emergencies.
                                                     The City also participates in the Statewide Master Mutual Aid Agreement,
                                                     which provides additional assistance from San Bernardino City and
                                                     County Fire Departments, the San Manuel Fire Department and fire
                                                     departments throughout California. Mutual aid agreements provide
                                                     assistance from jurisdictions throughout the state when an incident is
                                                     beyond the capabilities within the City.
                                                     GOAL 4.8
                                                     Ensure the provision of adequate staffing, equipment and facilities to support
                                                     effective fire protection and emergency medical services that keep pace with
                                                     growth.
                                                     Policies
                                                          1) Work with the fire department to ensure that response time
                                                              standards and a high level of service are maintained.
             See the Public Health and Safety             2) Ensure the City has adequate fire training facilities, equipment
             Element for policies on fire hazards.
                                                              and programs for firefighters and inspection personnel, and
                                                              education programs for the general public.
4-22                                                                                       March 2006 | City of Highland General Plan

                                                                            4. PUBLIC SERVICES & FACILITIES ELEMENT
     3) Coordinate and cooperate with the East Valley Water District to
          maintain and/or upgrade water facilities to ensure adequate water
          supply is available for fire suppression operations.
     4) Ensure the availability of adequate fire flow prior to the recordation
          of residential tracts or parcel maps and prior to the issuance of
          commercial building permits by requiring the testing of all fire
          hydrants in the vicinity of the project at the applicant’s expense. In
          the absence of adequate flow, require either the installation of on-
          site fire protection devices or improvements that upgrade the area’s
          water system to accommodate an adequate flow.
     5) Ensure that development in Fire Hazard Zones comply with
          adequate fire safety standards (e.g., fuel modification zones,
          perimeter roads, greenbelts, etc.).
Educational Facilities
The education system helps shape lifelong opportunities for Highland’s
residents and is essential to a healthy, productive and economically
competitive City. Education extends beyond basic skills and should
include a wide variety of educational opportunities for all Highland
residents, regardless of their socioeconomic background or location
within the City. Highland’s educational facilities include public and
private schools that provide elementary, middle and high school
programs. Community colleges and universities are located in
surrounding cities. As Highland continues to grow, the need for
additional school space is anticipated. School facilities should also serve
neighborhood needs far beyond education. This can be achieved
through cooperative planning with local school districts, developers and
the City to provide multiple-use facilities like joint school and park uses
within one location.
Two public school districts serve the City of Highland: San Bernardino
City Unified School District (SBCUSD) and Redlands Unified School
District (RUSD). SBCUSD and RUSD provide K–12 educational facilities
and programs. The SBCUSD generally covers the area of Highland west
of City Creek (or Boulder Avenue), and RUSD generally covers the
portion of Highland east of City Creek (or Boulder Avenue). Figure 4.3
shows the districts’ boundaries within Highland and shows schools
located within the City and its surrounding.
Building new public schools remains a continual challenge for school              Arroyo Verde Elementary School.
districts, primarily because of limited funds and availability of adequately
sized sites. Although the provision of adequate school facilities is the
responsibility of the school districts serving Highland, the City will
continue to work with the various educational entities and organizations
to identify the best school sites and quality educational opportunities.
City of Highland General Plan                                                                                     4-23

                                                  HIGHLAND…A Great Place to Live
     GOAL 4.9
     Maintain cooperative school and public facility planning to ensure the
     provision of adequate school facilities and quality educational programs in a
     manner consistent with other City goals and policies on facility location, use,
     timing, funding, recreational and social joint use programs.
     Policies:
         1) Continue to coordinate with local school districts on resolving
             issues such as joint use facilities, new facility locations and
             alternative use of vacant or underutilized sites in the City.
         2) Require that new development provide the necessary funding
             and/or resources to establish school facilities commensurate with
             the impact of development on school services. In cases where
             existing school capacity does not support new development,
             require the implementation of appropriate funding mechanisms,
             as permitted by law, to ensure the availability of adequate school
             facilities. Potential financing avenues include:
             •    A contract with the developer to provide funds for schools
             •    Land dedications
             •    Lease back turnkey program
             •    Special assessment district financing, such as Mello-Roos
                  Community Facilities Districts, for the proposed area of
                  development
         3) Encourage that all school impact fees collected from development
             projects be allocated toward the acquisition of land and
             construction of schools that serve the residents of those projects.
         4) Continue to coordinate development activity with local school
             districts by:
             •    Participating with local school districts in joint planning
                  efforts;
             •    Establishing a joint task force comprised of representatives
                  from the City, school district and development community to
                  identify additional means of funding school construction;
             •    Notifying school districts of proposed development
                  applications early in the review process;
             •    Requesting that school districts indicate the level of facilities
                  available to serve development projects requiring
                  discretionary review; and
4-24                                        March 2006 | City of Highland General Plan

                                                                          4. PUBLIC SERVICES & FACILITIES ELEMENT
          •   Establishing a clear methodology for determining the impacts
              of development on the school facilities in the City.
     5) Continue to work with local school districts to prepare a Master
          Plan of Schools that outlines specific sites needed to meet the
          future demand for school facilities.
     6) Explore the possibility of locating a major institution of higher
          learning in Highland.
City of Highland General Plan                                                                                 4-25

                                           HIGHLAND…A Great Place to Live
     This page intentionally left blank.
4-26                                  March 2006 | City of Highland General Plan


                                           HIGHLAND…A Great Place to Live
     This page intentionally left blank.
4-28                                  March 2006 | City of Highland General Plan

                                                                           4. PUBLIC SERVICES & FACILITIES ELEMENT
Cultural Facilities and Social Services
Cultural Facilities
The need for cultural facilities will play a vital role in enhancing
Highland’s social, economic and civic setting. A cultural facility is
generally a gathering space designed for community, cultural and civic
events. Cultural facilities and settings may include but are not limited to
historic buildings and districts, civic centers, community centers,
museums, visual and performing arts venues, and outdoor or public
spaces. The City has one major community center, the Jerry Lewis
Community Center, located on Central Avenue north of 5th Street. The
City is planning to develop a City of Highland Historic Museum on the
southwest corner of Palm Avenue and Main Street in the City’s Historic           The Jerry Lewis Community Center provides
District. The City is also considering siting a civic center approximately       recreational and social activities for Highland
                                                                                 residents.
0.5 mile south of the Historic District in the City’s proposed Town
Center. The Town Center would provide excellent opportunities for the
development of other cultural facilities as well.
Highland residents have access to major cultural facilities in the
surrounding region. These facilities include the San Bernardino County
Museum, located south of Highland near I-10 in the City of Redlands; the
Kimberly Crest Museum in Redlands; and the California Theatre of
Performing Arts in the City of San Bernardino.
Social Services
The social well-being of Highland’s residents, especially its children, is the
foundation for a prosperous Highland community. The County of San
Bernardino provides social services to the City of Highland, including but
not limited to food stamp programs, child protective services and adop-
tion. The County has a Human Services System (HSS) where different
departments who provide services to many of the same clients come
together to provide an integrated and extensive spectrum of services.
Traditional social services provided by the Transitional Assistance
Department (TAD) and Department of Children’s Services (DCS) are
part of the HSS along with other County services, such as public health,
community services and veteran’s affairs. The following is a summary
of social services and programs provided by the TAD and DCS:
     •    CalWORKS Program                 •   Cash Aid Program for
     •    Food Stamp Program                   Immigrants
     •    Medi-Cal Program                 •   Child Care Programs
     •    Refugee Resettlement             •   Foster Care Program
          Program                          •   Child Protective Services
     •    General Relief Program           •   Adoption Assistance Program
City of Highland General Plan                                                                                                  4-29

                                                  HIGHLAND…A Great Place to Live
     GOAL 4.10
     Ensure the continued development of cultural facilities and the provision of
     social services for Highland residents.
     Policies
         1) Encourage the development of cultural facilities in the City,
              especially in districts such as the Town Center and Historic
              District.
         2) Continue to work with surrounding jurisdictions to ensure the
              availability of regional cultural facilities to Highland residents.
         3) Work with the County of San Bernardino to secure the
              availability of social services to Highland residents.
4-30                                         March 2006 | City of Highland General Plan

5. Conservation & Open Space Elemen
This page intentionally left blank
Chapter 5. Conservation and Open Space
INTRODUCTION
Highland’s Valuable Resource
P
        erhaps nothing is as important to maintaining the small town
        character and natural setting in Highland as the preservation of
        open-space land. Due to its unique setting, the City of Highland
has a special duty to protect and enhance its many natural gifts—its land,
water, air quality and biological resources. It is bordered on the north
and east by the San Bernardino Mountains and San Bernardino National
Forest. The City is traversed by two significant watersheds, contains
important habitat areas and has large areas of open land on the east,       The constant presence of open space is one of
including mining and agricultural activities.                               Highland’s most treasured attributes.
Highland takes a broad and inclusive view for planning open space and
natural resources and integrating them with future development is both a
challenge and opportunity. The City realizes that protecting these natural
resources goes beyond a passive preservation role; it requires proactive
managment for the enjoyment of the entire community now and into the
future.
Purpose and Function
State planning law requires both an Open Space and Conservation
Element. The former concerns the “comprehensive and long-range
preservation and conservation of open space land” (Government Code,
Section 65563). This includes unimproved land devoted to open space
uses and encompasses four principal areas: natural resource
preservation, resource management, outdoor recreation and public
health and safety. Because the City still contains agricultural uses in its
eastern areas that contribute to open space and scenic resources, this
Element also contains policies related to the future of such uses.
Related to open space preservation is the Conservation Element, whose
primary goal is the conservation, development and utilization of natural
resources. These resources include water, soils, rivers, wildlife, minerals
and other natural resources. Conservation of cultural resources, such as
City of Highland General Plan                                                                                          5-1

                                               HIGHLAND…A Great Place to Live
    archaeological sites, is also included here although historic preservation
    planning is covered in the Community Design Element. Since both
    elements require preservation and management of natural resources,
    they are combined into one element.
    The City also takes an even broader and more integrated view of
    conservation and open space planning by including parks, recreation
    and multi-use trails, energy conservation and natural resource education.
    The best way for the community to enjoy natural resources is to take
    advantage of outdoor recreational opportunities as well as to learn about
    preserving the natural systems that are so essential to quality of life.
    The Conservation and Open Space Element is directly linked to the
    City’s Land Use, Safety and Community Design Elements. Land use
    designations are the primary legal tool that cities use to preserve open
    space and provide the foundation for more specific zoning regulations
    and development standards. The required mapping of hazards in the
    Safety Element designates open space resources and cites policies related
    to protection of public health and safety. The Community Design
    Element sets policies for land use transitions and open space buffers, all
    related to open space and conservation efforts. References are made to
    these other elements where applicable.
    Achieving the Vision
    The citizens of Highland have always been proud of their city’s rural
    character and have consistently expressed a desire to preserve and
    enhance open space and recreational opportunities. The following issues
    have been identified as the most important:
        •   Expand park and recreation opportunities for all ages
        •   Connect future growth to open space with adequate multi-use
            trails
        •   Continue to implement the planned trails and bikeways system
        •   Look for new ways to recycle and conserve water and energy
        •   Protect and enhance scenic vistas
        •   Work with local and regional agencies to protect sensitive species,
            habitat and watersheds and link wildlife corridors
        •   Add more greenbelt areas
        •   Improve the safety and aesthetics in sand and gravel excavation
            activities
5-2                                        March 2006 | City of Highland General Plan

                                                                       5. CONSERVATION AND OPEN SPACE ELEMENT
Addressing these issues through policies and implementing actions is the
goal of this element. Achieving the vision requires the combined and
sustained efforts of the City staff, the citizens of Highland, the business
community, and local and regional agencies.
Related Plans and Programs
Conservation and open space planning is truly a multi-jurisdictional
effort. Managing water resources involves satisfying a myriad of federal,
state and regional water quality mandates. Preserving habitats also
involves coordination with state and regional agencies. Multi-use trail
systems often link to countywide efforts, and recycling programs are often
coordinated at the regional level. Planning for energy conservation is
aided by private and public agencies, whereas park planning is more of
a local effort, although requirements for recreational acreage per 1,000
residents are governed by statewide standards.
                                                                                Management of watersheds and their habitat is a
                                                                                key priority at the regional and local levels.
Element Components
This Open Space and Conservation Element is organized around the
following issue areas:
     •    Scenic Resources
     •    Agricultural Resources
     •    Water Resources
     •    Biological Resources
     •    Archaeological Resources
     •    Mineral Resources
     •    Parks, Recreation and Multi-Use Trails
     •    Energy Conservation, Green Building Practices and Solid Waste
          Management
     •    Air Quality
City of Highland General Plan                                                                                                  5-3

                                                                                            HIGHLAND…A Great Place to Live
                                                GOALS AND POLICIES
                                                Scenic Resources
                                                Highland enjoys a beautiful and dramatic setting at the base of the San
                                                Bernardino Mountains. The views and vistas that this area affords are
                                                among Highland’s most treasured assets and contribute greatly to its
                                                rural, natural character. Although the City does not regulate private
                                                views, it has long realized the importance of view corridor planning in
                                                both public and private development. Preserving views of the San
                                                Bernardino Mountains and stretches of open space along City Creek and
                                                the Santa Ana River will continue to be very important to creating and
                                                maintaining a sense of community in Highland. View preservation also
   The rugged and dramatic topography of the    includes careful regulation of hillside development by encouraging low
       San Bernardino Mountains are a visual
          backdrop from all areas of the City.
                                                profile massing and natural colors and building materials.
                                                GOAL 5.1
                                                Preserve, maintain and create views and vistas throughout the
                                                community to enhance the visual experience of Highland.
                                                Policies
                                                    1) Incorporate view corridor planning in related development efforts
                                                         and capital improvement programs.
                                                    2) Along roadway-based view corridors, frame views of attractive
                                                         features of the natural and built environment with appropriately
                                                         placed median and street tree landscaping. Use of fire-resistant
                                                         vegetation and ample spacing between trees and shrubs is
                                                         encouraged to reduce the spread of fires.
                                                    3) Enforce hillside development standards that call for natural
                                                         contour grading, environmentally sensitive design, shape and
                                                         siting techniques, and fire-retardant building materials.
            This dramatic east-west view could
                 be enhanced with appropriate       4) Work with San Bernardino County and the City of San
                          arterial landscaping.          Bernardino to develop consistent regulations for the protection of
                                                         ridgelines, slope areas and hilltops within the surrounding foothill
                                                         communities.
                                                    5) Require that all excess excavated material (waste materials) be
                                                         properly removed and disposed of or otherwise reincorporated
                                                         into the development plan without compromising natural
                                                         contours or aesthetic qualities of the site.
5-4                                                                                     March 2006 | City of Highland General Plan

                                                                        5. CONSERVATION AND OPEN SPACE ELEMENT
     6) Require that hillside development be located below ridgelines
          and that structures themselves and accompanying landscaping
          conceal cut slopes and grading.
     7) Encourage developers in high slope gradient areas to use raised
          floor systems and stepped footages to leave slope contours in a
          more natural state.
     8) Retain existing vegetation within or alongside hillside
          development areas except where such vegetation poses a risk to
          buildings in high fire hazard zones (see Goal 6.5, Public Health
          and Safety Element). Use native, fire resistant, drought-tolerant
          plant material in fuel modification areas when existing vegetation
          can not be retained.
     9) Preserve mature trees, natural hydrology, native plant materials
          and areas of visual interest.
     10) Work with San Bernardino County and the City of San
          Bernardino to protect scenic resources located outside of the
          City, such as prominent ridges, slopes and hilltops.
     11) Enact provisions in the municipal code to minimize soil erosion,
          restore natural drainage surfaces, attenuate slope instability and
          reduce the amount of impermeable surface.
     12) Index the percentage of impermeable surface to slope gradient.
     13) Develop different water-retention standards for single dwellings
          and larger tracts. Subdivisions should have overall
          implementation and water-retention strategies.
Agricultural Resources
Much of the area that is now the City of Highland was once devoted
to agriculture, primarily citrus production. As the City and County have              The Seven Oaks Area, the area
urbanized, however, there has been a steady loss in agricultural land.                generally located east of the Santa
                                                                                      Ana River and south of the Seven
Demand for housing and high costs of water have made agricultural uses                Oaks Dam, contains the City’s sole
less cost effective, and very few acres remain. The new General Plan                  Agricultural Preserve. No lands
                                                                                      within the Preserve are bound by
maintains almost 1,000 acres as “Agriculture/Equestrian” uses in the                  Williamson Act contracts. Future use
eastern part of the City. This designation is appropriate for rural and               of the Preserve area is subject to the
equestrian-oriented development with light agricultural uses permitted.               City adopted Rules and Procedures
                                                                                      for the Administration of Agricultural
                                                                                      Preserves and Contracts.
The land use issues involved in converting from agricultural to very low-             For General Plan policies related to
density residential/equestrian uses center on avoiding isolated or                    the Preserve, please see the Seven
“checker board” development, incorporating appropriate land use buffers               Oaks Area section of the Land Use
                                                                                      Element.
and maintaining the rural character of the area. For example,
City of Highland General Plan                                                                                                5-5

                                                                                              HIGHLAND…A Great Place to Live
                                                 boundaries of development should follow natural land features and
                                                 topography to avoid an arbitrary grid pattern.
                                                 GOAL 5.2
                                                 Achieve an orderly transition from agricultural uses to low-density
                                                 residential/equestrian uses.
                                                 Policies
                                                     1) Ensure that farmlands converted to other uses are consistent with
                                                         the East Highlands Ranch Planned Development.
                                                     2) Incorporate appropriate land use transitions and buffering
                                                         techniques into new development
                                                     3) Incorporate appropriate edge treatment between the
                                                         agricultural/equestrian uses and higher density residential uses
                                                         through landscaped buffers, greenbelts, view fencing and
                                                         parkways.
                                                     4) Preserve visual reminders of the City’s agricultural heritage in
                                                         park design, buffer zones, public use areas and landscape plans.
                                                 Water Resources
                                                 Water is a precious resource in Southern California, and the City of
                                                 Highland is in an unusually important setting with regard to water
    As agricultural land converts to other uses, resources. Situated at the base of the San Bernardino Mountains,
         transition areas and edges need to be   traversed by two important creeks that feed into the Santa Ana River,
            compatible with surrounding uses.
                                                 Highland has both responsibilities and opportunities. It must ensure
                                                 adequate water supplies for its growing needs but must also work to
                                                 reduce negative impacts of urban runoff and preserve important
                                                 watersheds. Efficient use, protection and conservation of water
                                                 resources are therefore high priorities in the Open Space and
                                                 Conservation Element.
                                                 Supply Sources
                                                 Water providers in Southern California face the challenge of balancing
                                                 growing demand amid uncertainties of supply. Variables such as
                                                 weather, political and legal challenges, changing regulations and new
                                                 technology can all affect the reliability of water supplies. Recent laws in
                                                 California require assurances of reliable water supplies before large-scale
                                                 development can be approved. In most of Southern California, local
                                                 resources are supplemented with imported water supplies.
5-6                                                                                      March 2006 | City of Highland General Plan

                                                                       5. CONSERVATION AND OPEN SPACE ELEMENT
Groundwater
Water is provided to Highland by the East Valley Water District (see
Public Services and Facilities Element for further discussion). The
District, which includes Highland, parts of San Bernardino and
unincorporated parts of the County, plans to serve a buildout population
of 110,000 persons by 2015. Their projections assume an average
demand for water at 250–300 gallons per day per person by 2015. The
District’s sole supply source is groundwater that is extracted at depths
exceeding 600 feet from an aquifer known as Bunker Hill Basin.
Groundwater from this basin has consistently met both State of California
and the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency drinking water standards,
and supply is projected to meet demand for the foreseeable future.
However, energy requirements, drought and potential contamination will
continue to put pressure on unlimited use of groundwater.
Surface Water
Surface water is also available to the East Valley Water District through
developable rights to local streams including the Santa Ana River, City
Creek and Plunge Creek. Some of the flow from these sources is already                For a map of Highland’s major
                                                                                      tributaries, please reference Figure
diverted by other agencies or used for agricultural purposes. Access to               6.4 in the Public Health and Safety
this water is made possible, in part, by the District’s stock ownership in            Element.
local irrigating companies.
State Water Project
An alternative source of water for the City is the State Water Project. The
San Bernardino Valley Municipal Water District imports State Project
Water through the East Branch of the California Aqueduct after purchase
agreements or exchanges. Under such a potential exchange program,
the East Valley Water District would forgo its entitlements to Santa Ana
River water.
Water Quality
Regulatory Requirements
Maintaining water quality is an increasingly complex and inter-
governmental effort. In California, water resources are regulated and
water rights are established at the federal, state, regional and local level.
All laws, regulations and administration of water resources flows from the
federal Clean Water Act whose stated purpose is to “restore and maintain
the chemical, physical and biological integrity of the Nation’s waters” and
to make all surface waters “fishable” and “swimmable.” From this
mandate, state and regional water quality control boards implement
                                                                                    Preserving water quality is critical
water quality practices and planning.                                               where urbanized uses abut
                                                                                    watercourses.
The California Regional Water Quality Board, the agency responsible for
the administration of the Clean Water Act, is divided into regional water
City of Highland General Plan                                                                                              5-7

                                                                                           HIGHLAND…A Great Place to Live
                                                quality control boards. The responsible agency for the City of Highland
                                                is the Santa Ana Regional Water Quality Control Board. This agency
                                                monitors enforcement of waste discharge permits and enforces ground
                                                and surface water quality objectives, and supports non-point source
                                                pollution prevention programs.
                                                Other agencies are also involved in water quality, watershed protection
                                                and water reclamation. The State Fish and Game Department works to
                                                prevent unauthorized diversions of any surface water and discharge of
                                                any substance that may be deleterious to fish, plant, animal or bird life.
                                                The EPA, Water Resources Control Board, Regional Water Quality
                                                Control Boards and the State Department of Health Services regulate
                                                reclaimed water. The state requires Regional Boards to support water
                                                reclamation and encourages best management practices to achieve these
                                                ends.
  The Santa Ana River is the largest watershed
  in the region, flowing through three counties
                                                Watershed Protection
       before emptying into the Pacific Ocean.
                                                Protecting water quality involves managing watershed and groundwater
                                                resources and limiting discharges and urban-runoff. For Highland,
                                                maintaining and preserving water quality is important not only for
                                                domestic consumption but also for the regional impacts caused through
                                                runoff. Highland’s location at the base of several watersheds of regional
                                                importance makes the implementation of these policies a very high
                                                priority.
                                                Since local groundwater is currently and will continue to be the primary
           Common Threats to                    water supply source for the planning area, prevention of water pollution
           Groundwater                          is essential in protecting and conserving this critical water resource.
           Natural dangers:                     Water pollution stems from both point and non-point sources. Point
           •   Bacteria                         sources discharge wastewater directly into a receiving water source at a
           •   Animal waste                     discrete point, usually at the end of a pipe or conduit. Non-point
           •   Fertilizers
                                                sources, on the other hand, are diffuse in origin, including nuisance flows
           •   Plant decay
                                                and storm water runoff from roadways, parking lots and other paved
           •   Minerals
                                                areas.
           Household/business toxic dumping:
                                                Water pollution controls for the Santa Ana River watershed are
           •   Pesticides
           •   Motor oil
                                                administered by the Santa Ana Regional Water Quality Control Board
           •   Sewage
                                                (SARWQCB) in accordance with its Basin Plan. The principal method
           •   Paints/solvents                  is through waste discharge requirements that control the discharge of
           •   Industrial chemicals             wastes that could impact surface and ground water quality. Regulatory
                                                tools enforced by SARWQCB include National Pollutant Discharge
                                                Elimination System (NPDES) permits, Waste Discharge Requirements,
                                                Water Reclamation Requirements, Water Quality Certification and Waste
                                                Discharge Prohibitions. The regulations that most directly affect the City
                                                of Highland are the NPDES permit programs pertaining to discharges
                                                from the City’s municipal storm drainage system. Private homeowners
                                                who need to dispose of wastewater through an individual septic tank
5-8                                                                                    March 2006 | City of Highland General Plan

                                                                      5. CONSERVATION AND OPEN SPACE ELEMENT
system must obtain permits from the County of San Bernardino,
Environmental Health Services Division.
Groundwater Protection
Groundwater is a fragile resource, easily polluted by improper handling
of waste and toxic materials. Since groundwater moves slowly through
rock and soil, pollutants are difficult to dislodge once they percolate into
the soil. The East Valley Water District’s sewage collection system treats
over two billion gallons of wastewater through a regional treatment plant.
Treated wastewater is then returned to the Santa Ana River and diverted
to other sources. Water suppliers are required by law to continually test
drinking water, and the quality in the planning area is generally good,
with the lowest levels of total dissolved solids (TDS) of any of the
groundwater basins in the Upper Santa Ana River watershed.
Limiting Urban Runoff
One of the most important steps that cities can take towards improving         New development can incorporate site design
water quality is limiting urban runoff. Due to the large amount of paved       practices that limit runoff. This swale captures
surfaces in urban areas connected to storm drains, excess water is             excess runoff, trapping pollutants in grasses
                                                                               and soil rather than channeling them to nearby
efficiently channeled into the local collection system. Unfortunately, this    streams and rivers.
flow commonly contains a variety of water pollutants, including elevated
levels of pathogens, sediment, trash, fertilizers, pesticides, heavy metals
and petroleum products. Storm water can carry these pollutants to the
eventual receiving waters, i.e., rivers, streams, lakes, bays and the ocean.
In the case of Highland, urban and storm water runoff flows into the
network of storm drains and is directed to regional flood control channels
and the local streams and rivers, in this case Bledsoe, Plunge, Edler
Gulch, City, Sand, Warm and Bald Ridge Creeks, the Old City Creek
Overflow Channel, and then the Santa Ana River.
To implement its obligations under the Area Wide Urban Storm Water
Permit, the City has adopted a Municipal Storm Water Management Plan                BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES
(MSWMP), which consists of a variety of measures, including prohibition             Limiting Non-Point Source Pollution
or regulation of specific types of discharges, inspections, avoidance of            • Pollution Source Controls
sewage spills, public education, controls on new development and                        9 Proper fertilizer application
                                                                                        9 Litter laws
redevelopment, site maintenance practices and construction site                         9 Disposal of Household Waste
management practices. All new construction projects involving a                     • Solid Waste Collection
                                                                                       9 Proper storage containers
ground disturbance of at least one acre in total area must comply with              • Proper Disposal
regulations issued by the regional water quality control board.                     • Runoff Collection and Distribution
                                                                                       9 Detention Ponds, Swales
Prior to the issuance of building permits, new development and                      • Discharge Treatment
                                                                                       9 Constructed Wetlands
redevelopment projects subject to the City’s MSWMP restrictions are                 • Site Development Planning
also required to submit and obtain approval of a Storm Water Quality                   9 Permeable surfaces –
                                                                                              grass buffer/landscape strips
Management Plan (SWQMP) that specifies pollution control Best                          9 Directing rooftop runoff
Management Practices (BMPs) to be incorporated into the project design.                9 Detention ponds, swales
Structural BMPs are engineering solutions to storm water management,                Source: US Environmental Protection Agency
including storm water ponds, open channels or swales, and overhead
City of Highland General Plan                                                                                                  5-9

                                                 HIGHLAND…A Great Place to Live
     coverage of potentially polluting sources such as chemical or waste
     storage areas. Nonstructural BMPs are procedures and practices such
     as education, site planning, activity restrictions and policy measures to
     minimize runoff. The City regularly monitors its storm drain system to
     detect illegal or unwarranted discharges into the City storm water
     drainage system. Monitoring is accomplished by water and soil sampling
     and spot inspections. Fines may be imposed on businesses or individuals
     who discharge illegal substances into the storm drain system.
     Water Conservation
     Cities throughout the nation are writing water conservation into their
     local policies and practices, and this is especially important in dry
     Southern California. Efforts to conserve water are multifaceted and
     multijurisdictional, and the City works in tandem with the East Valley
     Water District and other regional water agencies to disseminate and
     adopt as many water-saving practices as possible. Below is a summary
     list of some of the major water conservation practices.
                     WATER CONSERVATION STRATEGIES
            •   Installation of water-saving devices (low-flow shower nozzles).
            •   Use of displacement devices (water-wise appliances).
            •   Careful use of water (repairing leaks, using buckets when
                cleaning).
            •   Development of efficient irrigation systems.
            •   Use of drought-tolerant landscaping (50 percent of domestic
                water use goes to landscaping).
            •   Limit grass use in landscaping; use ground-covering materials
                as an alternative.
            •   Development of public education programs.
            •   Development and implementation of water reclamation
                programs.
            •   Consider grey water strategies and storm water runoff
                restrictions.
5-10                                         March 2006 | City of Highland General Plan

                                                                       5. CONSERVATION AND OPEN SPACE ELEMENT
GOAL 5.3
Continue to work with the East Valley Water District to meet the
current and future water needs of its residents (see Public Services
and Facilities Element, Section 4.2).
Policies
     1) To the extent possible, preserve floodplain and aquifer recharge
          areas in their natural condition.
     2) Continue to coordinate water resource policy with the East Valley
          Water District and other relevant agencies.
     3) Expand outreach efforts, through the Environmental Learning
          Center and City-sponsored publications, to educate the public on
          water supply and water quality issues.
GOAL 5.4
Continue to preserve and enhance the water quality and natural
habitat of its waterways.
Policies
     1) In coordination with the East Valley Water
          District and the County of San Bernardino,
          continue to maintain and improve the
          hydrology and natural quality of the watersheds
          of Bledsoe Creek, Plunge Creek, Elder Gulch
          City Creek, Sand Creek, Warm Creek, Old City
          Creek Overflow Channel, Bald Ridge Creek,
          Santa Ana Canyon and the Santa Ana River.
                                                             Retention grading, which creates depressions or sunken gardens in
     2) Review and revise, as necessary, zoning and          lawns and gardens, allows rainfall to percolate into the soil.
          subdivision ordinance provisions related to
          protection of the City’s watersheds, especially
          in areas that abut creek systems and natural vegetation and
          open space areas, to enhance the natural appearance of
          watershed areas without compromising flood control and
          safety considerations.
     3) Cooperate with other agencies and participate in multi-
          jurisdictional efforts to improve watershed management practices.
City of Highland General Plan                                                                                                  5-11

                                                HIGHLAND…A Great Place to Live
        4) Reevaluate the effect of engineering practices and specifications
           relative to storm channel design to avoid their appearance as
           “concrete ditches.”
     GOAL 5.5
     Continue to reduce urban runoff.
     Policies:
        1) Use water quality best management practices (BMPs) in land
           planning, project-level site planning and procedural requirements
           as part of the Storm Water Quality Management Plan.
        2) Require best management practices for all parking lots and paved
           storage areas within industrial and commercial zones, for the
           City’s street network, and within the City’s parks and other civic
           facilities.
        3) Require site design practices that capture and channel specified
           percentages of rainfall and other runoff to permeable surfaces.
        4) Conduct community outreach programs, in conjunction with the
           local water agency, to educate the public about reducing urban
           runoff.
        5) Develop an informational brochure for residents and developers
           summarizing best management practices for reducing urban
           runoff.
        6) Retain water on site through the use of attractively landscaped
           retention basins and other measures to replenish aquifers.
     GOAL 5.6
     Monitor and strengthen Highland’s water conservation practices.
     Policies
        1) Continue to inspect, maintain and enhance City facilities for
           water conservation purposes.
        2) Continue interdepartmental coordination of water use and
           conservation policies to improve City-facility water use.
        3) Continue to specify and install water-conserving plumbing
           fixtures and fittings in public facilities such as parks, community
5-12                                       March 2006 | City of Highland General Plan

                                                                         5. CONSERVATION AND OPEN SPACE ELEMENT
          centers and government buildings in accordance with Title 24 of
          the California Code of Regulations.
     4) Continue and expand water conservation outreach programs, in
          coordination with EVWD, to local schools, the public and the
          development community through the Environmental Learning
          Center, webpage links, incentive programs and community
          events.
     5) Ensure that the latest water-saving technologies for domestic and
          landscaping uses are incorporated into new developments or
          retrofitted into existing developments where intensification is
          proposed.
     6) Encourage the use of drought-tolerant plants and water-efficient
          landscape design.
     7) Encourage alternatives to lawns and turf uses, except for parks,
          playing fields, children’s play areas and other specialized uses.
     8) In general, work to reduce turf landscaping. Where domestic
          water supplies are used in the irrigation of turf areas, encourage
          the use of tall fescue varieties or other warm season turf.
     9) Consider underground irrigation techniques to conserve water.
                                                                                  Aurantia Park uses native species, such as the
                                                                                  monkey flower (foreground), to reduce
     10) To the extent possible, require the preservation of existing native      water use.
          trees and shrubs.
     11) Within each model home complex, require that homes
          incorporate a specified amount of drought-tolerant landscaping.
     12) Require residential builders to provide information, including a
          plant palette of xeriscape species, to prospective buyers of new
          homes within the City of Highland regarding drought-tolerant
          planting concepts.
     13) Where possible, require the extensive use of mulch in landscape
          areas to improve the water-holding capacity of the soil by
          reducing evaporation and soil compaction.
     14) In new developments require, and in existing uses encourage, the
          installation of efficient irrigation systems that minimize runoff and
          evaporation. Such systems include:
          •   Drip irrigation
          •   Soil moisture sensors
          •   Automatic irrigation systems with appropriate timing devices
              to minimize evaporation.
City of Highland General Plan                                                                                                 5-13

                                                                                         HIGHLAND…A Great Place to Live
                                                     •    Subsurface, or underground, irrigation.
                                                 15) Establish landscape maintenance districts along streets for water
                                                     conservation purposes.
                                            Biological Resources
                                            Nature is everywhere around and through Highland. Situated at the
                                            base of the San Bernardino Mountains and adjacent to the Santa Ana
                                            River and its tributaries, the City of Highland rests against a huge
                                            expanse of open space and therefore has the benefits and responsibilities
                                            of managing its biological resources wisely.
                                            Not only does the City contain large expanses of open space, natural
                                            hillsides, alluvial flood plains and natural stream channels, it also contains
                                            and borders habitat considered crucial to several endangered species.
                                            Biological resources are regulated and protected by federal (U.S. Fish
                                            and Wildlife Service) and state (California Department of Fish and
                                            Game) and the County of San Bernardino, but the City also has an
                                            important role to play because it contains and abuts many of these
                                            sensitive areas. In fact, the City falls within two existing conservation
                                            planning areas and is part of proposed conservation plans, including the
                                            Upper Santa Ana River Wash Land Management and Habitat
                                            Conservation Plan (HCP) and the San Bernardino Valley-wide Multi-
                                            Species HCP. Therefore, the City must coordinate its land use planning
                                            with several agencies at the county, regional, state and federal level in
                                            addition to educating its citizenry about its precious biological resources.
                                            Existing Biological Resources
                                            The native plants and animals that once inhabited the City of Highland
                                            have undergone considerable transition over the years. Due to urban
                                            expansion and growth, wildlife that once inhabited the Valley floor is
                                            now limited to nearby undisturbed areas to the north, northeast and east
                                            of the city limits. Riparian habitats, within woodlands and forest
                                            communities, occur in the foothill and mountain portions of the City.
                                            Unique habitats such as Riversidian sage scrub and alluvial fan sage
                                            scrub occur within the floodplain areas to the south. Some of these
                                            natural communities are further reduced when adjoining urban uses,
                                            such as fuel modification zones for fire safety, infringe into undeveloped
                                            areas of the City.
                                            Various levels of government regulate the biodiversity of California.
                                            Depending on any number of conditions and causes, certain plant and
     Highland contains and borders many
   natural areas, including stream, marsh,
                                            animal species or vegetation communities can be designated as sensitive,
         alluvial fan, scrub and woodland   rare, threatened or endangered. A listing of sensitive species that have
                                  habitats. been found and may occur in a particular area can be found in the
5-14                                                                                March 2006 | City of Highland General Plan

                                                                     5. CONSERVATION AND OPEN SPACE ELEMENT
California Department of Fish and Game’s California Natural Diversity
Data Base (CNDDB).
Animal and Plant Communities
There are a large number of animal and plant communities within and
adjacent to the City, several of which are significant biological habitats.
Many are associated with the watercourses that traverse the City and
drainages in the canyons of the foothills and mountains. Stands of
riparian vegetation, including California sycamore, willows and
cottonwood line these areas. Upland habitats include coastal sage scrub
and chaparral. Native habitats within the developed parts of the City are
few and include annual grasslands with nonnative grasses, disturbed
areas with sparse amounts of native species, and landscaped areas.
According to previous biological surveys, the following sensitive native
habitats have been identified within or adjacent to the City.
Natural Communities
     •    Valley Needlegrass Grassland
     •    Wildflower Field (California Annual Grassland)
     •    Riversidian Alluvial Fan Sage Scrub
     •    Southern Willow Scrub
     •    Southern Coast Live Oak Riparian Forest
     •    Southern Cottonwood-Willow Riparian Forest
     •    Southern Riparian Forest
     •    White Alder Riparian Forest
     •    Southern Sycamore Alder Riparian Woodland
     •    California Walnut Woodland
     •    Freshwater Seep
Figure 5.1 depicts the areas in the City where sensitive biological
resources may be found.
Sensitive Species
The City contains habitat for species that are designated as “endangered”
or “threatened” under the Endangered Species Act of 1973.
City of Highland General Plan                                                                           5-15

                                                                             HIGHLAND…A Great Place to Live
                                 San Bernardino Kangaroo Rat
                                 The City contains habitat for the San Bernardino Kangaroo Rat (SBKR,
                                 Dipodomys merriami parvus). This rodent, known for its jumping ability
                                 and desert survival skills, lives in sandy habitats of alluvial fans that are
                                 characterized by periodic flooding and sparse scrub vegetation. SBKR is
                                 one of nineteen recognized subspecies of Merriam’s kangaroo rat and is
                                 distinguished as the only species of kangaroo rat with four toes on each
                                 of its hind feet. The SBKR was emergency listed as endangered in
                                 January 1998 when its population had been reduced by approximately
                                 95 percent, due to habitat loss, urban development, degradation, water
                                 conservation activities and fragmentation owing to sand and gravel
     San Bernardino Kangaroo Rat mining operations.
                                 Historically, its range extended from San Bernardino Valley in San
                                 Bernardino County to the Menifee Valley in Riverside County.
                                 Currently, SBKR occupy approximately 32,480 acres of areas called
                                 critical habitat, primarily in three main blocks: the Santa Ana Wash,
                                 the San Jacinto Wash, and Lytle Creek and Cajon Wash.
                                 Santa Ana River Woolly Star
                                 The upper Santa Ana River Wash is also an important component in the
                                 planning of the proposed Upper Santa Ana River Land Management and
                                 Habitat Conservation Plan, part of which falls within the City of
                                 Highland. Within the riverbed are two endangered plant species: the
                                 Santa Ana River woolly star (Eriastrum densifolium ssp. sanctorum) and
                                 the slender-horned spineflower (Dodecahema leptoceras). One of these
                                 plants, the woolly star, of the family Polemoniaceae, is a wild flowering
                                 plant that grows 10 to 30 inches tall from a woody base, with irregularly
                                 divided leaves along its stem. The entire plant has a silvery white, woolly
           Santa Ana Woolly Star
                                 appearance. It blooms every year from late May to mid-August,
                                 generating blue-lavender flowers.
                                 This species originally occurred on higher floodplain terraces. Its range
                                 has now been significantly reduced along the Santa Ana River. Past and
                                 present threats facing this plant include developments within the flood
                                 plain, grazing by domestic animals, competition from plants exotic to the
                                 area, and urbanization. In an effort to mitigate such instances, 764 acres
                                 of alluvial fan sage scrub within the Santa Ana River wash have been
                                 preserved as the Woolly Star Preservation Area (WSPA). The WSPA is
                                 in is a section of flood plain downstream of Seven Oaks Dam and was
                                 established in 1998 by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers to minimize the
                                 effects of the dam on the Santa Ana River woolly star.
5-16                                                                     March 2006 | City of Highland General Plan


                                           HIGHLAND…A Great Place to Live
     This page intentionally left blank.
5-18                                   March 2006 | City of Highland General Plan

                                                                       5. CONSERVATION AND OPEN SPACE ELEMENT
Slender-Horned Spineflower
The slender-horned spineflower is a small annual of the buckwheat
family found in the silted, flood deposited, older alluvial areas of Los
Angeles, Riverside and San Bernardino counties. It is found from 700 to
2,500 feet in elevation in central and eastern Southern California. This
plant holds a cluster of small leaves and spreading flowering stems, which
produce up to five white flowers with pink stripes from a total of 12
different stems in an intricate fashion. It is threatened by development
projects, flood control activities, sand and gravel mining and
urbanization. Slender-horned spineflower has been reported as
occurring in the upper Santa Ana River wash in Highland and in Lytle
                                                                                Slender-horned spineflower
Creek.
Coastal California Gnatcatcher
The coastal California gnatcatcher (Polioptila californica californica) is a
small, long-tailed, dark blue-gray and grayish-white bird. This subspecies
is restricted to coastal southern California from Ventura and San
Bernardino Counties, south to northwestern Baja, Mexico. It typically
occurs in or near sage scrub habitat, including Riversidian sage scrub and
alluvial fan scrub. The gnatcatcher was listed by the U.S. Fish and
Wildlife Service as “threatened” in 1993. It has been the impetus for the
regional, “habitat based” conservation efforts that use Natural
Community Conservation Plans to reconcile the competing needs of
environmental protection and economic development. Critical habitat
for the gnatcatcher was designated in October 2000. The unit of critical
habitat in San Bernardino County covers over 74,000 acres and includes
lands within the City along the San Bernardino Mountain foothills and
along City Creek and the Santa Ana River Wash.
Planning to Preserve Biological Diversity
Existing Conservation Areas
In addition to the WSPA described above, three parcels totaling 760
acres in the Santa Ana River were designated in 1994 by the Bureau of
Land Management as an Area of Critical Concern (ACEC) and Research
Natural Area (RNA) for the protection of habitat for the Santa Ana River
woolly star and the slender-horned spineflower. Portions of Highland
also fall within this conservation area.
Critical habitat identifies areas, occupied or that may be occupied by
federally protected species, that are essential to the conservation of these
species. The U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, since the last update of the
General Plan, has designated critical habitat for the SBKR and the coastal
California gnatcatcher, portions of which fall within the City limits. In
general, projects that are located within critical habitat can involve
consultation with the resource agencies regarding possible effects of the
City of Highland General Plan                                                                              5-19

                                                HIGHLAND…A Great Place to Live
     sensitive species and conservation measures that may be needed to offset
     these effects.
     Regional Efforts
     Planning for species preservation has taken a much broader perspective
     over the last several decades. While still working to preserve individual
     species, governmental efforts have focused on preserving larger, regional
     habitats while trying to accommodate compatible land use. In 1991, the
     California Department of Fish and Game adopted the Natural
     Community Conservation Planning (NCCP) program. This program
     takes a broad-based ecosystem approach to planning for the protection
     of biological resources. It is intended to provide for a regional approach
     to protect plants, animals and habitats and streamline the existing
     permitting processes while accommodating compatible land uses.
     Presently, there is no approved HCP/NCCP plan for San Bernardino
     County. There are two proposed HCPs currently in the planning stages.
     Upper Santa Ana River Wash Land Management and
     Habitat Conservation Plan
     The proposed Upper Santa Ana River Wash Land Management and
     HCP involves approximately 4,365 acres located in the upper Santa Ana
     River wash. This conservation effort has been developed over the past
     several years to develop a consensus-based land use strategy for the
     Upper Santa Ana River alluvial fan, which supports most of the
     remaining Santa Ana River woolly star, slender-horned spineflower and
     other rare plant and animal species. The aim is to develop a reserve and
     conservation plan that protects the most important habitat areas while
     allowing sand and gravel extraction and water spreading activities to
     continue. It would most likely include the existing WSPA and Santa Ana
     River ACEC and RNA area. The construction of the Seven Oaks Dam in
     1999, which affects water flows and sand transfer to downstream areas,
     was a driving force in these conservation efforts.
     San Bernardino Valleywide Multi Species Habitat
     Conservation Plan
     The City of Highland falls within the proposed San Bernardino Valley-
     wide Multi Species Habitat Conservation Plan (MSHCP). The MSHCP
     was proposed to encompass approximately 500 square miles containing
     six unique habitat types, six state endangered or threatened species, 13
     federally endangered or threatened species, and over 53 species of
     special concern San Bernardino County, through their Natural History
     Museum staff, have been conducting biological and botanical surveys in
     order to identify habitat needs and requirements for the various sensitive
     species. This status of this plan is uncertain at this time, and completion
     is not anticipated anytime in the near future.
5-20                                        March 2006 | City of Highland General Plan

                                                                       5. CONSERVATION AND OPEN SPACE ELEMENT
GOAL 5.7
Maintain, protect and preserve biologically significant habitats,
including riparian areas, woodlands and other areas of natural
significance.
Policies
     1) Continue participation, in cooperation with relevant agencies and
          jurisdictions, in the preparation, planning and implementation of
          Habitat Conservation Plans and preservation areas.
     2) Ensure that all development, including roads proposed adjacent
          to riparian and other biologically sensitive habitat, avoid
          significant impacts to such areas.
     3) Require that new development proposed in such locations be
          designed to:
          •    Minimize or eliminate the potential for unauthorized entry
               into the sensitive area;
          •    Create buffer areas adjacent to the sensitive area,
               incorporating the most passive uses of the adjacent property;
          •    Protect the visual seclusion of forage areas from road
               intrusion by providing vegetative buffering;
          •    Provide wildlife movement linkages to water sources and
               other habitat areas;
          •    Provide native vegetation that can be used by wildlife for
               cover along roadsides; and
          •    Protect wildlife crossings and corridors.
     4) Design lighting systems so as to avoid intrusion of night lighting
          into the sensitive area.
     5) As part of the environmental review process, require that projects
          determined to be located within a biologically sensitive area
          prepare documentation on the impacts of such development
          along with mitigation and mitigation monitoring programs.
     6) Ensure that required biological assessments are conducted in
          cooperation with the California Department of Fish and Game
          and the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service.
     7) Within existing natural and naturalized areas, preserve existing
          mature trees and vegetation.
City of Highland General Plan                                                                             5-21

                                                   HIGHLAND…A Great Place to Live
          8) Within rural and hillside residential areas, permit only such
              natural vegetation to be removed as is necessary to locate home
              sites, construct access roads and ensure fire safety.
          9) Enforce requirements that healthy, mature individual specimen
              trees be preserved in place, as per the City Municipal Code.
          10) Require builders and developers to prune, treat and maintain
              existing trees and plant new ones within future rights-of-way,
              public lands, common areas and development projects.
          11) Enforce the tree preservation ordinance as a means of managing
              the preservation of trees and their removal, where necessary.
          12) Require replacement at a 2:1 ratio of all mature trees (those with
              24-inch diameters or greater measured 4½ feet above the
              ground) that are removed.
          13) Develop an outreach program to schools and the community
              about the preservation and management of the City’s rich
              biological resources.
     Archaeological Resources
     The City of Highland recognizes the importance of preserving sites of
     archaeological significance. Although the City’s prehistory is not well
     defined, the area was inhabited by Native Americans of the Serrano,
     Cahuillia and Gabrieleno groups. In 1860, over 3,000 Native Americans
     lived in San Bernardino County.
     One of the Native American tribes closely associated with the City of
     Highland is the San Manuel Band of Mission Indians. Also known as
     People of the Pines, this sect of the Serrano Indians has resided in what
     is currently the City of Highland for over three hundred years. Their
     presence in the region pre-dates Spanish settlers coming to the area in
     the early 1700s. The San Manuel Reservation originated in 1891 and is
     located immediately north of the City of Highland. This group strongly
     values their history; this belief is conveyed in the adage, “Our Past is the
     foundation of our future.” Today, the San Manuel Band of Mission
     Indians is a vital part of the Highland community. Additionally, the
     group actively works to educate and inform others about their history
     through the Tribal Unity and Cultural Awareness Program.
     Many of the archaeological resources located in the City of Highland
     document the culture, activities and history of the San Manuel Band
     of Mission Indians. Because these archaeological resources chronicle the
     evolution of this group in particular, it is important that the City
     acknowledges the San Manuel Band of Mission Indians’ connection and
5-22                                         March 2006 | City of Highland General Plan

                                                                      5. CONSERVATION AND OPEN SPACE ELEMENT
investment in all archaeological resources. It is the City of Highland’s
goal to collaborate with the San Manuel Band of Mission Indians
regarding all new development in historically significant areas.
There are several sites to the north of the City and specific areas that
have been designated as “archaeologically sensitive” areas with a high
probability for discovery of archaeological resources if disturbed by
development. Within this area, several Historic and Prehistoric sites have
been catalogued. Figure 5.2 identifies these areas of sensitivity for
archaeological resources.
Preservation Strategies
Since the area’s archaeological resources are widely spread throughout
the City, the best preservation approach would be a site-by-site analysis
using the development review process. This type of analysis is required
by state law through the California Environmental Quality Act’s (CEQA)
environmental review process. This review would need to be
coordinated through the County Archaeological Information Center
located at the San Bernardino Museum and would involve:
     •    Archival research
     •    Field reconnaissance/survey and resource extraction
     •    Cultural Resource Report preparation
If resources are identified, the individual project applicant would work
with the City of Highland, the Archaeological Information Center and a
qualified archaeologist to determine the proper mitigation for the site in
question.
GOAL 5.8
Protect, document and minimize disruption of sites that have
archaeological significance.
Policies
     1) Avoid significant impacts in all new developments within areas
          determined to be archaeologically sensitive through the following
          measures:
          •   Conduct an archaeological records search with the
              Archaeological Information Center in order to identify
              potential on-site sensitivities;
          •   In cooperation with a qualified archaeologist, develop
              mitigation measures for projects found to be located in or
              near sensitive areas or sites; and
City of Highland General Plan                                                                            5-23

                                           HIGHLAND…A Great Place to Live
        •   Require that environmental review be conducted for all
            applications within the area designated as archaeologically
            sensitive, including but not limited to grading, earth moving
            and stockpiling, and building and demolition permits.
     2) Include the following statement as a condition of approval on all
        development projects:
            “If cultural resources are discovered during project
            construction, all work in the area of the find shall cease,
            and a qualified archaeologist shall be retained by the
            project sponsor to investigate the find, and to make
            recommendations on its disposition. If human remains
            are encountered during construction, all work shall cease
            and the San Bernardino County Coroner’s Office shall be
            contacted pursuant to Health and Safety Code
            provisions.”
     3) Coordinate with the San Manuel Band of Mission Indians when
        proposals for development projects are filed within the Areas of
        Sensitivity for Archaeological Resources (illustrated in Figure 5.2)
        through the following actions:
        •   Notify the San Manuel Band of Mission Indians via
            notification mailings about proposed projects in
            archaeologically sensitive areas; and
        •   Invite comments and suggestions to be forwarded to City staff
            and appropriate decision makers to aid the preservation and
            development review processes.
5-24                                   March 2006 | City of Highland General Plan


                                           HIGHLAND…A Great Place to Live
     This page intentionally left blank.
5-26                                   March 2006 | City of Highland General Plan

                                                                        5. CONSERVATION AND OPEN SPACE ELEMENT
Mineral Resources
The City of Highland, due to its large washes and stream channels,
contains regionally significant construction aggregate and mineral
resources. The primary minerals found in the area are iron, decorative
rocks, clay, limestone, sand and gravel. From a planning perspective, the
City overlies areas identified as Mineral Resource Zones (MRZs,
Categories 1–3) (see Figure 3.2). Category 1 areas contain no significant
aggregate deposits. Category 2 indicates that significant deposits are
likely to be present. Category 3 represents areas whose significance
cannot be evaluated from available data. More than half of the City is
underlain by MRZ-2 rated mineral resources, with most of the remaining
categorized as MRZ-3. As the Table below indicates, most of the MRZ
zones exist in areas that have already been developed. Currently, there
are approximately 4,439 acres that have not been developed.
                        Table 5.1: Mineral Resource Zones
                                                             Remaining
                                          Total             Undeveloped
               Category                  Acres                  Acres
           MRZ-1                                6                     0
           MRZ-2                           6,052                 2,345
           MRZ-3                           5,846                 2,094
           Total                         11,904                  4,439
           Source: State of California and the County of San Bernardino
California’s Surface and Mining and Reclamation Act of 1975 focuses
on the continuing need for mineral resources and the assurance that
significant impacts of surface mining will be mitigated. The California
Geological Survey Minerals Resources Project helps chart information on
nonfuel mineral production. The Minerals Hazardous Project maps and
monitors the minerals that are directly affiliated with public health and
safety issues. Such minerals are heavy metals, asbestos, mercury and
radon. According to the California Department of Health Services, these
minerals have not been found through the tests conducted.
While most land uses have options to site development, mineral
extraction is limited where the minerals naturally occur. Because these
areas can also support development in most cases, mineral resources are
often ignored as a profitable commodity and important component of
Highland’s economy. Mineral resources within and adjacent to Highland
have been classified as significant by both the State Geologist and San
Bernardino County. As such, these resources should be protected and
managed or they will be lost due to encroachment of incompatible land
uses.
City of Highland General Plan                                                                              5-27

                                                 HIGHLAND…A Great Place to Live
     Despite their economic benefits, mining operations are generally
     incompatible with the uses that surround them and leave behind
     unsightly scars. The process of mineral extraction can create a variety
     of potential impacts to the environment, including air pollution emissions,
     truck traffic, noise and harm to sensitive flora and fauna. Mining
     operations should be required to minimize aesthetic impacts to
     surrounding uses and provide reclamation of mining areas following
     their use.
     Proper management of these mineral resources will protect not only
     future development of mineral deposit areas, but will also guide the
     exploitation of mineral deposits so that adverse impacts caused by
     mineral extraction will be reduced or eliminated. Policies in this section
     seek to conserve areas identified as containing significant mineral
     deposits for potential future use; to promote the reasonable, safe and
     orderly operation of mining and extraction activities where
     environmental, aesthetic and adjacent land use compatibility impacts can
     be adequately mitigated; and to provide guidance for the eventual
     reclamation of extraction sites.
     GOAL 5.9
     Manage mineral resources and extraction policies for short and
     long term safety, economic and land use compatibility
     considerations.
     Policies
         1) Identify any significant mineral resources within the City and, as
              feasible, protect them from encroachment by residential or other
              incompatible development, for future use.
         2) Adopt policies and procedures for mining and processing of
              mineral resources.
         3) Develop criteria for location and operation of mineral processing
              to minimize adverse impacts to the environment, watersheds,
              wildlife, aesthetic resources, public health and safety, and
              adjacent land uses.
         4) Establish and implement Mining Reclamation Plans for any
              proposed mining operations in compliance with existing local,
              state and federal policies and statutes. Review land development
              proposals near resource areas or mining operations for land use
              compatibility.
5-28                                         March 2006 | City of Highland General Plan

                                                                         5. CONSERVATION AND OPEN SPACE ELEMENT
     5) Require that mining plans include, but not be limited to the
          following:
          •    Effects on terrain, natural and man-made slopes, permeability
               of soil, groundwater quality;
          •    Protection of water quality through erosion, runoff and
               sedimentation control;
          •    Protection of wildlife;
          •    Control of noise, dust, vibration, smoke, odors and lighting;
          •    Plans for rehabilitation and reclamation of lands; and
          •    Proposed timing of extraction and reclamation activities
          •    Offsite routes of travel.
     6) Investigate the adoption of a reclamation fee program designed
          to mitigate remaining scars from previous quarry operations.
     7) Pursue and implement a joint-powers agreement with adjacent
          cities and involved agencies for the management of natural
          resources located in the Santa Ana River Wash.
     8) Permit non-mining uses within the designated Open Space
          District only if a finding is made that no significant impacts on
          future regional mineral resources will result from project approval.
City of Highland General Plan                                                                               5-29

                                           HIGHLAND…A Great Place to Live
     This page intentionally left blank.
5-30                                   March 2006 | City of Highland General Plan


                                           HIGHLAND…A Great Place to Live
     This page intentionally left blank.
5-32                                   March 2006 | City of Highland General Plan

                                                                      5. CONSERVATION AND OPEN SPACE ELEMENT
Parks and Recreation
Located at the foot of the San Bernardino Mountains, Highland offers a
wide array of recreational opportunities. Bordered by the San
Bernardino National Forest, the geographic setting provides for such
activities as biking, hiking, sightseeing, horseback riding and winter
sports. Within its city limits, the community also contains active and
passive parks and recreation and community centers. The challenge for
Highland, as with all cities in the region, will be to provide enough parks
with the desired facilities to serve a growing population. Through a
combination of development impact fees, capital budgeting and land
acquisition agreements, Highland is working to develop the most
comprehensive parks and recreation program possible, and these efforts
can be guided by a Parks and Recreation Master Plan, separate from, but
consistent with, the policies contained in this General Plan.                  Aurantia Park is a multi-use passive park with
                                                                               regional design references.
The City has the advantage of being close to a number of excellent
regional recreational amenities. It is located within one hour of the
vacation resort areas of Big Bear Lake and Lake Arrowhead, the San
Gorgonio Wilderness and the San Jacinto Mountains. The San
Bernardino National Forest provides for outdoor activities as diverse as
swimming, boating, hiking, camping, downhill skiing and cross-country
skiing. Other surrounding regional recreation areas include: Lake Perris
and Lake Elsinore, Lake Skinner County Park, Yucaipa Regional Park,
Glen Helen Regional Park and Mt. San Jacinto State Park.
Types of Parks
There are many types of parks and recreational facilities in Highland, and
their description provides the basis for setting future goals and standards.
Below is a description of the hierarchy of basic types of parks. In
addition, Figure 5.4 depicts sample sizes, configurations and amenities
provided by each of the park types located in Highland.
Mini-Parks. Often called pocket parks, sub-neighborhood parks or play
lots, they serve built-up, urbanized areas and are commonly developed in
conjunction with specific plans, planned developments and community
centers.
Neighborhood Parks. From 10 to 20 acres, these are walk or bike-to parks
located within the neighborhood they serve. They include both active
and passive designs and include such facilities as picnic areas, informal
fields, tot lots, court games, passive green space and off-street parking.
These facilities usually represent a separate property delineated by a
fence.
Community Parks. These facilities are 20 to 40 acres with a service radius of
1.5 miles. Their typical amenities include lighted sports fields and courts,
City of Highland General Plan                                                                                              5-33
                                                  HIGHLAND…A Great Place to Live
     picnic facilities, play areas, restrooms, off-street parking, pool and service
     yards.
     Regional Parks. Consisting of 100 acres or more and attracting users from
     a service radius of up to an hour’s drive, these facilities contain a wide
     range of amenities from hiking areas, scenic areas and major sports
     facilities. Using this criterion, there are numerous regional facilities
     available to Highland’s residents including the San Bernardino National
     Forest and the recreational facilities associated with three major
     universities.
5-34                                          March 2006 | City of Highland General Plan

                              5. CONSERVATION AND OPEN SPACE ELEMENT
Figure 5.4: Park Types
City of Highland General Plan                                    5-35
                                           HIGHLAND…A Great Place to Live
     This page intentionally left blank.
5-36                                   March 2006 | City of Highland General Plan

                                                                                                                                                 5. CONSERVATION AND OPEN SPACE ELEMENT
Park Standards and Facilities
Throughout the country, park planning is conducted by establishing a
ratio of park acreage per population. The open space ratio established
for the Highland is 2.5 acres per 1,000 residents, which includes a ratio
of 2.0 acres of developed park acreage and 0.5 acre of undeveloped
natural parkland. In California, park standards are provided by the
Quimby Act of 1975, which gave cities the authority to pass parkland
impact fees or dedication ordinances, recognizing the tremendous strain
that local cities were under to provide enough parkland and open space
for their residents. It is the City’s intention to exceed state-mandated
minimums, which generally fall in the 4 to 5 acres per 1,000 citizen
range.
With regard to types of facilities within parks, no single set of accepted
standards exists, partly due to the diverse needs of different communities
and population changes. Nevertheless, the National Recreation and
Parks Association (NRPA) has published benchmark guidelines for
communities to consider and they are summarized below in Table 5.2.
                                                                   Table 5.2: Recreation Facilities and Standards
                            Primary Function      Space Standard       Service Area Radius                                                                                                             Community Center
       Park Type                                                                             Tot Lot   Picnic Area   Passive Area   Restrooms   Basketball   Volleyball            Baseball   Soccer                               Swimming
                                                                                                                                                                          Tennis                                          Nature
                                               Up to 1
Mini               Passive                                         ¼ mi.
                                               AC
Neighborhood Passive/ Active 5-20 AC                               ¼ to ½ mi.                                                                                                            
                                               20-100
Community          Active                                          ½ to 3 mi.                                                                                                                                                 
                                               AC
    Facility should be included in all parks.
 Facility may be included in park.
 Facility will be limited to a few parks.
City of Highland General Plan                                                                                                                                                                                                                 5-37

                                                 HIGHLAND…A Great Place to Live
     Existing Park Supply and Demand
     Park and recreation facilities are in short supply in the City, partly the
     result of a lack of developable space. For future planning, given a
     projected build-out population of 69,582, Highland should have
     approximately 143.8 acres of developed park acreage and 36 acres of
     undeveloped natural parkland, totaling 179 acres based on the standard
     of two acres of parkland per 1,000 residents.
     Among Highland’s recreational facilities are: Cunningham Park and
     Canyon Oaks Park, both of which are two-acre neighborhood parks;
     Aurantia Park, a ten-acre passive park; and the 17-acre Central Avenue
     Park. The Jerry Lewis Community Center, consisting of a 30,000
     square-foot multi-use facility containing a gymnasium, several multi-
     purpose rooms, a kitchen and offices, is surrounded by Central Avenue
     Park. A major Public Library and Environmental Learning Center is to
     be located nearby. Additional recreational needs of the City are met by
     the sports fields and playgrounds of the eight schools in the City, parks or
     schools in surrounding cities, vacant lots and a few privately held fields
     that serve as informal ball fields and gathering places.
     Part of the parkland shortfall can be partially alleviated through joint-use
     school/park facilities. The City has worked to establish joint-use
     agreements with the San Bernardino and Redlands School Districts for
     targeted schools. It should be pointed out that such agreements provide
     active recreational space but not passive parkland. Also, joint-use
     agreements are severable by local school boards and, as such, cannot be
     relied on exclusively to alleviate the parkland shortfall. Thus, the City
     realizes that such programs, although beneficial to the community, are
     not a substitute for acquiring additional parkland.
     Target Planning Areas and Future Needs
     Park planning relies on establishing target areas and service area
     boundaries for each type of recreation facility. This depends on
     forecasting population growth and land use patterns. Figure 5.5 shows
     ten service areas for the City, three immediate needs target areas, and
     existing and proposed park facilities. The target areas in the central parts
     of the City are high priorities for neighborhood park development, even
     though their provision may cause an overlap in service area boundaries.
     For residents of the East Highlands area, there appears to be ample park
     space. It should be noted that East Highlands Ranch has 113.6 acres of
     active recreational space including walking, hiking, or biking trails and
     940.3 acres of natural and visual open space for the private use of its
     residents; however, this parkland is not counted toward the parkland
     requirements that must be met by the City because it is private. It should
     also be noted that the California Youth Soccer Association (CYSA)
5-38                                         March 2006 | City of Highland General Plan

                                                                        5. CONSERVATION AND OPEN SPACE ELEMENT
Soccer Complex, a regional recreation facility, is located just outside
of the City (north of Base Line and west of Victoria Avenue).
Planning for the Future
Determining future park and recreation demand is an ongoing process
that considers changes in population growth, user preferences and
implementation of a Parks and Recreation Master Plan. Current
demographic trends favor more facilities for young people and
consequent demand for organized sports facilities within community
parks. The City will continue to take a proactive role in park planning by
collecting fees, acquiring land and designing the parks themselves. The
following issues have been identified for the effective planning of future
park and recreation facilities:
     •    Available school site facilities and recreational opportunities
          within private developments can offset some of the shortfall in
          parks space, but as iterated above, should not be relied upon
          exclusively for meeting this need.
     •    The western portion of Highland has only two stand-alone parks
          that are not associated with school facilities.
     •    Based on a park standard of 2.5 acres per 1,000 residents, there
          is a deficit in park space. These deficiencies exist mainly at the
          neighborhood and community park level.
     •    In the year 2000, the largest share of Highland’s population
          (20.4 percent) was in the 0–9 year old age group. Combining the
          number of 10–19 year olds with the number of 0–9-year-olds in
          Highland, gave the City a population where 38.4 percent of its
          residents were under 20 years of age in 2000. Increases in the
          child-age population will necessitate the provision of additional
          lands for youth sports and activities in the future.
     •    Quimby funds and general revenues may be insufficient to
          acquire, develop, maintain and operate the additional
          recreational facilities needed. The City must, therefore, employ
          creative techniques such as land banking to secure additional
          land for parks.
City of Highland General Plan                                                                              5-39

                                           HIGHLAND…A Great Place to Live
     This page intentionally left blank.
5-40                                   March 2006 | City of Highland General Plan


                                           HIGHLAND…A Great Place to Live
     This page intentionally left blank.
5-42                                   March 2006 | City of Highland General Plan

                                                                       5. CONSERVATION AND OPEN SPACE ELEMENT
GOAL 5.10
Maintain a high-quality system of parks that meet the needs of all
segments of the community.
Policies
Adequate Supply of Parks
     1) Develop and periodically update a Parks and Recreation Master
          Plan, with direction from the Planning Commission, Design
          Review Board and City Council, to identify specific future sites for
          additional parks and recreational open space.
     2) Supplement existing development fee program for parkland
          acquisition with other funding sources, grants and programs (fee
          sponsors, corporate sponsors, fund raising, for example).
                                                                                The latest in playground equipment and
     3) Use the redevelopment process for the selection, acquisition and        softscape surfaces will make this park a favorite
          funding of additional parkland in western portions of the City.       with kids and their parents.
     4) Prepare a phased strategy for developing new facilities.
     5) Assess areas of potential annexation into the City and, if
          necessary, negotiate an agreement with the County of San
          Bernardino to provide parks meeting City standards within areas
          of eventual annexation into the City.
Parks for Diverse Needs
     6) Conduct periodic assessments of park and recreation facilities
          and services, including user surveys.
     7) Provide handicap access to all parks.
     8) Develop a multi-dimensional recreation program for all citizen
          groups in Highland including exercise, arts and crafts and cultural
          enrichment.
Park Design
     9) Provide a variety of activity options, including active and passive
          uses, within each park.
     10) Study the desirability of developing “specialty parks” such as
          skate, dirt bike, fishing and art parks.
     11) Evaluate the facilities and amenities of all City parks as part of the
          periodic update of the Parks and Recreation Master Plan.
     12) Conduct periodic user surveys on the design of public parks.
City of Highland General Plan                                                                                                5-43

                                                 HIGHLAND…A Great Place to Live
        13) Conduct service-area based design charettes with community
            members on park design.
        14) Give priority to the acquisition of large parcels for the
            development of Community Parks that accommodate athletic
            fields.
        15) Encourage design competitions for new and remodeled parks.
     Parks in Newly Developing Areas
        16) Continue to implement the local park ordinance through
            developer dedication of parkland or in-lieu fees.
        17) Require that new specific plans and planned unit developments
            (PUDs) incorporate sufficient park and recreation facilities along
            with natural open space areas, where appropriate, to serve the
            needs of their future residents.
        18) Given the residential focus in Highland, increase park standard
            acreage ratios above state required minimums.
        19) Connect newly developed parks, wherever practical, to the
            existing and future bicycle and recreational trail system.
        20) Initiate a long-term program to correct park deficiencies.
        21) Adopt a density bonus program for development that includes
            usable park and open space lands above the City-required
            standard.
        22) Develop recreational opportunities within the Greenspot area.
     Park Safety and Maintenance
        23) Design parks in accordance with contemporary safety standards
            and “CPTED” (Crime Prevention Through Environmental
            Design) principles.
        24) Periodically evaluate parks for safety and maintenance.
        25) Conduct evaluation of park improvements to test for safety
            compliance, crime prevention and effective maintenance.
     Joint-Use Agreements with School District
        26) Pursue joint public/private development of recreation facilities,
            especially in areas where joint development would maximize use
            of existing facilities, as well as add new land to the facility.
5-44                                         March 2006 | City of Highland General Plan

                                                                         5. CONSERVATION AND OPEN SPACE ELEMENT
     27) Develop and implement a facilities plan that indicates the
          potential development of recreational facilities, their costs and
          implementation at selected school sites.
     28) Establish clear policies about the proper community use of school
          facilities including maintenance, scheduling, fees and regulations.
Park Accessibility and Signage
     29) Locate parks and recreation facilities within convenient walking
          and biking distance of all neighborhoods.
     30) Integrate park and recreation facilities with existing and future
          trail and bikeways, wherever practical.
     31) Prepare templates for proper on and off-site signage for all parks.
Multi-Use Trails
Trails and equestrian use have a strong tradition in Highland. In the
early days of the City’s development, citrus crops were pulled by horses
along an extensive system of trails. The proximity of mountains, rivers
and open space has made equestrian, hiking and biking uses both
popular and practical. The views afforded from area trails and bikeways
are some of the finest in the region. An accessible trail system not only
promotes exercise, but also links community facilities and neighborhoods
together. Successful implementation of the Multi-Use Trails Master Plan
depends on strong community support, careful planning and consistent
funding. Figure 5.6 summarizes the proposed mixed use trail system for
Highland.
Types of Trails
Just as there are different types of parks for which to plan, there are also
different types of trails and bike paths for different uses. Multi-use on
City of Highland recreational trails in urban areas may include bicycling
and hiking. In natural or low-use areas, multiple-use may include any
combination of bicycling, hiking, or equestrian uses. An off-street
recreational trail system combines hiking, equestrian and Class 1 bike
trails. Such trails are primarily used for recreation, but can also be used
to provide access to community facilities, such as transit stops or schools.
Dedicated bike lanes, or Class 2 Bikeways, consist of a dedicated lane
along the pavement edge of streets and provide an alternative to the
automobile throughout the city. Off–road vehicles such as ATVs and dirt
bikes, which are currently using private lands, should also have a trail
system. The following are commonly used trail and bicycle lane
standards:
City of Highland General Plan                                                                               5-45

                                                                                                  HIGHLAND…A Great Place to Live
                                                     Multi-Use Trails are combined trails that accommodate hikers, joggers,
                                                     bicyclists and equestrians with improved surface of concrete or asphalt
                                                     for the bike and an unimproved surface for equestrian uses. Hiking
                                                     portions of trail may or may not be improved, depending on the nature
                                                     of the trail and the surroundings. Minimum width for two bikes is 8 feet
                                                     5 inches for one bike and 4 to 7 feet for hikers and equestrians.
                                                     Separating medians can be used, especially at major crossings and near
                                                     nodes. Major trail nodes occur where trail systems begin or where they
                                                     cross as well as places where important information needs to be given to
   This multi-use trail in east Highland connects    users.
  neighborhoods with minimal street crossings,
  providing access for pedestrians, bicycles and     Equestrian/Hiking Trails are wide enough to allow two horses to pass:
                                        equestrians.
                                                     minimum 10-foot width and 10-foot vertical clearance from overhanging
                                                     branches.
                                                     Class I Bikeways (Bike Paths) are provided for corridors nor served by streets
                                                     or highways; excellent for use along rivers, channels and utility rights-of-
            See the Circulation Element for          way or easements; recommended width for two-way bike path is 8 feet.
            further discussion of bikeway
            standards.
                                                     Class 2 Bike Lanes are for use along roadways in urban settings; minimum
                                                     land width of 4 feet between the gutter or parking lane and the auto
                                                     travel lane; used in developed areas with significant bicycle travel
                                                     demand.
                                                     Class 3 Bicycle Routes connect Class 1 and 2 Bikeways, usually in developed
                                                     areas; length varies depending on access routes.
                                                     The biggest priorities for Highland are for both multi-use trails and
                                                     bikeways. Since the majority of existing trails are for both equestrian and
                                                     hiking uses, a high priority is to complete the planning and
                                                     implementation of the Multi-Use Trails Master Plan recommended by the
                                                     Community Trails Committee. Also, since there is a shortage of trails
5-46                                                                                          March 2006 | City of Highland General Plan

                                                                        5. CONSERVATION AND OPEN SPACE ELEMENT
and bikeways in western portions of the City, a high priority is to develop
connections to other trails. These plans are coordinated with the City of
San Bernardino where bikeways cross both jurisdictions.
Existing Trail System
In the early agricultural period of Highland’s development, an extensive
system of informal trails developed, mostly associated with equestrian
transport routes. Over time, the gentle, sloping and scenic terrain
attracted even more recreational uses. Some of these early routes are
now becoming a formal trail system. The majority of the trails are
located in the vicinity of East Highlands Ranch and the more rural
portions of East Highland. Trail opportunities in the western portions
of the City are limited because of urbanization and subsequent lack of
open space.
Regional Connections – Santa Ana River and the
Scenic Trail System
Highland’s location at the base of the San Bernardino Mountains gives
its citizens and visitors major opportunities to access to City-maintained
trails and the regional network of multi-use trails. In fact, the City is
home to or is close to several trails designated as Scenic Trails by the
County of San Bernardino (see Figure 5.6, Multi-Use Trails), including:
     •    Santa Ana River Trail
     •    San Bernardino Green Belt Trail
     •    City Creek Trail
Of major significance is the Santa Ana River Trail. This river corridor is
approximately 110 miles long and covers three counties from the crest
of the San Bernardino Mountains to the Pacific Ocean. About 2 of the
18 miles that lie in San Bernardino County have been paved as bicycle
paths and are accessible to Highland. The remaining portion of the
project will be addressed with future funding sources. The eastern
portion of the River corridor provides a peaceful, natural setting, which
would facilitate high-quality rural and equestrian-oriented development
in areas not subject to flooding. This system of trails interconnects with
the other regional/local trails within Orange, Riverside and San
Bernardino Counties.
Trail Planning
A formal trail system was initiated when the East Highland Ranch began
construction in the early 1980s. It is envisioned that this trail system will
be improved to City standards while other trails will become the
responsibility of the City. Recommendations by the Equestrian Trails
Committee, formed in the late 1980s, lead to City adoption of the
City of Highland General Plan                                                                              5-47

                                                 HIGHLAND…A Great Place to Live
     Conceptual East Highlands Equestrian Map in 1989. Realizing the
     importance of other non-equestrian users, a Community Trails
     Committee was established in 1990 to advise the City on the planning,
     acquisition and maintenance of a Multi-Use Trails Master Plan.
     A major focus for the City will be to complete a truly integrated multi-
     use Master Plan for trails. This will include not only expanded equestrian
     and hiking trails, but also improved bikeways throughout the City. In
     addition, the City’s Master Plan will improve links to the regional network
     of trails and bikeways.
     Trail Construction and Maintenance
     There are many challenges in trail planning. The long distances involved
     and the public/private ownership patterns can pose maintenance and
     liability issues. Use of floodplains, channels and public rights-of-way can
     save on acquisition costs, and use of recycled material such as crushed
     concrete can keep construction costs down. Maintenance costs can be
     reduced by using volunteer groups, “Adopt a Trail” programs, contracted
     labor such as the California Conservation Corps, and public awareness
     programs. Private trail systems are usually maintained through
     Homeowner’s Association provisions.
5-48                                        March 2006 | City of Highland General Plan


                                           HIGHLAND…A Great Place to Live
     This page intentionally left blank.
5-50                                   March 2006 | City of Highland General Plan

                                                                          5. CONSERVATION AND OPEN SPACE ELEMENT
GOAL 5.11
Provide excellent opportunities and facilities for hiking, equestrian
and bicycle use through the Multi-Use Trail Master Plan.
Policies
     1) Require, where appropriate, that residential, commercial and
          industrial developments within the City dedicate and construct
          trail links within their boundaries as part of the Multi-Use Trail
          Master Plan.
     2) Provide equestrian, bicycling and pedestrian staging areas
          consistent with plan standards.
     3) Support the acquisition of trail rights-of-way through dedication
          in conjunction with development activity or acts of philanthropy
          that occur prior to adoption of a route plan.
     4) Where possible, locate trail easements within City-required
          landscaping or other easements.
     5) Preserve, to the extent possible, existing formal and informal trail
          routes in the City, in particular routes that provide major north-
          south and east-west access.
     6) Where an established trail is jeopardized by impending
          development or subdivision activity, require the dedication of trail
          easements, where appropriate, to establish a planned trail system
          alignment.
     7) Require proposed development adjacent to trail systems to
          dedicate land for trailhead access points.
     8) Where feasible, use active and abandoned roads, flood control,
          utility and railroad rights-of-way, and other easements for
          potential sites for expanded trail use.
     9) Refine, adopt and implement the Multi-Use Trails Master Plan to
          include, at a minimum, the following:
          •    Indication of an exact trail location (e.g., which side of street,
               channel, etc.);
          •    Identification of each trail with a name, approximate length
               and type;
          •    Specific design standards for each trail;
City of Highland General Plan                                                                                5-51

                                                   HIGHLAND…A Great Place to Live
             •    Identification of logical rest areas and facilities;
             •    Establishment of sign standards and locations for the various
                  types of trails; and
             •    Suggested funding sources and implementation strategies.
         10) Work with local, state and federal agencies; adjoining cities and
             jurisdictions; interest groups; and private landowners, in an effort
             to promote a Citywide trail system, and to secure trail access
             through purchase, easement, or by other means.
         11) Locate trail linkages to minimize conflicts with motorized traffic.
     GOAL 5.12
     Develop and maintain trail and bikeway connections to
     recreational facilities, schools, existing transportation routes,
     natural features and regional trail systems.
     Policies
         1) Provide trail connections between and/or along the major city
             and surrounding regional facilities, sites and features indicated on
             the Multi-Use Trails Master Plan.
         2) Provide bicycle and pedestrian trails along major home-to-work,
             home-to-school and other travel routes, where appropriate.
         3) Seek to construct or assist in the construction of those portions of
             the San Bernardino County Regional Trail system that are
             located within Highland.
         4) Require the dedication of trail easements, where appropriate, for
             establishing a planned trails system alignment, or where an
             established trail is jeopardized by impending development or
             subdivision activity.
         5) Where possible, designate and design new trail development near
             transit routes or heavily traveled areas.
5-52                                          March 2006 | City of Highland General Plan

                                                                          5. CONSERVATION AND OPEN SPACE ELEMENT
GOAL 5.13
Ensure the maximum safety and enjoyment of all trail system
users.
Policies
     1) Establish an educational program that will protect the health and
          safety of trail users by encouraging proper etiquette and
          procedures.
     2) Access should be provided to the maximum extent feasible to trail
          users of all abilities and all ages.
     3) Adopt the following hierarchy of users on the City’s trail system:
          •   Bicyclists must yield right-of-way to all other users.
          •   Runners must yield to hikers and equestrians (note: horses
              should not be on trails predominantly intended for bikes and
              pedestrians).
          •   Hikers must yield to equestrians.
     4) Implement two general levels of trail use:
          •   Low Use and Natural Area: Standards shall apply to sections
              of the trail where terrain, remoteness, expected low usage,
              easement, or other restrictions make larger, multiple trails
              infeasible.
          •   Urban (Maximum Accessibility): Standards define a relative
              flat, wide trail for use where little physical challenge is
              required and where wheelchair access can be accomplished.
              The grades are low, and the trail is wide and compacted or
              surfaced.
     5) Require that cyclists adhere to the following requirements:
          •   Alert hikers and equestrians of their presence.
          •   Travel no faster than 15 mph, unless conditions warrant
              reduced speed.
          •   Slow to 5 mph when passing and dismount when necessary.
     6) Promote adherence to the following code of off-road bicycling
          responsibility, as developed by the International Mountain
          Bicycling Association:
          •   Ride on open trails only.
          •   Control your bicycle.
City of Highland General Plan                                                                                5-53

                                                HIGHLAND…A Great Place to Live
            •    Always yield trail.
            •    Never spook animals.
            •    Leave no trace.
            •    Plan Ahead.
        7) Maintain adequate line-of-sight on multiple use trails as
            determined by the City Engineer.
        8) Incorporate, where feasible and without compromising safety, all
            compatible multiple uses on a single trail.
        9) Where a single trail is not feasible or there is heavy use, provide
            alternate or parallel routes and/or design separate, dual trails.
        10) Allow ample space in right-of-way for safe passage of users, for
            signing, fencing, separation of trails, trailheads and where
            appropriate, landscaping.
        11) For trails in developed areas, provide a setback of at least 5 feet
            so that trail fence can be set back from the curb and planting
            strip.
        12) Along narrow equestrian/hiking trails (less than 6 feet wide) with
            steep side slopes (greater than 30 percent), provide passing areas
            at regular intervals to allow hikers and other equestrians to pass.
        13) Inform all trail users of the system’s etiquette requirements
            through trailhead signs.
        14) Reserve the right to temporarily close trails for safety and
            maintenance reasons, and post signs at convenient locations and
            outlets indicating the extent and probable length of closure.
     GOAL 5.14
     Maintain and enhance the trail system’s clear and informative
     signage.
     Policies
        1) Continue to use consistent and established sign styles and other
            symbols, for the trails system.
        2) To the extent possible, develop signs that use easily identifiable
            symbols, natural materials and colors, and vandal-resistant
            construction.
5-54                                        March 2006 | City of Highland General Plan

                                                                        5. CONSERVATION AND OPEN SPACE ELEMENT
     3) Place signs in clearly visible areas such as at access points, trail
          heads, rest facilities and road crossings.
     4) Use positive rather than negative language, emphasizing
          permitted activities rather than extensive “No!” signing, where
          appropriate.
     5) Relate the number of signs to trail usage. More signage is
          appropriate in urban or high-use areas rather than natural or low-
          use areas.
     6) Develop a highly informative sign program incorporating such
          information as:
          •    Destinations and mileage indicators along the trail route;
                                                                                    This small post sign at Aurantia Park uses
          •    Connections to other trails and community facilities;                symbols to communicate with users.
          •    Areas where access is hazardous or restricted;                       Although in the center rather than the side
                                                                                    of a trail head, the scale and color of the
          •    Areas in which dogs or other animals are not allowed;                sign make it less obtrusive.
          •    Educational exhibits and informational displays;
          •    Delineation of private property adjacent to trails;
          •    Habitat restoration along or near trails;
          •    Recognition of areas dedicated to or sponsored by an
               organization or individual;
          •    Vista points, pullouts, or rest stops;
          •    Etiquette or permitted and nonpermitted uses; and
          •    Speed limits for bicyclists and equestrians.
GOAL 5.15
Develop a multi-faceted program of trail maintenance with public
and private participation.
Policies
     1) Monitor public use of trail system on a regular basis so that
          maintenance issues can be addressed on a timely basis.
     2) Enforce trail regulations as a means of controlling trail use, and
          ensure that regulations for different trail segments within various
          jurisdictions do not conflict.
     3) Develop a program to enlist volunteers and volunteer
          organizations on trail development, operations and maintenance,
          education, and enforcement activities.
City of Highland General Plan                                                                                                5-55

                                                HIGHLAND…A Great Place to Live
          4) Locate trailheads in areas of high visibility and access.
          5) Develop or open to public use trails and/or easements only after
             a public agency (which may be the City of Highland) or private
             organization agrees to accept maintenance and liability
             responsibilities.
          6) Conduct a feasibility study of a possible off-road vehicle park or
             recreation area.
          7) Maintain an up-to-date map of all existing and proposed
             dedicated public trail easements in the General Plan.
          8) Ensure that all proposed trails leading from the City into the San
             Bernardino National Forest are coordinated with the San
             Bernardino National Forest Service and consistent with the
             County of San Bernardino National Forest Land and Resource
             Management Plan.
     Energy Conservation, Green Building Design
     and Recycling
     Using resources wisely saves money and helps the environment, and the
     City of Highland is connecting its citizens to these trends. This Open
     Space and Conservation Element analyzes energy conservation
     opportunities and describes the policies and actions that can make the
     City more energy wise. Energy conservation is not only about using
     appliances wisely, but also about designing buildings to use renewable
     energy rather than waste it—the so-called “green building” or sustainable
     energy practices. Conserving also means less waste. Managing solid
     waste, through recycling and other programs, conserves precious space
     in landfills.
5-56                                        March 2006 | City of Highland General Plan

                                                                     5. CONSERVATION AND OPEN SPACE ELEMENT
Energy-Saving Practices and Green
Building Design
Energy conservation is a comprehensive process, involving a myriad of
groups—renters, homeowners, cities, utility companies and the
development community. The City of Highland can be a role model in            For additional information on energy conservation,
                                                                              please visit the following websites:
energy efficiency and sharing information with its residents and
encouraging energy-wide practices and development.                            •   Southern California Edison –
                                                                                  www.sce.com
With its hot summers and cool winters, the City is in a good position to      •   The U.S. Department of Energy –
                                                                                  www.eren.doe.gov/consumerinfo/energy_savers
benefit from energy conservation information. Utility providers such as
Southern California Edison and government agencies have a wealth of           •   Power Protection -–
                                                                                  www.powerprotectiononline.org
information to share, and the City continues to disseminate it to its
                                                                              •   The California Energy Commission -–
citizens. The United States Department of Energy and the                          www.consumerenergycenter.org
Environmental Protection Agency have long sponsored conservation
                                                                              •   Energy Star Program –
efforts such as the Energy Star Program that encourages superior                  www.energystar.gov
energy efficiency by residents and businesses. The American Institute         •   The Energy Commission's
of Architects’ (AIA) Committee on the Environment (COTE) maintains                "Your California Home Page" –
a powerful website on sustainable design. Many jurisdictions have                 www.idea-server.com/CAHome
enrolled in the Community Energy Efficiency Program (CEEP), which             •   Flex Your Power Official Site –
                                                                                  www.flexyourpower.ca.gov
provides incentives for builders who attain energy savings 30 percent
above the National Model Energy Code.                                         •   Southern California Gas Company –
                                                                                  www.socalgas.com
The City also has a role in encouraging energy-efficient, “green”             •   American Institute of Architects –
                                                                                  www.aia.org/cote
buildings. Providing information and incentives for builders whose
designs work with solar and wind patterns can save money and add
comfort to homes and businesses. Local utilities have continued to
offer incentives to builders who meet “Energy Star” or comfort wise
standards that are at least 15 percent above Title 24 of the California
Building Code. The City of Highland continues to pride itself on
environmental quality and is developing the foundation for a strong
“green building” program.
GOAL 5.16
Continue to encourage, support and adopt energy-conservation
practices.
Policies
     1) Consolidate and adopt energy-saving practices for all City
          departments.
     2) Monitor energy usage for all City facilities.
     3) Provide information on free energy audits for the public given by
          public utilities.
City of Highland General Plan                                                                                                    5-57

                                              HIGHLAND…A Great Place to Live
        4) Distribute energy-conservation information, in both English and
           Spanish, to residents and businesses through:
           •   Links to energy agencies and utilities on City’s homepage
           •   Brochures available at City Hall and other public facilities
           •   Information and tips on utility bills.
           •   Outreach programs to schools and businesses.
           •   Environmental Learning Center
        5) Coordinate energy-related policies and actions with local utilities
           and energy agencies.
     GOAL 5.17
     Encourage site design practices that reduce and conserve energy
     use.
     Policies
        1) Encourage energy and environmentally sustainable designs—
           such as “Green Development Standards”—in the design and
           approval of new projects.
        2) Orient buildings on the site to maximize the natural ventilation
           provided by prevailing breezes.
        3) Incorporate passive solar design techniques including building
           orientation, energy-saving materials, roof overhangs, and window
           and door placement.
        4) Increase minimum building insulation standards.
        5) Encourage landscape design that cools buildings and blocks solar
           rays, such as the planting of deciduous trees on south and west
           facing elevations, and give Title 24 credit for landscaping.
        6) Channel runoff to permeable surfaces through the design of roofs
           and rain gutter systems and drainage courses.
        7) Encourage energy-efficient retrofitting of existing buildings, where
           practical, throughout the City including assisting applicants in the
           installation of more efficient HVAC (heating, ventilation, air
           conditioning) systems.
        8) Distribute and participate in incentive programs for incorporation
           of solar and photovoltaic panels (active solar) into existing or new
           buildings.
5-58                                      March 2006 | City of Highland General Plan

                                                                        5. CONSERVATION AND OPEN SPACE ELEMENT
     9) Establish a “green building” site design incentive program, such
          as density or height bonuses, reduced parking requirements,
          expedited plan check, and recognition programs.
     10) Adopt LEED (Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design)
          design standards for public buildings.
     11) Participate in the CEEP (Community Energy Efficiency Program)
          Certificate and Recognition Program.
     12) Encourage a grey water recycling plan.
Solid Waste Management/Recycling
Recycling saves resources and has become an important state, regional
and local concern. The goal is to reduce the growing waste stream
generated by residences and businesses and to find sufficient land for             For additional information regarding solid
its disposal. The State’s Integrated Waste Management Act of 1989                  waste services and facilities, please refer to
required that cities reduce their solid waste diversions to landfill by            the Public Services and Facilities Element.
50 percent by the year 2000. After this date, cities could set even
higher goals.
Solid waste management involves source reduction, recycling and
composting, and safe transformation and disposal of solid wastes. The
City of Highland operates under the County of San Bernardino Solid
Waste Management Division (SWMD) and is responsible for the
operation and management of the County of San Bernardino’s solid
waste disposal system that consists of six regional landfills, eight transfer
stations and five community collection centers.
The City of Highland has developed an array of recycling programs in
an effort to reduce the amount of solid waste to local landfills. These
programs include a no-cost citywide curbside recycling program for
Highland households; office recycling in all City departments; and
education programs on recycling. Additionally, the City participates in
“Merry Mulch,” a program sponsored by San Bernardino County that
encourages residents to provide Christmas trees for mulching at regional
landfills. Another program is “Spring Clean-Up” day sponsored by the
City’s Chamber of Commerce and local businesses. This program
encourages residents to bring large bulky items to a designated location
in the City for disposal. Private sector recycling programs represent
additional opportunities for recycling programs.
City of Highland General Plan                                                                                                     5-59

                                                   HIGHLAND…A Great Place to Live
     GOAL 5.18
     Continue to improve Highland’s solid waste management and
     recycling efforts.
     Policies
         1) Continue to provide services to resident and businesses that
             facilitate community cleanup, curbside collections and diversion
             of oil and other hazardous waste materials
         2) Where joint programs offer improved efficiency or reduced cost,
             collaborate with other entities in waste recycling efforts.
         3) Maintain a comprehensive public education program,
             coordinated, in part, through the Environmental Learning Center,
             to stimulate recycling, reuse and waste reduction by its resident
             and businesses.
         4) Continue to implement the policies and programs identified in
             the City’s SRR (Source Reduction and Recycling Element) and
             HHW (Household Hazardous Waste Element), and develop
             measures to evaluate their effectiveness.
         5) Evaluate and update hazardous waste management programs
             and implement improvements based on current best practices.
         6) Evaluate and update community education programs on solid
             and hazardous waste disposal to insure that this information is as
             broadly available as possible, especially through the school
             system.
         7) Aggressively pursue polluters and develop a fine program for
             distributors of fliers and leaflets found in parking lots.
     Air Quality Planning
     The enjoyment of Highland’s scenic resources depends on clean air. Its
     location at the base of the Southland’s tallest mountain range puts it in
     a highly visible and somewhat vulnerable position with regard to air
     quality. Furthermore, as one of the many cities in the South Coast Air
     Quality Management District, the City is not only affected by regional
     trends in air pollution but is also a participant in air quality planning.
     Background
     The City of Highland lies within The South Coast Air Quality
     Management District (AQMD), the air pollution control agency for all of
     Orange County and the urban portions of Los Angeles, Riverside and
5-60                                         March 2006 | City of Highland General Plan

                                                                      5. CONSERVATION AND OPEN SPACE ELEMENT
San Bernardino Counties. The SCAQMD prepares an Air Quality
Management Plan every three years, following its mandate from the
Federal Clean Air Act. Among the many strategies used by the District to
reduce pollution, the primary effort is the reduction of vehicle trips, since
mobile sources such as automobiles constitute the number one                      Sources of Air Pollution
contributor to air quality.                                                       • Combustion—primarily from automobile
                                                                                    engines; the largest source of air pollution
More recently, a growing strategy in the fight against air pollution is           • Natural sources—oil seeps, vegetation,
effective land use planning. Efficient land use planning—mixed/multi-use            windblown dust
development, accessible retail centers, pedestrian amenities and transit-         • Evaporation of organic liquids—used in
                                                                                    coating and cleaning processes
oriented development—can reduce unnecessary vehicle trips. Although               • Abrasion—primarily between tires and
not a large city within the SCAQMD, changes in Highland’s development               roadways
patterns and general plan land use designations contribute towards fewer          • Industrial processes and construction—
vehicle trips. In particular, the City is planning an increase in:                  windblown fumes and particulate matter
     •    Mixed and multi-use planning;
     •    Consolidation of retail development to more accessible centers;
     •    Pedestrian connections to adjoining retail and office
          development;
     •    Development of a Town Center that would discourage out-of-
          town shopping trips;
     •    In-fill development for greater efficiency of land use; and
     •    Improvement of trail systems.
Policies described in this section are meant not as additional City
regulations but to create incentives and support for local and regional
efforts to help clean the air.
GOAL 5.19
Continue to support air quality planning through land use policies,
outreach efforts and coordination with regional air quality
agencies.
Policies
     1) Reduce locally generated emissions through traffic flow
          improvements (including signal synchronization) and construction
          management practices.
     2) Encourage the use of public transit within the City through
          coordination with regional transit providers and publication of
          routes and timetables on the City website and publications.
     3) Encourage land use planning and urban design that reduces
          vehicle trips through mixed and multi-use development,
City of Highland General Plan                                                                                                  5-61

                                             HIGHLAND…A Great Place to Live
         consolidation of commercial development along major arterials,
         provision of pedestrian connections from residential to retail
         areas, and development of a multi-use Town Center.
     4) Establish performance standards for clustering residential areas
         near commercial services where mixed use is not feasible.
     5) Expand citizen and business outreach and education programs,
         disseminated and conducted in the Environmental Learning
         Center, relating to policies that improve air quality
     6) Provide incentives such as permit streamlining for
         industrial/commercial or residential development projects that
         meet or exceed air quality practices.
     7) Encourage employers to develop trip reduction plans to promote
         alternative work schedules, ridesharing, telecommuting and work-
         at-home programs, employee education and preferential parking.
     8) Conduct City staff in-service training, in conjunction with regional
         air quality agencies, on the latest policies, techniques, programs
         and technology for air quality planning.
     9) Work with SANBAG to develop guidelines for the location and
         design of land uses that are sensitive to air pollution.
     10) Reduce particulate emissions from roads, parking lots,
         construction sites and agricultural lands to the maximum extent
         practical through dust suppression, street cleaning and other
         practices.
     11) Establish grading and building permitting procedures so that all
         construction involving demolition or earth movement reduces
         fugitive dust emissions through the appropriate techniques (e.g.,
         wetting).
     12) Incorporate the provisions of SCAQMD Rule 403 (Fugitive Dust)
         into City land use administration rules and procedures.
     13) Continue comprehensive efforts to reduce energy consumption.
     14) Offer incentives to home-based businesses, carpool networks and
         park-and-ride facilities.
     15) Evaluate the desirability of developing a multi-modal, transit hub
         in the City.
5-62                                    March 2006 | City of Highland General Plan

6. Public Health & Safety Elemen
This page intentionally left blank
Chapter 6. Public Health & Safety Element
INTRODUCTION
P
        rotecting the life, health, and property of the community from
        natural and man-made hazards is a fundamental role of the City
        of Highland. The occurrence of natural disasters, such as flooding,
earthquakes, and fires in Southern California, has made effective public
safety programs increasingly important. The Public Health and Safety
Element of the General Plan assesses the natural and man-made hazards
present in the community and includes goals and policies to address
those hazards.
Purpose and Function
The Public Health and Safety Element identifies areas in the City
where public and private decisions on land use need to be sensitive to
hazardous conditions that pose a potential threat to public health and
safety. This element addresses hazards related to geologic and seismic
activity, slope instability, flooding, hazardous materials, fire hazards,
emergency preparedness, airport land use compatibility and safety, and
air quality. This element provides background information related to
each hazard, identifies hazard locations in the City, and provides policies
for decision-makers in their review of projects. Policies address ways to
minimize any social, economic, and environmental disruption, and
accelerate the City’s recovery following a disaster.
Related Plans and Programs
Critical relationships exist between the Public Health and Safety Element
and other General Plan Elements, especially the Land Use, Circulation,
and Public Services and Facilities Elements. The types and locations of
land uses identified in the Land Use Element are influenced and
regulated by the locations of natural and man-made hazards, while
emergency evacuation routes and locations of critical facilities can be
influenced by the goals and policies identified in the Circulation Element.
Additionally, land use changes can influence circulation and traffic in the
City, thereby influencing air quality. This element addresses goals and
policies to help reduce air quality problems in the City. The Public
Services and Facilities Element identifies safety services available to the
City of Highland General Plan                                               6-1

                                                HIGHLAND…A Great Place to Live
    City, such as police and fire, to aid in the response to potential disasters
    identified in this element.
    Federal, state, and local regulations, such as the California
    Environmental Quality Act (CEQA), the California Government Code,
    and the Highland Municipal Code regulate and/or influence land use and
    development in the City. Not only do these regulations help protect the
    health, safety, and welfare of Highland residents, visitors, and businesses
    by ensuring the proper analyses are conducted, sound construction
    practices are implemented, and uses are appropriately sited within the
    City, they can also help minimize the recovery time experienced after the
    occurrence of a disaster.
    GOALS AND POLICIES
    This section contains the goals and policies related to public health and
    safety in the City of Highland.
    Geology, Seismicity and Liquefaction
    Like most areas throughout Southern California, Highland is susceptible
    to seismic hazards. With the San Andreas fault zone running through the
    northern part of the City and the San Jacinto fault not far away,
    Highland understands the need to guide future development to ensure
    the health and safety of residents, businesses and visitors. This section
    describes the geologic setting of Highland, identifies the potential hazards
    associated with seismic events, and provides policies to address these
    hazards. In addition to these General Plan policies, the State regulates
    development in California through a variety of tools that reduce risk or
    mitigate potential hazards from earthquakes and other geologic hazards.
    The California Building Code (CBC), the Unreinforced Masonry Law, the
    Alquist-Priolo Earthquake Fault Zoning Act, the State of California
    Seismic Hazards Mapping Act and related maps and regulations govern
    development in potentially seismically active areas.
    Geology
    Highland and surrounding areas are part of a gently sloping alluvial plain
    bordered on the north by the San Bernardino Mountains, a traverse
    range that runs from east to west. The plain is predominantly composed
    of alluvium deposited by rivers and creeks that drain from the nearby
    mountains. The Santa Ana River and Mill Creek produced the major
    coalescing alluvial fans, while East Twin and City Creek created smaller
    fans. Figure 6.1 shows the generalized geology of Highland.
    Older alluvial deposits extend down from the foothills and cover
    approximately half of the City. The older alluvium consists of terrace
    deposits in major stream canyons, older conglomerates of alluvial fans
6-2                                        March 2006 | City of Highland General Plan

                                                                          6. PUBLIC HEALTH & SAFETY ELEMENT
downstream from canyon mouths, and deposits under mesas. Younger
alluvium including river channel deposits consisting of unconsolidated
gravel, sand, and silt underlies much of the City. These materials appear
near the surface of the Santa Ana River course in the eastern portion of
Highland. The younger alluvium is highly permeable and conducive to
groundwater recharge, particularly in streambeds.
Seismicity
The seismic setting of Highland and surrounding areas is dominated by
the San Andreas Fault. Several “active” and “potentially active” faults
of the San Andreas Fault are present within and nearby Highland.
North and south branches of the San Andreas Fault run through
Highland. The last major earthquake along the south branch of the San
Andreas was the 1857 Fort Tejon earthquake, estimated at a Richter
magnitude of 8.0 plus. The San Andreas Fault is capable of generating
an earthquake magnitude of up to 8.3 on the Richter scale. Located
approximately 4.5 miles southwest of Highland, the San Jacinto Fault
Zone has a maximum credible earthquake Richter magnitude of 8.5
and has the potential for significant ground shaking within the region.
City of Highland General Plan                                                                            6-3

                                          HIGHLAND…A Great Place to Live
    This page intentionally left blank.
6-4                                   March 2006 | City of Highland General Plan


                                          HIGHLAND…A Great Place to Live
    This page intentionally left blank.
6-6                                   March 2006 | City of Highland General Plan

                                                                              6. PUBLIC HEALTH & SAFETY ELEMENT
To protect residents from hazards associated with seismic activity, areas
of the San Andreas Fault have been designated as Earthquake Fault                 Alquist-Priolo Earthquake
Zones (formerly Special Studies Zones), as required by the Alquist-Priolo         Fault Zoning Act
                                                                                  The main purpose of the Alquist-Priolo
Earthquake Fault Zoning Act. Under this act, the State Geologist has              Earthquake Fault Zoning Act is to prevent the
established and mapped Earthquake Fault Zones, or regulatory zones                construction of buildings used for human
                                                                                  occupancy on the surface trace of active faults.
around the surface traces of active faults. The portion of the Alquist-Priolo     The Act focuses on the hazards associated with
Earthquake Fault Zone that runs through the eastern portion of Highland           surface fault rupture and does not address other
is depicted in Figure 6.2.                                                        earthquake hazards.
Prior to the approval of structures within the zone, a geologic study must
be undertaken to determine the precise location and necessary setbacks
from identified faults. The designation of the San Andreas Fault as part          Surface Trace
                                                                                  Commonly referred to as a “fault line,” a surface
of the Alquist-Priolo Earthquake Fault Zone prohibits the construction of         trace is the intersection of a fault plane with the
most types of habitable structures within 50 feet of the fault. In addition       surface of the Earth. It is sometimes, but not
to this statewide standard, Highland encourages more restrictive policies         always, visible at the surface because of
                                                                                  geomorphic evidence such as ridges, valleys, etc.
for special use buildings and activities such as schools, hospitals, and
emergency services.
Primary and secondary hazards related to potential seismic activity within        Ground shaking is the movement of the earth in
the San Andreas fault zone remain as a significant concern to all in              response to a seismic event.
Highland. Primary hazards include ground shaking, ground failure, and             Ground failure is the inability of the earth to
                                                                                  maintain strength. This hazard typically occurs
ground or surface rupture. In general, ground shaking and associated              because of ground shaking and is manifested as
structural failure contribute to the greatest number of earthquake-related        liquefaction and tilting or uneven land surfaces.
damage and deaths. Secondary hazards related to earthquakes include               Surface rupture occurs when movement on a
                                                                                  fault deep within the earth breaks through to the
liquefaction, rock falls, ground subsidence, dam overtopping and failure,         surface.
and seiches.
Highland has a high potential for surface rupturing and is susceptible to
ground shaking. Ground shaking is a particular risk in the hills to the
north of Highland. While a high potential exists for surface rupturing, the
threat of surface rupturing diminishes as development is distanced from
the San Andreas Fault Zone. Liquefaction and earthquake-related
landslides are also potential threats to the health, safety and welfare of
Highland residents.
In the event of a major earthquake, evacuation routes to and from
Highland may be severely disrupted due to potential physical road
damage, flooding from failure of the Seven Oaks Dam, and the
subsidence of the roadbed.
                                                                                  Unreinforced Masonry Law
                                                                                  The Unreinforced Masonry Law requires cities
Some structures in Highland, depending on the year of construction, may           and counties within Seismic Zone 4 to identify
not withstand a seismic event of the predicted maximum intensity                  hazardous unreinforced masonry buildings and
earthquake. A study has been completed to identify these structures and           consider local regulations to abate potentially
                                                                                  dangerous buildings through retrofitting or
an Unreinforced Masonry Building Mitigation Plan is under preparation.            demolition as outlined in the State Office of
Plans for reinforcement or removal of such structures are, at present,            Planning Research Guidelines.
uncertain.
City of Highland General Plan                                                                                                         6-7

                                               HIGHLAND…A Great Place to Live
    Liquefaction
    Liquefaction is a seismically induced form of ground failure, which has
    been a major cause of earthquake damage to roads, utility pipelines,
    buildings and other structures during past earthquakes in Southern
    California. Research and historical data indicate that loose, granular
    materials at depths of less than 50 feet with silt and clay contents of less
    than 30 percent saturated by relatively shallow groundwater table are
    most susceptible to liquefaction. These geological conditions are typical
    in parts of Southern California including Highland, and in valley regions
    and alluviated floodplains.
    The potential threat of liquefaction in Highland is a concern and should
    be considered in approvals for development on susceptible soils within
    the City. Liquefaction takes place when granular materials that are
    saturated by water lose strength and transform from a solid to a liquid
    state. In general, liquefaction occurs during significant earthquake
    activity. Structures located on soils such as silt or sand may experience
    significant damage during an earthquake due to the instability of
    structural foundations and the moving earth. Areas susceptible to high
    liquefaction are shown in Figure 6.3.
6-8                                        March 2006 | City of Highland General Plan


                                           HIGHLAND…A Great Place to Live
     This page intentionally left blank.
6-10                                   March 2006 | City of Highland General Plan


                                           HIGHLAND…A Great Place to Live
     This page intentionally left blank.
6-12                                   March 2006 | City of Highland General Plan

                                                                              6. PUBLIC HEALTH & SAFETY ELEMENT
GOAL 6.1
Minimize the risk to public health and safety and disruption to
social, economic, and environmental welfare resulting from
seismic and geologic activities.
                                                                                  Critical
                                                                                  Critical uses in potential liquefaction zones that
Policies                                                                          should be restricted or considered generally
                                                                                  unsuitable include nuclear related systems; major
     1) Ensure that all new development, including facilities required for        dams; explosives or hazardous materials
                                                                                  manufacturing, handling, or storage; and hospitals
          the provision of emergency services following a seismic or              and other emergency medical facilities.
          geologic event, adhere to proper construction design criteria.
                                                                                  Essential
     2) Enforce the requirements of the Alquist-Priolo Earthquake Fault           Essential uses in potential liquefaction zones
                                                                                  that should be restricted or considered
          Zoning Act and require the preparation of reports pursuant to the       generally unsuitable include police, fire
          Act as part of the development review process for all new               and communications systems; Emergency
                                                                                  Operations Centers (EOCs); electric power inter-
          projects.                                                               tie systems; power plants; small dams; utility
                                                                                  substations; sewage treatment plants; water-
     3) Continue efforts to upgrade seismically hazardous (unreinforced           works; local gas and electric distribution lines;
          masonry) buildings within the City, including compliance with the       aqueducts; major pipelines; major highways,
                                                                                  bridges, and tunnels; ambulance services;
          Unreinforced Masonry Building Mitigation Plan.                          public assembly sites with 300 or more capacity;
                                                                                  and schools.
     4) Continue to evaluate all new development within the Alquist-
                                                                                  High Occupancy
          Priolo Earthquake Fault Zone.                                           High occupancy uses in potential liquefaction
                                                                                  zones that should be restricted, or considered
     5) Continue to evaluate the compatibility of critical, essential, high       generally unsuitable, or provisionally suitable
          occupancy, and normal to low risk uses in areas of potential            include multi-family residential of 20 units or more;
                                                                                  major commercial development including large
          liquefaction during the review of all discretionary and ministerial     shopping centers; office buildings; large hotels;
          actions.                                                                health care clinics and convalescent homes;
                                                                                  heavy industry; and gas stations.
     6) Continue to review building and zoning codes to determine the             Normal to Low Risk
          need for specific standards for siting and seismic design criteria,     Normal to low risk uses in potential liquefaction
          especially for critical, essential, high occupancy and normal to        zones that should be restricted, or considered
                                                                                  generally unsuitable, or provisionally suitable
          low risk structures.                                                    include single-family and two-family residential;
                                                                                  multi-family of less than 20 units; small scale
     7) Review existing critical and emergency structures for any                 commercial; small hotels or motels; light industry;
          significant siting, design, or construction problems that would         and warehousing.
          make them vulnerable in an earthquake, and incorporate findings         Notes:
          of the review into emergency operations plans and long-term             1 Restricted uses are prohibited unless a site
                                                                                      investigation demonstrates hazards will be
          programs for upgrading or relocating vulnerable facilities.                 adequately mitigated and that alternative sites
                                                                                      are not available or feasible.
     8) Continue to monitor new building materials used for earthquake            2 Generally suitable uses are prohibited unless a
          stability and fire resistance and incorporate such materials into           site investigation demonstrates that a site is
                                                                                      suitable or that hazards will be adequately
          plan checks when applicable.                                                mitigated.
                                                                                  3 Provisionally suitable uses require a site
     9) Continue to enforce as part of the development review process                 investigation to confirm suitability and may
          site-specific analysis of soils and other conditions related to the         require some modification of location or facility
                                                                                      design.
          onsite impact of maximum credible seismic and geologic events.
City of Highland General Plan                                                                                                         6-13
                                                 HIGHLAND…A Great Place to Live
     Slope Instability
     General slope stability is determined by a number of factors such as the
     angle of the slope, vegetative cover, wildland fire, bedrock, soil, seismic
     activity, precipitation, groundwater, erosion, and human alterations to
     land such as hillside grading activities. Slopes may be in temporary
     equilibrium until one of the aforementioned factors is modified by natural
     or human activity resulting in an unstable condition and potential slope
     failure.
     Highland’s topography ranges in steepness from 0 percent slope (flat) to
     more than 15 percent slope. The majority of the City (71 percent) falling
     has a relatively flat category. Foothill slopes of the San Bernardino
     Mountains exist as a major feature in the eastern portion of Highland and
     its sphere of influence. These slopes have been subject to erosion,
     seismic and non-seismic-related landslides, mudslides, and slope collapse
     in the past. In addition, slopes left from mineral extraction activities exist
     in Highland. Without reclamation of mining activities, such slopes can
     become serious hazards.
     Landslides
     Landslides are fast, downward movement of earth and rock materials.
     Some landslides are caused by the infiltration of water into unstable
     material. Other landslides are earthquake-induced landslides consisting
     of rock falls and debris flow. Areas with the potential for earthquake-
     induced landslides generally occur in areas of previous landslide
     movement, or where topographic, geological, geotechnical, and
     subsurface water conditions indicate a potential for permanent ground
     displacement. Areas of landslide susceptibility are shown in Figure 6.3.
     Foothills crossed by drainage channels created from local mountain
     runoff to the north characterize areas in the northeastern portion of
     Highland. Drainage from the north has cut deep into the surrounding
     landform creating steep walls susceptible to landslides. Traces of the San
     Andreas Fault zone add to the threat of landslides due to ground shaking.
     High fire danger in the local mountain area further adds to the risk of
     landslide and mudslide. Slopes devoid of suitable vegetation after a
     natural fire event may not be able to maintain topsoil in times of heavy
     precipitation.
6-14                                         March 2006 | City of Highland General Plan

                                                                            6. PUBLIC HEALTH & SAFETY ELEMENT
GOAL 6.2
Protect people and property from hazards related to slope
instability.
Policies
     1) Continue to enforce hillside development guidelines for proposed
          development within or nearby slope instability areas of the City.
     2) Require appropriate structural design measures for proposed
          development within hillside or steep slope areas.
Flooding
According to the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA),
floods are the most common and widespread of all natural disasters,
except fires. The potential for flooding is a safety concern in Highland,
especially flooding from the failure of the Seven Oaks Dam caused by a
severe earthquake.
Flooding is both a local and regional matter. Flooding in areas adjacent
to Highland may contribute to potential flood hazards in Highland if
appropriate local and regional flood control measures are not properly
planned and implemented. The San Bernardino County Flood Control
District Comprehensive Storm Drain Plan outlines the necessary drainage
improvements.
The City of Highland is responsible for ensuring that new development is
protected from 100-year floods due to storm flows in accordance with
FEMA’s National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP). In January 1976, the
San Bernardino County Flood Control District authorized the
development of plans for a comprehensive system of storm drains that
encompass approximately 42 square miles of area including the City of
Highland. In addition, the District’s local Zone Advisory Committee
reviews and determines the establishment of local flood control
improvement priorities.
Drainage Areas
Highland receives a considerable amount of runoff from watershed areas
in the San Bernardino Mountains. This runoff flows along several
improved, semi-improved, and unimproved flood control channels and
creeks to the Santa Ana River and eventually to the sea. Eight major
tributaries traverse Highland from east to west including Oak Creek,
Plunge Creek, Elder Creek, Bledsoe Creek, Cook Creek, City Creek,
Sand Creek, and Upper Warm Creek. Sand Creek, Small Canyon Creek
and Bald Ridge Creek flow into Upper Warm Creek. The Santa Ana
River is located along the southern boundary of Highland east of the
City of Highland General Plan                                                                             6-15

                                                                                                 HIGHLAND…A Great Place to Live
                                                     San Bernardino International Airport. Figure 6.4 shows the location of
                                                     the Santa Ana River and major tributaries in Highland.
                                                     City Creek and Plunge Creek act as major natural drainage facilities for
                                                     Highland. The Plunge Creek watershed is generally located along
                                                     Greenspot Road and includes the tributaries of Little Mill Creek and
                                                     Fredalba Creek. The City Creek watershed is located along Highway
                                                     330 north of Highland north of the intersection of Highway 330 and
                                                     Highland Avenue. According to the East Valley Water District, flows
                                                     along the City Creek fluctuate from year to year between wet and dry
                                                     periods. An increase in the amount of paved or impervious surfaces can
                                                     exacerbate flooding by increasing the amount of storm water and runoff
                                                     conveyed through the City’s drainage system.
                                                     100-Year and 500-Year Floodplains
                                                     According to FEMA, parts of Highland fall within the 100-Year
 100-Year Floodplain                                 Floodplain and 500-year Floodplain. Figure 6.5 depicts flood hazard
 Land that is subject to flooding by a 100-year      areas within City boundaries, including the 100-Year and 500-Year
 flood or the flood elevation that has a one percent
 chance of being equaled or exceeded each year.      Floodplains. The 100-Year Floodplain is an area of land subject to
                                                     potential inundation by a storm whose intensity occurs on the average of
 500-Year Floodplain
                                                     once every 100 years. Communities subject to flooding can participate
 Land that has the potential to be flooded in a
 storm that has a 0.2 percent chance of occurring    in FEMA’s NFIP. The NFIP offers flood insurance to property owners
 every year.                                         in flood prone areas. In return for the coverage, the participating
                                                     community is required to regulate new development in hazardous areas.
                                                     As a member of the NFIP, the City of Highland has adopted standards
                                                     for flood protection in relationship to minimum building elevation, flood
                                                     proofing, and anchoring.
                                                     Dam Inundation
                                                     Highland is within the Seven Oaks Dam inundation area. Dam failure at
 Dam Inundation                                      full capacity is a potential hazard for most of Highland. Figure 6.5 shows
 The release of flood waters to downstream areas     the limits of flooded areas with failure of the Seven Oaks Dam. In such a
 caused by failure of a dam.
                                                     case, water could extend as far north as Pacific Street in some locations.
                                                     All southern exits from Highland could be impassable during a major
                                                     inundation event.
                                                     Seven Oaks Dam is a single purpose flood control project located just
                                                     outside Highland’s northeast boundary in an unincorporated area of San
                                                     Bernardino County. The dam is a major feature of the Santa Ana River
                                                     Mainstem Project designed to protect Orange, Riverside, and San
                                                     Bernardino Counties from flood. The dam is able to resist an earthquake
                                                     measuring 8.0 on the Richter scale with any point able to sustain a
                                                     displacement of four feet without causing any overall structural damage.
The Seven Oaks Dam, seen in the right portion        In the event of dam failure, the Big Bear Dam has the potential to flood
        of the picture above, is a potential flood   eastern portions of Highland. The Big Bear Dam is a water conservation
    inundation hazard for the City of Highland.
                                                     reservoir owned by the Big Bear Municipal Water District.
 6-16                                                                                        March 2006 | City of Highland General Plan


                                           HIGHLAND…A Great Place to Live
     This page intentionally left blank.
6-18                                   March 2006 | City of Highland General Plan


                                           HIGHLAND…A Great Place to Live
     This page intentionally left blank.
6-20                                   March 2006 | City of Highland General Plan

                                                                             6. PUBLIC HEALTH & SAFETY ELEMENT
Other facilities located near the San Andreas Earthquake Fault Zone
have the potential for damage and/or flooding during a seismic event.
These include the East Highlands Reservoir, a smaller reservoir located
within Bledsoe Gulch; the North Fork Canal; and the San Bernardino
Valley Municipal Water District (SBVMWD) transmission line.
GOAL 6.3                                                                         Critical
Reduce the risk to life and minimize physical injury, property                   Critical uses in the 100-year floodplain that should
                                                                                 be restricted include nuclear related systems;
damage, and public health hazards from the effects of a 100-year                 major dams; explosives or hazardous materials
storm or 500-year storm and associated flooding.                                 manufacturing, handling, or storage; and hospitals
                                                                                 and other emergency medical facilities.
Policies                                                                         Essential
                                                                                 Essential uses in 100-year floodplain that should
     1) Review all proposed development to ensure that structures                be restricted include police, fire and
                                                                                 communications systems; Emergency Operations
          designed for human occupancy are accessible in the event of a          Centers (EOCs); electric power inter-tie systems;
          100-year storm and are protected from the 100-year storm to a          power plants; small dams; utility substations;
          point one foot above the floodplain.                                   sewage treatment plants; water-works; local gas
                                                                                 and electric distribution lines; aqueducts; major
                                                                                 pipelines; major highways, bridges, and tunnels;
     2) Continue to evaluate the compatibility of critical, essential, high      ambulance services; public assembly sites with
          occupancy, and normal to low risk uses in areas within the             300 or more capacity; and schools.
          100-year floodplain during the review of all discretionary and         High Occupancy
          ministerial actions.                                                   High occupancy uses in 100-year floodplain that
                                                                                 should be considered generally incompatible
     3) Require a drainage study be completed by a qualified engineer            include multi-family residential of 20 units or more;
                                                                                 major commercial development including large
          prior to all proposed development to certify that the proposed         shopping centers; office buildings; large hotels;
          development will be adequately protected and that                      health care clinics and convalescent homes;
                                                                                 heavy industry; and gas stations.
          implementation of the development will not create new
          downstream flood hazards.                                              Normal to Low Risk
                                                                                 Normal to low risk uses in 100-year floodplain that
     4) Require all development in the City and its sphere of influence          should be considered generally incompatible
                                                                                 include single-family and two-family residential;
          comply with discharge permit requirements established by the           multi-family of less than 20 units; small scale
          Regional Water Quality Control Board.                                  commercial; small hotels or motels; light industry;
                                                                                 and warehousing.
     5) Encourage proposed development to balance or enhance the                 Notes:
          natural landscape features of a site in order to reduce the amount
                                                                                 1 Restricted refers to uses restricted unless
          of impervious surfaces built within the City.                              alternative sites are not available or feasible
                                                                                     and a site investigation demonstrates hazards
     6) Continue to work with the San Bernardino County Flood Control                will be adequately mitigated.
          District and the United States Army Corps of Engineers to receive      2 Generally incompatible refers to uses
          and implement updated flood control measures and information.              restricted unless a site investigation
                                                                                     demonstrates that a site is suitable or hazards
                                                                                     will be adequately mitigated.
City of Highland General Plan                                                                                                       6-21
                                                                                              HIGHLAND…A Great Place to Live
                                                      7) Utilize flood control methods that are consistent with Regional
                                                           Water Quality Control Board Policies and Best Management Practices
 Best Management Practice (BMP)                            (BMPs).
 A practice that has been defined or adopted as
 the most effective, practical, economical, and
 technologically sophisticated means to better    Hazardous Materials
 manage wastes and prevent or reduce
 contamination of groundwater.                    Highland has many businesses that manufacture, transport, store, use
 For additional information on BMPs, please refer and dispose of hazardous materials and waste. The unauthorized
 to the Water Resources section of the            handling of such materials is an issue of concern. The unhealthful effects
 Conservation and Open Space Element.
                                                  of certain chemicals and substances have led to extensive regulation
                                                  of hazardous materials. Nevertheless, there is still the potential for
                                                  hazardous materials to be released into the environment, whether as
                                                  a result of an accident, carelessness, or intentionally.
                                                  Regulations and responsible agencies
                                                  Many regulations at the local, state, and federal level govern the
                                                  management of hazardous materials and waste. Since these regulations
                                                  are constantly changing, individuals and businesses that use or transport
                                                  hazardous materials in the City should obtain information and applicable
                                                  permits from the appropriate jurisdictions. The U.S. Environmental
                                                  Protection Agency (EPA) and the County of San Bernardino manage the
                                                  inspection, regulation, and permitting of hazardous materials storage,
                                                  use, and transportation.
                                                  Several other jurisdictions are also involved in regulating the
                                                  transportation of hazardous waste and materials on roads and highways.
                                                  The U.S. Department of Transportation (DOT), in cooperation with the
                                                  U.S. EPA, establishes and enforces regulations for transportation of
                                                  hazardous materials and wastes such as containment and marking
                                                  hazardous materials. At the state level, the Department of Health
                                                  Services (DHS) tracks shipments of hazardous wastes, and the California
                                                  Highway Patrol (CHP) enforces transportation-related regulations by
                                                  periodic inspection of vehicles on the road and annual inspection of
                                                  transport vehicles to issue certification as required by the DHS.
                                                  The City of Highland may restrict or prohibit the transportation of
                                                  hazardous materials and waste on local roads by City ordinance, if
                                                  the ordinance meets certain conditions. The City may also establish
                                                  notification requirements or restrict hours of transport by imposing
                                                  curfews. Other actions the City may take to protect the public from
                                                  the risk of accident during the transport of hazardous materials include
                                                  maintaining road systems and improved information to hazardous
                                                  waste generators so they may contract with reputable transportation
                                                  companies. The local Fire Department is responsible for inspecting and
                                                  permitting the use, storage, and handling of hazardous materials.
6-22                                                                                      March 2006 | City of Highland General Plan

                                                                               6. PUBLIC HEALTH & SAFETY ELEMENT
The City of Highland recognizes its responsibility to provide information
and develop guidelines for the management of hazardous waste within
City limits. However, not all necessary facilities for processing,
transportation, and disposing of hazardous materials may be physically
located within City boundaries. The City recognizes its role as a
participant in the regional management of hazardous wastes, their
generation, transportation and disposal.
San Bernardino County has a County Hazardous Waste Management
Plan (HWMP). As further required by the State, all cities within the
County must also adopt a City Hazardous Waste Management Plan.
Ordinance No. 171, in accordance with state law and the HWMP,
regulates hazardous materials management in the City and requires
businesses that use hazardous materials or generate hazardous waste to
include an inventory of amounts and types of hazardous materials,
practices for management and reductions, and emergency response
procedures.
GOAL 6.4
Protect life and property from the potential short- and long-term
risks of transporting, storing, treating, and disposing of hazardous
materials and wastes in the City.
Policies
     1) Ensure compliance with current federal, state, and local
          regulations governing hazardous materials transport, storage,
          treatment, and disposal by working with appropriate agencies.
     2) Require that new facilities involved in the production, use,
          storage, transport or disposal of hazardous materials locate a safe
          distance from land uses that may be adversely impacted by such
          activities. Conversely, do not allow new sensitive facilities, such
          as schools, child-care centers, and senior centers, to be located
          near existing sites that use, store or generate hazardous materials.
     3) Identify City roadways along which hazardous materials are
          routinely transported. If essential facilities, such as schools,
          hospitals, child care centers or other facilities with special
          evacuation needs are located along these routes, identify
          emergency response plans that these facilities can implement in
          the event of an unauthorized release of hazardous materials in
          their area.
     4) Provide information to the public on regulations that address the
          transport, storage, treatment, and disposal of hazardous materials
          and wastes.
City of Highland General Plan                                                                                6-23
                                                                                              HIGHLAND…A Great Place to Live
                                                      5) Maintain a variety of effective citywide programs for household
                                                          hazardous waste collection.
                                                 Fire Hazards
                                                 Wildland and Urban Fires
                                                 Fire hazards threaten lives, property, and natural resources, and also
                                                 present a considerable risk to vegetation and wildlife habitat. Fires occur
                                                 in wildland, urban, and wildland-urban interface areas.
                                                 Urban fires usually result from sources within structures themselves and
                                                 are generally related to specific sites and structures. The availability of
                                                 fire fighting services is essential to minimizing loss. Effective fire
                                                 protection in urban areas is based upon several factors, such as the age
                                                 of structures, efficiency of circulation routes that ultimately affect
                                                 response times, and availability of water resources to combat fires. More
                                                 urbanized, developed areas of Highland generate general fire service
                                                 needs. Typical calls for service in these urban areas include structure,
                                                 vehicle, trash, and vacant lot field fires, as well as emergency medical
                                                 assistance and response to traffic accidents.
                                                 Wildland fires occur in large undeveloped areas and result from ignition
                                                 of grass, brush, and other flammable vegetative materials. Wildland fires
Wildland-urban interface area in north Highland.
                                                 can burn large areas destroying vegetation leading to increased
                                                 susceptibility to land or mudslides, and cause a great deal of damage to
                                                 both structures and valuable open space land. As indicated in Figure
                                                 6.6, the northeastern and eastern portions of the City, especially hillside
                                                 areas, are most susceptible to wildfires due to the location of fire-prone
                                                 vegetation, limited access for fire fighting equipment, steep topography,
                                                 and seasonal conditions that exacerbate fire hazard conditions.
                                                 Conditions contributing to the severity of wildland fires are primarily
                                                 related to weather, including temperature, humidity, and wind. Winds
                                                 commonly referred to as “Santa Ana” winds typically occur during the
                                                 fall months and pose a particularly significant hazard.
                                                 Wildland-urban interface fires occur in areas where urbanized
                                                 development meets wildland areas. Wind-driven wildland-urban
                                                 interface fires pose a significant threat to lives and have increased
                                                 potential to cause significant damage to structures.
                                                 In wildland and wildland-urban interface areas, taking the proper
                                                 precautions, such as the use of fire resistant building materials,
                                                 implementing fuel modification zones, and maintaining vegetation
                                                 clearance around structures can help protect developed lands from
                                                 fires, thereby reducing the potential loss of life and property. New
                                                 development in wildland and wildland-urban interface areas must be
                                                 consistent with the provisions of the municipal code.
6-24                                                                                      March 2006 | City of Highland General Plan

                                                                                  6. PUBLIC HEALTH & SAFETY ELEMENT
The California Department of Forestry and Fire Protection (CDF)
provides fire protection and emergency medical services to the City of                In October 2003, the worst fires in at least a
                                                                                      decade, as described by FEMA, raged across
Highland through a cooperative agreement. The CDF also provides                       Southern California causing widespread
wildland fire protection to the unincorporated state responsibility area              devastation and prompting the declaration of five
                                                                                      counties, including San Bernardino County, as
immediately adjacent to the eastern edge of the City. Additional                      federal disaster areas. The City of Highland
wildland fire protection services are provided by the U.S. Forest Service             remained relatively unharmed by this disaster,
on National Forest Lands adjacent to the City.                                        primarily as the result of aggressive firefighting,
                                                                                      and pre-fire preparation and planning. For
                                                                                      example, flood control channels and easements
Peak Water Demand and Supply                                                          at the eastern portion of the City acted as buffers
                                                                                      between the fire and homes.
The availability of water is critical to effective fire protection. The East
Valley Water District (EVWD) provides water services to the majority of
Highland. Other water districts serving Highland include the Arroyo
Verde Mutual Water District and the Eastwood Farms Community Water
Users Association. According to the CDF, the Insurance Services Office
(ISO) rated the fire protection system of Highland in July 2002 and gave
the EVWD a rating of Class I for their water delivery system. A Class I
rating is the ISO’s best possible classification.
                                                                                      See the Public Services and Facilities Element
                                                                                      for additional information on fire and water
The CDF has general water flow requirements of 1,500 gallons per                      services.
minute (gpm) for new residential development and 3,000 gpm for new
commercial development. Table 6-1 is a list of water flow requirements
by land use for fire protection.
                   Table 6-1: Water Flow Requirements for Fire Protection
                          Land Use                                      Fire Flow
       Agricultural/Open Space                            1,000 gpm for 2 hours
       Single-Family Residential                          1,500 gpm for 2 hours
       Multi-Family Residential/High Density              2,500 gpm for 2 hours
       Commercial/Industrial                              3,000 gpm for 3 hours
       Source: California Department of Forestry and Fire Protection, June 2004.
City of Highland General Plan                                                                                                            6-25

                                           HIGHLAND…A Great Place to Live
     This page intentionally left blank.
6-26                                   March 2006 | City of Highland General Plan


                                           HIGHLAND…A Great Place to Live
     This page intentionally left blank.
6-28                                   March 2006 | City of Highland General Plan

                                                                              6. PUBLIC HEALTH & SAFETY ELEMENT
GOAL 6.5
Protect life and property from wildland–urban interface fires.
Policies
     1) Review the vulnerability of new development in areas with the
          potential for wildland-urban interface fires and incorporate
          appropriate mitigation measures in the conditions of approval.
     2) Ensure the adequate protection of proposed and existing
          development in areas subject to wildland-urban interface fires
          and balance the need for fire prevention measures with the need
          to preserve significant biological resources.
     3) In areas designated as Fire Hazard Zone I and Fire Hazard Zone
          II, and as set forth in the Municipal Code, continue to incorporate
          additional fire safety standards, such as:
          •    Secondary or alternative access for all new development in a
               fire safety review area;
          •    Increased setbacks from fuel modification areas and fire
               hazard areas;
          •    Perimeter roads adjacent to development; or
          •    Maintained fuel modification zones.
     4) Prepare, develop, and distribute public information on the
          prevention of urban and wildland fires.
     5) Continue to update the fire department five-year plan to identify
          fire hazards and risks, and ensure present and future fire
          protection needs.
     6) Continue efforts to develop and maintain public fire prevention
          education and hazard abatement, in cooperation with other
          appropriate agencies.
     7) Enforce the Fire Sprinkler ordinance for all newly constructed
          buildings.
     8) Require all development to meet the emergency water service
          standards established by the East Valley Water District.
     9) Encourage the use of fire proof construction materials.
City of Highland General Plan                                                                               6-29

                                                 HIGHLAND…A Great Place to Live
     Emergency Preparedness
     The purpose of emergency preparedness is to protect the health, safety,
     and welfare of the general public during and after natural and human
     emergencies. These emergencies include flooding, high winds,
     earthquakes and other geologic hazards, hazardous material accidents,
     and wildfire. The City has adopted the City of Highland Emergency
     Plan. As discussed under Fire Hazards, the City also has a five-year plan
     that outlines fire hazards and risks, and present and future fire protection
     needs.
     The City participates in the Statewide Master Mutual Aid Agreement;
     Mutual Aid Agreements with the City of San Bernardino and the San
     Bernardino County Sheriff’s Department; and automatic aid agreements
     with the cites of Redlands and Yucaipa, the CDF, and the U.S. Forest
     Service. The American Red Cross also provides a wide range of
     emergency response support services to Highland ranging from single
     residential fire to community-wide disaster relief. The Red Cross has an
     area disaster action team coordinator who will respond to emergencies
     within an hour of notification to estimate the damage and the need for
     further relief. The Red Cross works closely with the CDF and the school
     districts to provide damage assessment, shelter for families left homeless
     by a disaster and referral services to affected households that need
     further assistance from state and federal agencies or the Red Cross. Red
     Cross personnel also assist with evacuations, identifying missing persons,
     and reuniting displaced families.
     Evacuation Routes
     The current San Bernardino County General Plan identifies potential
     evacuation routes in and around Highland. Major evacuation routes
     within the San Bernardino Valley include, but are not limited to,
     Interstate 10, 15 and 215; State Highway 30, 31, 60, 66, and 71; and
     numerous major and secondary highways. Since earthquakes, floods,
     fires, or other disasters may render some or portions of these routes
     impassible, specific evacuation routes may need to be designated during
     an emergency depending on the nature and location of the particular
     disaster.
6-30                                        March 2006 | City of Highland General Plan

                                                                           6. PUBLIC HEALTH & SAFETY ELEMENT
GOAL 6.6
Maintain effective emergency preparedness and response
programs and coordinate with appropriate public agencies and
neighboring jurisdictions to develop a regional system to respond
to daily emergencies and major catastrophes.
Policies
     1) Maintain the City’s emergency plan including inventory of all
          local emergency resources.
     2) Continue to support area wide mutual aid agreements and
          communication links with San Bernardino County authorities and
          other participating jurisdictions.
     3) Evaluate the adequacy of access routes to and from hazard areas
          relative to the degree of development or use (e.g., road width,
          road type, length of dead-end roads, etc.).
     4) Establish a working relationship with local amateur radio clubs
          and secure their voluntary participation in disaster recovery
          efforts.
     5) Ensure adequate provision of public information to residents and
          businesses on actions to minimize damage and facilitate recovery
          from a natural disaster.
Airport Land Use Compatibility and Safety
The importance of air transportation has grown over the years due to the
timesaving it provides in the movement of people and freight. It has
opened up many areas that were not economically feasible when served            For additional Airport Land Use Compatibility
                                                                                policies, please see the Airport Element.
by other modes of transportation and provides businesses better access
                                                                                For additional Noise policies, please refer to the
to labor supply, natural resources, and product market. In addition to          Noise Element.
the increased demand for air transportation by businesses, the rapid
population increase expected for the Inland Empire will also likely
require the expansion of existing aviation facilities and the addition of
new facilities.
The closest airports to Highland are the Rialto Municipal Airport,
Redlands Municipal Airport, and the San Bernardino International
Airport. The Rialto Municipal Airport to the west of the City and the
Redlands Municipal Airport to the southeast of the City are general
aviation airports. The San Bernardino International Airport, located
just outside the City’s southern boundary, has the capacity to provide
regional air traffic for domestic and international service, both            The San Bernardino International Airport
commercial and cargo, along with the necessary support facilities            lies south of the City of Highland.
City of Highland General Plan                                                                                                      6-31

                                                 HIGHLAND…A Great Place to Live
     for major and smaller airlines. In addition, the Ontario International
     Airport, located approximately 30 miles west of Highland, serves as the
     nearest commercial airport providing air carrier and air cargo operations.
     Evolving air transportation services in the City of San Bernardino can
     potentially complement economic growth in Highland and create
     competitive advantages for its businesses. However, the nature of airport
     operations and their accompanying noise and safety hazards require
     careful land use planning on adjacent lands to ensure the safety of
     residents and passengers alike, and to protect Highland businesses and
     property owners to the greatest extent possible from the potential hazards
     that could be created by operations from the San Bernardino
     International Airport, especially by arriving and departing flights that fly
     over the southern portion of Highland. Figure 6.7 shows the Airport
     Influence Area of the San Bernardino International Airport. Additionally,
     a small portion of Highland lies within an area designated as an Area of
     Special Compatibility Concern on the Redlands Municipal Airport Land
     Use Compatibility Plan (1997).
     GOAL 6.7
     Reduce risk to people and property by limiting the type and
     intensity of development within identified aircraft potential zones
     and ensure adequate public notification of aircraft activities to
     residents in overflight areas.
     Policies
          1) Require the review of all new development in proximity to the
              San Bernardino International Airport for compliance with Federal
              Aviation Administration (FAA) requirements and the California
              Airport Land Use Planning Handbook with adopted plans.
          2) Evaluate the compatibility of airport uses, activities, and
              operations with all new development in proximity to the San
              Bernardino International Airport prior to approval and protect
              sensitive uses, such as residences, schools, hospitals, and libraries
              from overflight areas.
          3) Require letters of advisement incorporating information in
              Conditions, Covenants and Restrictions (CCRs) or Real Estate
              Disclosures, which report where projects occur within the
              projected 65 Community Noise Equivalent (CNEL) and
              established Airport Influence Areas (AIA).
          4) Encourage notification requirements and establishment of a
              buyer awareness program for areas of Highland within
              established Areas of Special Compatibility Concern.
6-32                                        March 2006 | City of Highland General Plan

                                                                           6. PUBLIC HEALTH & SAFETY ELEMENT
     5) Actively participate in San Bernardino International Airport
          planning efforts to: encourage economic advantages for the City;
          discourage intensification of negative impacts on Highland;
          ensure adequate mitigation of impacts and preservation of land
          values; and encourage aircraft arrivals and departures southwest
          of the Airport.
City of Highland General Plan                                                                            6-33
                                           HIGHLAND…A Great Place to Live
     This page intentionally left blank.
6-34                                   March 2006 | City of Highland General Plan


                                           HIGHLAND…A Great Place to Live
     This page intentionally left blank.
6-36                                   March 2006 | City of Highland General Plan

                                                                             6. PUBLIC HEALTH & SAFETY ELEMENT
Air Quality
Although air quality in Southern California continues to improve,
Southern California still experiences the worst air quality in the nation,
requiring continued diligence to meet air quality standards. Continuing
the progress toward clean air is a challenging task, not only to recognize
and understand complex interactions between emissions and resulting air
quality, but also to pursue the best possible set of strategies to improve
air quality while maintaining a healthy economy.
South Coast Air Basin
The City of Highland is located within the South Coast Air Basin. The
Basin is a coastal plain with connecting broad valleys and low hills that
extend across Los Angeles and Orange Counties as well as the western
portions of Riverside and San Bernardino Counties. The Pacific Ocean
forms the southwestern border and high mountains surround the rest of
the Basin.
Climate and the amount of pollutants emitted into the air are the two
primary factors influencing Highland’s air quality. Air quality in the
Highland area is the product of several factors including climate, location,
topography, and emissions from automobile and truck traffic.
Additionally, particulate emissions from building, mining and industrial
activity also influence air quality. The production of ozone, the main
constituent of photochemical smog, is Highland’s chief air quality
problem. Motor vehicle emissions accumulated throughout the Basin
and transported to the Highland area are the main source of ozone.
The South Coast Air Quality Management District (SCAQMD) is the air
pollution control agency that provides direction regarding the
management of air quality within the region, which includes Orange
County and the urban portions of Los Angeles, Riverside, and San
Bernardino County. SCAQMD is responsible for controlling air pollution
mainly from stationary sources, such as large power plants, refineries, the
corner gas station, and some consumer products. SCAQMD develops
and adopts an Air Quality Management Plan in compliance with federal
and state clean air standards.
Climate
The climate of the Highland area is typical of Southern California’s
Mediterranean climate with hot, dry summers and mild, moist winters.
This pattern is influenced by the semi-permanent high-pressure zone of
the eastern Pacific, which is responsible for deflecting storms away from
the Basin and allowing for the mild climate of the region. This
climatological pattern is rarely interrupted, although some periods of
City of Highland General Plan                                                                              6-37

                                                  HIGHLAND…A Great Place to Live
     extremely hot weather, winter storms, or Santa Ana wind conditions
     occur.
     Winds are an important climatic feature of air quality. The SCAQMD
     notes that the low average wind speeds of the Basin have limited
     effectiveness in dispersing accumulated air pollutants. Instead, vertical
     wind currents induced by heating of the mountain slopes carry much of
     the pollution through mountain passes or upward and over Basin
     mountains during the spring and early summer months. From late
     summer through winter, however, winds originating in the mountains
     occur too late in the day to fully disperse pollutants, thereby allowing
     them to accumulate within the Basin for one or more days.
     Nighttime winds emanating from the southeast are generally mild and
     cool. Daytime winds originate off-coast and carry with them significant
     amounts of industrial and automobile air pollutants from the densely
     urbanized western portion of the Basin to the eastern portion of the
     Basin.
     Inversions are a critical climatic factor that can significantly impede the
     vertical dispersion of air pollutants. Inversion layers can create an
     effective “lid” over the Basin, whereby temperature increases with
     altitude and obstruct vertical air movement. Air pollutants can no longer
     rise through the inversion, thereby concentrating within the Basin.
     Inversion layers generally dissipate during the day, once the ground
     temperature warms up to the air temperature.
     Air Quality Plan
     Highland has participated in the preparation of a Regional Air Quality
     Plan for San Bernardino County and its cities within the South Coast Air
     Basin. The plan includes an Air Quality Element with goals and policies
     that would become part of each jurisdiction general plan as agreed upon
     by the participants through consensus. The plan also has a menu of
     actions that can be evaluated by each jurisdiction, tailored to its specific
     needs, and incorporated into its own implementation plan. The portions
     of the Regional Air Quality Plan applicable to Highland’s General Plan
     have been integrated into the goals and policies of this element.
6-38                                         March 2006 | City of Highland General Plan

                                                                            6. PUBLIC HEALTH & SAFETY ELEMENT
GOAL 6.8
Reduce mobile and stationary source air pollutant emissions
through cooperation and endorsement of the San Bernardino
Regional Air Quality Plan and support of feasible techniques,
incentives, and regulatory measures to achieve significant air
quality improvements and any necessary air quality related
lifestyle and economic changes while sustaining continued
economic growth.
Policies
     1) Ensure consistency of Federal, State, and County legislation with
          Highland’s Air Quality goal and policies.                            See the Open Space and Conservation
                                                                               Element for additional policies on Air Quality.
     2) Participate in formulating regional policies and solutions to air
          quality problems established by the San Bernardino County
          Regional Air Quality Plan.
     3) Create and integrate innovative local emissions reducing pilot
          programs into city plans for future government facilities and
          equipment.
     4) Support the development and use of alternative fuel sources for
          transportation-related activities to reduce local government
          energy demand.
     5) Participate in the establishment of public private partnerships for
          the provision of innovative public and private transportation
          services and systems where the enhancement of the local and
          regional air quality is a major goal.
     6) Cooperate with regional transit agencies in the continued
          development of diverse and efficiently operated transportation
          systems that generate the minimum feasible pollutants.
     7) Support current incentive programs that recognize and reward
          developments using new and innovative emission reduction
          techniques such as innovative efficient window glazing, wall
          insulation, and ventilation systems; efficient air conditioning,
          heating, and appliances; use of passive solar design, and solar
          heating systems; use of energy cogeneration and/or use of waste
          energy; and landscape techniques that reduce water consumption
          and provide passive solar benefits.
City of Highland General Plan                                                                                                  6-39

                                             HIGHLAND…A Great Place to Live
     8) Develop transportation demand management programs and
         incentives to reduce home to work vehicle trips. Examples of
         programs and incentives include:
         •   Employee ride share and transit incentives in public agencies.
         •   Employee ride share and transit incentives for employers with
             more than 25 employees at a single location.
         •   Working with private agencies in the implementation of
             teleconferencing and telecommuting for employers with more
             than 25 employees at a single location.
         •   Working with SANBAG to develop a public/private
             telecommunications center in San Bernardino County.
     9) Reduce work trips in the City and peak period auto travel by
         enforcing the City’s Transportation Demand Ordinance;
         supporting current staggered, flexible, and compressed work
         schedules in public agencies; working with private agencies to
         encourage work schedule flexibility programs for employers with
         more than 25 employees in a single location; educating City
         residents on the advantages of ride sharing and public transit;
         and encouraging the development of job-intensive uses within
         designated employment centers for local residents.
     10) Reduce vehicle emissions by supporting the design and
         implementation of the Citywide system of bikeways and
         pedestrian trails as a non-polluting circulation alternative by
         requiring as part of the development review process the
         installation of planned bicycle routes, paths, and lanes where
         designated; and the construction of necessary bicycle parking
         and storage areas within convenient commercial, employment
         and recreation activity areas.
     11) Reduce the number of vehicles driven to work by requiring as
         part of the development review process that preferential parking
         be included in parking lot designs to high occupancy vehicles,
         vanpools, and shuttle services, if applicable.
     12) Continue to encourage the integration of air quality planning with
         land use and transportation planning in the design, review, and
         development processes by:
         •   Ensuring that site designs facilitate rather than discourage
             pedestrian movement between commercial development and
             residential or office uses (e.g., locate buildings adjacent to the
             street with parking behind such that pedestrians need not
             walk through parking lots to reach their destination; provide
             clear pedestrian paths and connections, etc.).
6-40                                    March 2006 | City of Highland General Plan

                                                                                6. PUBLIC HEALTH & SAFETY ELEMENT
          •   Supporting the mixed use overlay in the zoning ordinance as
              a means to enhance pedestrian movement throughout the
              City.
          •   Providing for increased intensity of development in
              designated locations along existing and proposed transit
              corridors.
          •   Supporting location and operational standards in the
              development code for ancillary employee services, including
              but not limited to child care, restaurants, banking facilities,
              convenience markets, at major employment centers for the
              purpose of reducing midday vehicle trips.
          •   Continuing to develop interconnected traffic signal control
              system in all new projects, roadway improvements. Move
              forward with programs to retrofit existing signals on all streets
              where traffic volume and delay time is significant.
          •   Enforcing parking lot design guidelines that encourage
              reciprocal parking designs and/or agreements between
              adjacent developments, provide for the consolidation of
              driveways along major commercial corridors such as Base
              Line, and require parking areas be efficiently designed so as
              to minimize internal circulation conflicts.
          •   Integrating, where appropriate and feasible, traffic
              improvements (e.g., dedicated turn lanes and pockets, bus
              turnouts and shelters, restripe traffic lands for optimal traffic
              flow) into capital improvement projects that improve the
              efficiency of transportation systems.
          •   Continuing to ensure that all new development applications
              include an air quality improvement summary per SCAQMD
              and SCAG Air Quality Handbook Guidelines, which describe
              the general methods used in development design to reduce
              air emissions.
     13) Regulate the location and design of sensitive receptors (schools,
          day care facilities, hospitals and the like) from excessive and
          hazardous emissions to air pollution, and continue to support site
          plans that separate and/or buffer residential and sensitive
          receptors from freeways, arterials, point sources, and hazardous
          material locations.
     14) Reduce particulate emissions from construction sites, grading
          activities, temporary roads and parking lots, and agricultural
          operations by enforcing requirements that minimize fugitive dust.
     15) Enforce compliance of new development with the Tree
          Preservation Ordinance.
City of Highland General Plan                                                                                 6-41

                                           HIGHLAND…A Great Place to Live
     16) Reduce particulate and stationary emissions attributed to the
         removal, transportation and processing of mineral resources by
         enforcing required permits and physical barrier requirements that
         minimize the effects of dust from day-to-day operations of
         mineral extraction, transportation, and processing facilities.
6-42                                   March 2006 | City of Highland General Plan

7. Noise Elemen
This page intentionally left blank
Chapter 7. Noise
INTRODUCTION
Purpose and Function
T
        he everyday activities of residents, visitors and workers have the
        potential to generate a variety of noise sources in the City of
        Highland. The San Bernardino International Airport (SBIA) is a
public, full-service airport designed to serve the western United States
with commercial and cargo air traffic. The SBIA contains and is
surrounded by multiple commercial and industrial properties, all of which
have the potential to generate noise through their business activities.
Highland also generates and draws a significant level of passenger and
truck traffic through the City along the major roadways and highways,
creating mobile sources of noise that can impact noise-sensitive land uses
such as homes and schools.
The Noise Element provides the goals and strategies necessary to ensure
an appropriately quiet environment for the residents, employees and
visitors in Highland. Since the regulation of transportation noise sources
such as roadway and aircraft primarily fall under either state or federal
jurisdiction, local land use and development planning decisions are
generally made in terms of limiting locations or volumes of such sources,
of avoiding development in noise impact zones or in shielding impacted
receiver sites.
As development continues, the City shall carefully review proposals to
ensure that land uses incompatible with the noise environment are
avoided. This Element identifies noise issues within the City and
provides goals and policies aimed at minimizing noise conflicts and
furthering the public health, safety and welfare.
City of Highland General Plan                                              7-1
                                                  HIGHLAND…A Great Place to Live
    Element Components
    The Noise Element has been organized into three sections:
        •    Introduction. This section states the purpose of the Element,
             provides a brief introduction to the topic of noise and discusses
             other related plans and programs that affect the noise
             environment of Highland.
        •    Noise Assessment and Modeling. This section presents the findings
             and standards of the General Plan noise analysis on the buildout
             of the General Plan Land Use Plan.
        •    Goals and Policies. This section provides a discussion of noise
             issues that apply to one area of the City or apply Citywide. Each
             of the issue discussions is followed by a series of goals and
             policies.
    Understanding Noise
    The principal characteristics of sound are its loudness (amplitude) and
    frequency (pitch). The frequency of a sound is significant because the
    human ear is not equally sensitive to all frequencies. At low frequencies,
    characterized as a rumble or roar, the ear is not very sensitive while at
    higher frequencies, characterized as a screech or a whine, the ear is most
    sensitive. To reflect this varying sensitivity, an A-weighted decibel scale
    (dBA) is typically used to measure the perceived loudness of a sound.
    Noise refers to sound pressure variations audible to the ear. The
    audibility of a sound depends on the amplitude and frequency of the
    sound and the individual’s capability to hear the sound. Whether the
    sound is judged as noise depends largely on the listener’s current activity
    and attitude toward the sound source, as well as the amplitude and
    frequency of the sound. To obtain convenient measurements and
    sensitivities at extremely low and high sound pressures, sound is
    measured in units of the decibel (dB). A listener often judges an increase
    in sound levels of 10 dBA as a doubling of sound. Examples of the
    decibel level of various noise sources are shown in Figure 7.1.
7-2                                          March 2006 | City of Highland General Plan

                                                                                                        7. NOISE ELEMENT
Figure 7.1: Noise Levels of Familiar Sources
                        dBA
                                                                     Noise Terminology
                         145                                         dB (Decibel) – The unit of measure that denotes the
  Physically Painful     140     Sonic Boom                          ratio between two quantities that are proportional to
   Extremely Loud        135                                         power; the number of decibels corresponding to the
                                                                     ratio of the two amounts of power is based on a
                         130                                         logarithmic scale.
                         125     Jet Takeoff at 200 feet
                                                                     dBA (A-weighted decibel) – The A-weighted
     Discomforting       120     Oxygen Torch                        decibel scale discriminates against upper and lower
                         115     Dance Club                          frequencies in a manner approximating the sensitivity
                         110     Motorcycle at 15 feet (unmuffled)   of the human ear. The scale ranges from zero for
                                                                     the least perceptible sound to about 130 for the pain
                         105     Power Mower at 3 feet               level.
        Very Loud        100     Newspaper Press
                                                                     CNEL (Community Noise Equivalent Level) – The
                          95     Freight Train at 50 feet            average equivalent A-weighted sound level during a
                          90     Food Blender                        24-hour day, obtained after the addition of five
                          85     Electric Mixer, Alarm Clock         decibels to sound levels in the evening from 7:00
                                                                     p.m. to 10:00 p.m. and after the addition of 10
                          80     Heavy Truck at 50 feet
                                                                     decibels to sound levels in the night from 10:00 p.m.
                          75     Busy Street at 50 feet              to 7:00 a.m. CNEL and Ldn are the metrics used in
                          70     Average Traffic at 100 feet,        this document to describe annoyance due to noise
                                                                     and to establish land use planning criteria for noise.
              Loud        65
                          60     Dishwasher at 10 feet               L50 – The A-weighted sound level that is exceeded
                                                                     50 percent of the sample time. Alternatively, the
                          55     Normal Conversation at 5 feet
                                                                     A-weighted sound level that is exceeded 30 minutes
                          50     Typical Daytime Suburban Background in a 60-minute period (similarly, L10, L25, etc.).
                          45     Refrigerator                        These values are typically used to demonstrate
                                                                     compliance with noise restrictions included in the
                          40     Bird Calls
                                                                     City noise ordinance.
                          35     Library
                                                                     Leq (Equivalent Energy Level) – The average
                          30
                                                                     acoustic energy content of noise during the time it
              Quiet       25                                         lasts. The Leq of a time-varying noise and that of a
                          20     Motion Picture Studio               steady noise are the same if they deliver the same
                          15                                         acoustic energy to the ear during exposure, no
                                                                     matter what time of day they occur.
                          10     Leaves Rustling
                          5                                          Ldn (Day-Night Average Level) – The average
                                                                     equivalent A-weighted sound level during a 24-hour
                          0                                          day, obtained after the addition of 10 decibels to
                                                                     sound levels in the night from 10:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m.
                                                                     Note: CNEL and Ldn represent daily levels of noise
                                                                     exposure averaged on an annual or daily basis, while
Ranges and Effects of Noise                                          Leq represents the equivalent energy noise exposure
                                                                     for a shorter time period, typically one hour. CNEL
                                                                     and Ldn are the metrics used in this document to
The most common sounds vary between 40 dBA (very quiet) and          describe annoyance due to noise and to establish
100 dBA (very loud). Normal conversation at three feet is roughly    land use planning criteria for noise.
at 60 dBA, while loud engine noises equate to 110 dBA, which can     Noise Contours – Lines drawn around a noise
cause serious discomfort. Physical health, psychological well-being, source indicating equal levels of noise exposure.
social cohesion, property values and economic productivity can all
be affected by excessive amounts of noise.
The effects of noise on people can be grouped into three general
categories: subjective effects, such as annoyance and nuisance;
interference with activities such as conversation and sleep; and
physiological effects, for example, a startle or hearing loss.
City of Highland General Plan                                                                                               7-3

                                                 HIGHLAND…A Great Place to Live
    Adverse reactions to noise generally increase with an increase in the
    difference between background or ambient noise and the noise
    generated from a particularly intrusive source such as a barking dog,
    traffic, aircraft or industrial operations. In most situations, noise control
    measures must reduce noise by 5 to 10 dBA in order to effectively lower
    the perceived sound. Therefore, loud, short duration noises from barking
    dogs and low-flying aircraft generally have little impact upon the
    Community Noise Equivalent Level (CNEL) levels of an area, due to
    the CNEL being a 24-hour weighted average of noise levels.
    Managing the Noise Environment
    There are a variety of strategies available for managing the City’s noise
    environment and preserving those qualities of peace and quiet that are
    essential and highly valued community assets. Land use planning,
    transportation planning, project design mitigation, simple and
    sophisticated technical fixes, and acoustical barriers can be applied to
    address community noise compatibility issues.
    In areas subject to significant or potentially significant noise impacts,
    site planning and design standards are geared to provide noise impact
    mitigation. Other mitigation measures include the use of buffer zones
    consisting of earthen berms, walls and landscaping between sensitive
    land uses and roadways and other noise sources. In addition, site
    planning and building orientation can provide shielding of outdoor living
    spaces and orient operable windows away from roadways. Effective
    acoustical materials can also be incorporated into building windows and
    walls that adequately reduce outdoor noise.
    Sensitive Noise Receptors
    A series of land uses have been deemed “noise-sensitive” by the State
    of California. These land uses require a serene environment as part of
    the overall facility or residential experience. Many of these facilities
    depend on low levels of sound to promote the well being of the
    occupants. Land uses deemed noise-sensitive by the State of California
    include residences, schools, hospitals, rest homes, long-term care and
    mental care facilities. Highland considers residential dwellings and
    institutional uses such as hospitals, convalescent homes and churches to
    be sensitive noise receptors. Activities conducted in proximity to these
    facilities must consider the noise output and ensure that they don’t create
    unacceptable noise levels that may unduly affect the noise-sensitive uses.
    Relatively noise insensitive land uses include retail and office
    developments. Land uses that are the least impacted by noise include
    industrial, manufacturing, utilities, agriculture, natural open space,
    undeveloped land, parking lots, rifle ranges, warehousing, liquid and
    solid waste facilities, salvage yards and transit terminals.
7-4                                          March 2006 | City of Highland General Plan

                                                                                     7. NOISE ELEMENT
Related Plans and Program
Other Elements
The Noise Element is most closely related to the Land Use and Airport
Elements. The Land Use Element identifies land use patterns and
policies to address land use compatibility. The Airport Element addresses
comprehensive issues related to the San Bernardino International and
Redlands Municipal Airports, including noise.
Municipal Code
The City of Highland Municipal Code sets forth the City’s standards,
guidelines and procedures concerning the regulation of noise use.
Specifically, the Code includes Title 8, Health and Safety, which includes
a chapter on noise control, and Title 16, Land Use and Development.
Title 8 directly regulates noise while Title 16 lays out land use standards
that indirectly regulate noise-generating and sensitive land uses. These
regulations are intended to implement the goals, objectives and policies
of the General Plan; protect property values and the health and general
well being of the public; and ensure that any negative effects of noise are
minimized or completely avoided.
The City categorizes land uses into designated noise zones to assign
appropriate interior and exterior noise standards. The appropriate
interior and exterior noise standards are identified in Tables 7.1 and 7.2,
respectively.
                    Table 7.1: City of Highland Interior Noise Standards
                              Type of Land Use                            CNEL (dBA)
          Residential                                                          45
          Educational/churches, other institutional uses                       45
          General offices                                                      50
          Retail stores, restaurants                                           55
          Manufacturing, warehousing                                           65
          Agricultural                                                         55
          Sand and gravel operations                                           75
          Source: Chapter 8.50, Noise Control, City of Highland Municipal Code.
City of Highland General Plan                                                                      7-5

                                                                                                        HIGHLAND…A Great Place to Live
                                                                     Table 7.2: City of Highland Exterior Noise Standards
                                                              Type of Land Use                       Time Interval           CNEL (dBA)
                                                                                                10:00 p.m. – 7:00 a.m.          55
                                                       Residential
                                                                                                7:00 a.m. – 10:00 p.m.          60
                                                                                                10:00 p.m. – 7:00 a.m.          60
                                                       Agricultural/Equestrian
                                                                                                7:00 a.m. – 10:00 p.m.          65
                                                                                                10:00 p.m. – 7:00 a.m.          65
                                                       Commercial
                                                                                                7:00 a.m. – 10:00 p.m.          70
                                                       Manufacturing or Industrial                     Any Time                 75
                                                       Open Space                                      Any Time                 75
                                                       Source: Chapter 8.50, Noise Control, City of Highland Municipal Code.
                                                San Bernardino International Airport Plans
                                                The San Bernardino International Airport (SBD), located just outside
                                                the City’s southern boundary, has the capacity to provide regional air
  For a more detailed discussion of issues and  traffic for domestic and international service, both commercial and cargo,
  policies related to the San Bernardino
  International Airport and Redlands Municipal  along with the necessary support facilities for major and smaller airlines.
  Airport, please refer to the Airport Element. When adopted, the Airport Master Plan should contain standards and
                                                guidelines on the appropriate range and design of land uses within areas
                                                impacted by noise emanating from airport operations.
                                                Redlands Municipal Airport Land Use
                                                Compatibility Plan
                                                Redlands Municipal Airport (RMA) is a General Aviation facility located
                                                south of Highland near the Santa Ana Wash. The Redlands Municipal
                                                Airport Land Use Compatibility Plan (LUCP) establishes procedures and
                                                criteria by which the City of Redlands can address, evaluate and review
                                                airport compatibility issues in the vicinity of the Redlands Municipal
                                                Airport. The (LUCP) also serves to alert the City of Highland to the
                                                potential effects of air traffic from the Redlands Municipal Airport on
                                                land uses in southern Highland.
                                                Federal Regulations
                                                State routes and freeways that run through the City are subject to federal
                                                funding and, as such, are under the purview of the Federal Highway
                                                Administration (FHWA). The FHWA has developed noise standards that
                                                are typically used for federally funded roadway projects or projects that
                                                require either federal or Caltrans review. The Environmental Protection
                                                Agency is charged with the regulation of railroad noise under the Noise
                                                Control Act, which is enforced by the Federal Railroad Administration.
7-6                                                                                              March 2006 | City of Highland General Plan

                                                                             7. NOISE ELEMENT
California Department of Health Services
The California Department of Health Services (DHS) Office of Noise
Control studied the correlation of noise levels and their effects on various
land uses. As a result, the DHS established four categories for judging
the severity of noise intrusion on specified land uses. Table 7.3 presents
a land use compatibility chart for community noise prepared by the
California Office of Noise Control to demonstrate land use compatibility.
Whereas the interior and exterior noise standards presented in Tables 7.1
and 7.2 provides limits on noise exposure for land uses from those
sources of noise under the jurisdiction of the City, Table 7.3 provides
planning guidelines for the review and approval of development
applications in terms of the compatibility of land uses with the existing
and future noise environment.
City of Highland General Plan                                                              7-7
                                                                                                    HIGHLAND…A Great Place to Live
                                              Table 7.3: Community Noise and Land Use Compatibility
                                                                              Community Noise Exposure Level Ldn or CNEL, dBA
                             Land Uses Category                               55        60           65          70          75        80
    Residential-Low Density Single Family Dwellings, Duplexes and
    Mobile Homes
    Residential Multi-Family Dwellings
    Transient Lodging – Motels, Hotels
    Schools, Libraries, Churches, Hospitals, Nursing Homes
    Auditoriums, Concert Halls, Amphitheaters
    Sports Arena, Outdoor Spectator Sports
    Playgrounds, Neighborhood Parks
    Golf Courses, Riding Stables, Water Recreation, Cemeteries
    Commercial and Office Buildings
    Industrial, Manufacturing, Utilities, Agriculture
    Explanatory Notes
             Normally Acceptable:                                                Normally Unacceptable:
             Specified land use is satisfactory based upon the                   New construction or development should generally be
             assumption that any buildings involved are of normal                discouraged. If new construction or development does
             conventional construction without any special noise                 proceed, a detailed analysis of the noise reduction
             insulation requirements.                                            requirements must be made with needed noise insulation
                                                                                 features included in the design. Outdoor areas must be
                                                                                 shielded.
             Conditionally Acceptable:                                           Clearly Unacceptable:
             New construction or development should be undertaken                New construction or development should generally not be
             only after a detailed analysis of the noise reduction               undertaken. Construction cost to make the indoor
             requirements is made and needed noise insulation                    environment acceptable would be prohibitive and the
             features included in the design. Conventional                       outdoor environment would not be usable.
             construction, but with closed windows and fresh air
             supply system or air conditioning will normally suffice.
             Outdoor environment will seem noisy.
    Source: California Office of Noise Control
7-8                                                                                           March 2006 | City of Highland General Plan

                                                                               7. NOISE ELEMENT
NOISE ASSESSMENT AND MODELING
To understand and evaluate the impacts of land use patterns, traffic and
individual developments on the noise environment, the General Plan
Environmental Impact Report incorporates a comprehensive noise
analysis of existing noise sources and projections of traffic volumes
associated with the buildout of the General Plan. Existing and future
impacts have been modeled, with projected noise contours for the City’s
roadways and freeways at buildout presented in Figure 7.2.
Like all highly urbanized areas, the City of Highland is subject to noise
from a myriad of sources. The major source of noise is from mobile
sources and most specifically, traffic traveling through the City on its
various roadways and freeways. Future noise impacts to the community
are expected to be primarily generated by increasing traffic volumes.
It is important to note that special attention to project specific site design
may substantially reduce noise impacts below those projected; therefore,
these estimates are considered to be conservative and unmitigated. A
wide range of design criteria affecting roadway engineering and traffic
noise abatement include differences in final grade between the roadbed
and the top of walls, spacing of intersections, setbacks and parkway
widths, roadway composition and other considerations.
City of Highland General Plan                                                                7-9

                                           HIGHLAND…A Great Place to Live
     This page intentionally left blank.
7-10                                   March 2006 | City of Highland General Plan


                                           HIGHLAND…A Great Place to Live
     This page intentionally left blank.
7-12                                   March 2006 | City of Highland General Plan

                                                                             7. NOISE ELEMENT
GOALS AND POLICIES
This section contains a brief discussion and detailed policy direction for
noise issues within Highland. The first issue, Land Use Planning and
Design, concerns the relationship between the design and approval of
land uses and existing or potential noise sources. The second issue,
Transportation Related Noise Sources, considers impacts that can be
created by the operation of motor vehicles, trucks, aircraft and railways
in the City. Non-Transportation-Related Noise Sources, the third issue,
involves noise impacts created by business or residential activities, such
as air conditioning units, mining activities, barking dogs or community
events. By following the policies associated with each issue, Highland
will ensure compatible development, protect noise-sensitive land uses
and minimize the effects of excessive and nuisance noise.
In addition to these goals, it is important to note that additional land use
direction is provided through other General Plan Elements, the
Development Code and redevelopment efforts.
Land Use Planning and Design
As Highland grows, the City’s population, employment and commercial
activity may generate more traffic and attract additional noise producing
uses. In addition, some undeveloped and underdeveloped areas are
designated for land uses that may be noise-sensitive and are located in
proximity to roadways and transit facilities. For example, along Base
Line, mixed-use and medium density residential development is
encouraged to stimulate the development of vibrant commercial activity.
In addition, some older neighborhoods in the southwestern portion of the
City adjacent to the SBIA are currently located in areas that are
transitioning to potential noise-generating business park and industrial
uses.
As a result, land use compatibility with noise is an important
consideration in the planning and design process. To identify potential
mitigation to address noise abatement strategies, noise evaluations
should be conducted when a proposed project places sensitive land uses
and major noise generators within close proximity to each other. The
City’s Community Development Department currently uses the project
review process to identify potential noise issues and works with
developers or landowners to apply site planning and other design
strategies to reduce noise impacts. A developer, for example, could take
advantage of the natural shape and contours of a site to arrange
buildings and other uses in a manner that would reduce and possibly
eliminate noise impacts. Examples of other site and architectural
techniques could include:
     •    Increasing the distance between noise source and receiver;
City of Highland General Plan                                                             7-13

                                                  HIGHLAND…A Great Place to Live
         •    Placing non-noise-sensitive land uses such as parking lots,
              maintenance facilities and utility areas between the noise source
              and receiver, while maintaining aesthetic considerations;
         •    Using non-noise-sensitive structures such as garages to shield
              noise-sensitive areas;
         •    Orienting buildings to shield outdoor spaces from a noise source;
              and
         •    Locating bedrooms in residential developments on the side of the
              house facing away from major roads.
     GOAL 7.1
     Protect sensitive land uses and the citizens of Highland from annoying and
     excessive noise through diligent planning and regulation.
     Policies
         1) Enforce the City’s Noise Control Ordinance consistent with health
              and quality of life goals and employ effective techniques of noise
              abatement through such means as a noise ordinance, building
              codes and subdivision and zoning regulations.
         2) Encourage the use of site planning and architectural techniques
              such as alternative building orientation and walls combined with
              landscaping to mitigate noise to levels consistent with interior and
              exterior noise standards.
         3) Require mitigation where sensitive uses are to be placed along
              transportation routes to ensure compliance with interior and
              exterior noise standards.
         4) Consider the compatibility of proposed land uses with the noise
              environment when preparing, revising or reviewing development
              proposals.
         5) Prevent the siting of sensitive uses in areas in excess of
              established 65 dBA CNEL without appropriate mitigation.
              Special attention should be paid to potential development
              within the 65 dBA CNEL noise contour of the San Bernardino
              International Airport and mining operations of the Santa
              Ana River.
         6) Work with San Bernardino International Airport Authority
              to ensure that future airport planning activities encourage
              consistency with adopted City land use plans and minimize
              impacts on Highland’s economic development opportunities
              and quality of life.
7-14                                         March 2006 | City of Highland General Plan

                                                                             7. NOISE ELEMENT
     7) Require that site-specific noise studies be conducted by a
          qualified acoustic consultant utilizing acceptable methodologies
          while reviewing the development of sensitive land uses or
          development that has the potential to impact sensitive land uses.
          Also require a site-specific noise study if the proposed
          development could potentially violate the noise provisions of the
          General Plan or City ordinance.
Actions
     1) Coordinate with school districts to ensure that schools are located
          and designed so that:
          •   interior noise in classrooms does not exceed 45 CNEL
          •   noise exposure does not exceed 65 CNEL at classroom
              buildings; and
          •   noise exposure does not exceed 70 CNEL on playgrounds
              and athletic fields.
     2) Coordinate with the San Bernardino International Airport
          Authority to minimize flight patterns over the City.
     3) When site and architectural design features cannot sufficiently
          reduce adverse noise levels, or cannot be economically provided,
          require the provision of noise barriers/berms, provided that noise
          barriers:
          •   are sufficiently massive to prevent significant noise
              transmission and high enough to shield receiver from noise
              source;
          •   noise barriers exhibit a minimum acceptable density of four
              pounds per square foot (equivalent to 3/4-inch plywood):
          •   contain no cracks or openings; and
          •   minimize the effect of flanking by bending the barrier back
              from the noise source at the end of the barrier.
     4) Require landscaping treatment to be provided in conjunction with
          noise barriers to provide visual relief and to reduce aesthetic
          impacts.
     5) Require realtors representing homebuyers in the vicinity of the
          gun club to inform new buyers of the existence of potential noise
          impacts associated with gunfire.
     6) Maintain a noise complaint file to document areas of excessive
          noise in the City.
City of Highland General Plan                                                             7-15

                                                 HIGHLAND…A Great Place to Live
     Transportation-Related Noise Sources
     Highland’s proximity to southern Californian mountains, desert resorts
     and other cultural and recreational attractions draws a significant level of
     passenger and truck traffic through the City. The City contains two major
     highways (State Routes 30 and 330) and a number of major arterials
     (such as Base Line and 5th Street), and sits next to the San Bernardino
     International Airport. These transportation facilities, while important
     components to mobility and economic vitality, are the major contributors
     of noise in Highland. Cost effective strategies to reduce their influence
     on the community noise environment are an essential part of the Noise
     Element.
     While local government has little direct control of transportation noise at
     the source, as these levels are set by state and federal agencies, the City
     does have some control over transportation noise that exceeds state
     and/or federal standards through the enforcement of the Municipal Code.
     The most effective method the City has to mitigate transportation noise is
     by reducing the impact of the noise onto the community through noise
     barriers and site design review. The effect of a noise barrier is critically
     dependent on the distance between the noise source and the receiver.
     Noise attenuation from barriers occurs when the barrier penetrates the
     “line of sight” between the source and receiver; the greater the
     penetration or height of the barrier, the greater the noise reduction.
     Additional attenuation can be achieved depending upon the source of
     transportation-related noise.
     Roadways
     Roadways are one of the biggest sources of noise in the City. Everyday,
     thousands of vehicles travel through and around Highland. Noise levels
     along roadways are determined by a number of traffic characteristics.
     The most important is the average daily traffic levels. Additional factors
     include the percentage of trucks, vehicle speed, the time distribution of
     this traffic and gradient of the roadway.
     One way the City can control vehicle noise is through speed reduction.
     A change of just 5 miles per hour can change the resultant noise by
     approximately 1 to 2 dB. The difference in noise associated with a
     reduction of 10 miles per hour could be roughly equivalent to reducing
     the traffic volume by one-half. The City also has some control over
     traffic-generated noise through weight limitations and the designation of
     truck routes. Medium trucks (i.e., those with a gross vehicle weight
     between 5 and 13.25 tons) produce as much acoustical energy as
     approximately 5 to 16 automobiles depending on the speed, with slower
     speeds demonstrating greater differential. Similarly, heavy trucks (i.e.,
7-16                                       March 2006 | City of Highland General Plan

                                                                                            7. NOISE ELEMENT
those with a gross vehicle weight in excess of 13.25 tons) produce as
much acoustical energy as 10 to 60 automobiles.
The City can further reduce traffic-generated noise by ensuring that street
paving is maintained and bumps and dips are minimized. Poor paving
causes vehicles to bounce and this bouncing exacerbates the noise due to
the rattling of the vehicle. This is especially important along those routes
that realize augmented volumes of truck traffic. Noise contours for the
City’s roadways and freeways are presented in Figure 7.2. Future
conditions consider sound levels given the buildout of land uses and the
roadway network, but do not consider sound attenuation measures such
as soundwalls.
Aircraft
Highland is subject to the activities of the San Bernardino International
Airport (SBIA) and the Redlands Municipal Airport (RMA). Airport
operations of the SBIA and RMA are of significant importance to the City     Specific policy direction on aircraft
                                                                             noise is provided in the Airport
of Highland because of their impacts to Highland’s safety, physical          Element.
development and economic welfare. In addition, local helicopter air
traffic is commonplace throughout the City. News and other helicopters
(e.g., freeway traffic report helicopters) fly through the area. Helicopter
use for fire and police services and at local hospitals is considered as an
emergency activity and is addressed by FAA regulations.
GOAL 7.2
Encourage the reduction of noise from transportation-related noise sources
such as automobile and truck traffic.
Policies
     1) Guide the location and design of transportation facilities to
          minimize the exposure of noise on noise-sensitive land uses.
     2) Employ noise mitigation practices, as necessary, when designing
          future streets and highways, and when improvements occur along
          existing road segments. Mitigation measures should emphasize
          the establishment of natural buffers or setbacks between the
          arterial roadways and adjoining noise-sensitive areas.
     3) Require that development generating increased traffic and
          subsequent increases in the ambient noise level adjacent to noise-
          sensitive land uses provide appropriate mitigation measures.
     4) Minimize truck traffic through residential neighborhoods.
City of Highland General Plan                                                                                      7-17

                                              HIGHLAND…A Great Place to Live
        5) Encourage the development of alternative transportation modes
           such as bicycle paths and pedestrian walkways to minimize the
           number of automobile trips and noise.
     Actions
        1) Maintain roadways so that the paving is in good condition to
           reduce noise-generating cracks, bumps and potholes.
        2) Use the daily design capacity identified in the General Plan and
           the posted speed limit to quantify the design noise levels adjacent
           to transportation routes for mitigation purposes.
        3) Require evaluation of highway and arterial roadway extensions
           for potential noise impacts on existing and future land uses.
        4) Consider the effects of truck routes, truck traffic, posted speed
           limits and future motor vehicle volumes on noise levels adjacent
           to transportation routes when planning improvements to the
           circulation system.
        5) Work with Caltrans to landscape or install mitigation elements
           along freeways and highways adjacent to existing residential
           subdivisions or noise-sensitive uses to beautify the landscape and
           reduce noise, where appropriate.
        6) Monitor proposals for future transit systems and require noise
           control to be considered in the selection of transportation systems
           that may affect the City.
7-18                                     March 2006 | City of Highland General Plan

                                                                             7. NOISE ELEMENT
Non-Transportation-Related Noise Sources
The City currently maintains a diversity of land uses, most of which
generate their own noise. Noise from one land use can “spill over” into
other uses and can potentially create undesirable noise impacts.
Industrial facilities generate noise through various processes that involve
the use of heavy equipment and machinery. However, even commercial
facilities and residential units can generate noise from the use of heating,
ventilating and air conditioning (HVAC) units.
Restaurants, bars and entertainment establishments may use sound
amplification equipment that operates well into the night. Residential
areas are also subject to noise from the use of landscape maintenance
equipment, barking dogs, etc. Mixed-use areas that place residential uses
alongside or above commercial uses can present their own challenges.
Requiring that the commercial component meet a residential standard
could make commercial operations difficult.
Alternatively, applying a commercial standard to a mixed-use project
could result in unacceptable noise levels at the residential portion of the
structure/site. Still, mixed-use projects offer several advantages from both
an air quality and transportation perspective, and should be encouraged.
One major stationary noise generator associated with mining and
processing of sand and gravel operations is located southeast of the
City’s boundary. Noise generated from the gravel pit is produced by the
use of vehicles and aggregate processing equipment. Vehicles include
bulldozers, loaders and other heavy machinery, as well as heavy trucks
used to load finished aggregate products for delivery via public
roadways. Low frequency noise source emissions can be reduced by
modifying equipment.
Noise emissions from mineral extraction activities are most heavily
concentrated within the processing area. A combination of individual
point noise sources and a diffuse collection of mobile equipment are the
primary cause for the noise observed in the nearest residential
neighborhoods north of the sand and gravel operations.
GOAL 7.3
Protect residents from the effects of “spill over” or nuisance noise.
Policies
     1) Enforce the City’s Noise Control Ordinance so that new projects
          located in commercial or entertainment areas do not exceed
          stationary-source noise standards at the property line of
          proximate residential or commercial uses, as appropriate.
City of Highland General Plan                                                             7-19

                                               HIGHLAND…A Great Place to Live
        2) Prohibit new industrial uses from exceeding commercial or
           residential stationary-source noise standards at the most
           proximate land uses, as appropriate. (Industrial noise may spill
           over to proximate industrial uses so long as the combined noise
           does not exceed the appropriate industrial standards.)
        3) Require that construction activities employ feasible and practical
           techniques to minimize noise impacts on adjacent uses.
           Particular emphasis shall be placed on the restriction of hours in
           which work other than emergency work may occur.
        4) Require that the hours of truck deliveries to commercial
           properties abutting residential uses be limited unless there is no
           feasible alternative or there are overriding transportation benefits
           by scheduling deliveries at another hour.
        5) Ensure that buildings are constructed to prevent adverse noise
           transmission between differing uses located in the same structure
           and individual residences in multi-family buildings.
     Actions
        1) As a condition of approval, limit non-emergency construction
           activities adjacent to existing noise-sensitive uses to daylight
           hours between 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. Discourage construction
           on weekends or holidays except in the case of construction
           proximate to schools where these operations could disturb the
           classroom environment.
        2) Ensure that the design and placement of air conditioning units
           and pool equipment within residential areas is accomplished in a
           manner that does not intrude upon the peace and quiet of
           adjacent noise-sensitive uses.
        3) Encourage the use of portable noise barriers for heavy equipment
           operations performed within 100 feet of existing residences or
           make applicant provide evidence as to why the use of such
           barriers is infeasible.
7-20                                      March 2006 | City of Highland General Plan

Chapter 8. 2014–2021 Housing Element
                                               th
                                     (5 Cycle)
 
     INTRODUCTION ....................................................................................8-3 
         Purpose and Function ...................................................................... 8-3 
         Consistency with State Planning Law .............................................. 8-3 
         General Plan Consistency................................................................. 8-4 
         Regional Housing Needs Assessment .............................................. 8-4 
         Housing Element Organization ....................................................... 8-5 
         Public Participation .......................................................................... 8-6 
     HOUSING RESOURCES.......................................................................8-8 
         High Density Special Overlay .......................................................... 8-8 
         Vacant Land Resources .................................................................... 8-8 
         Underutilized Land Resources........................................................8-10 
         Summary of Land Resources .......................................................... 8-11 
     HOUSING STRATEGY ........................................................................8-13 
     APPENDIX A: LAND INVENTORY
     APPENDIX B: EVALUATION OF THE 2006–2014 HOUSING ELEMENT
City of Highland General Plan                                                                                 i

                             HIGHLAND…A Great Place to Live
   This page intentionally left blank.
ii                                     May 2013 | City of Highland General Plan

INTRODUCTION
Purpose and Function
The purpose of the Housing Element is to provide a framework of
housing opportunities designed to meet the specific needs of
Highland’s existing and future residents. This document provides
residents and local government officials with a greater understanding
of local housing needs and guidance in matters relating to housing.
The Housing Element is a reflection of the City’s dedication to creating
quality living environments affordable to all economic segments of the
community.
The Housing Element provides programs created to address housing
needs, reduce constraints to housing for all, and set aside land and
financial resources for residents and developers. To the agencies and
departments entrusted with its implementation, the Housing Element
functions as a guidebook for alleviating housing problems and serves
as a resource for those seeking housing opportunities and assistance.
Consistency with State Planning Law
The State of California recognizes that an adequate supply of housing
for all income levels is a fundamental need for all communities. To
achieve that goal, it is critical that local governments share in the
responsibility of implementing solutions to address local and regional
housing needs. To that end, all California local governments are
required to prepare a Housing Element that specifies how the
community will plan for its existing and future housing needs.
This Housing Element was prepared in conformance with state
housing law (Government Code Sections 65580–65589) and following
the California Department of Housing and Community Development’s
Building Blocks for Effective Housing Elements. This document
provides residents of the community and local government officials
with a greater understanding of the housing needs in Highland and
guidance in matters relating to housing.
State law requires that the City periodically review the Housing
Element in order to evaluate:
        The appropriateness of the housing goals, objectives, and
         strategies in contributing to the attainment of the state
         housing goal;
        The effectiveness of the Housing Element in attainment of the
         community’s housing goals and objectives; and
City of Highland General Plan                                            8-3

                               HIGHLAND…A Great Place to Live
           The progress of the City in implementing the Housing
            Element.
    The City of Highland’s housing goals, policies, and programs are
    based on an analysis of existing and projected housing needs, an
    evaluation of potential constraints to housing, and a statement of
    goals, policies, quantified objectives, financial resources, and
    scheduled programs for the preservation, improvement, and
    development of housing for households of all income levels. An
    evaluation of the previous programs identifies progress and areas in
    need of improvement.
    General Plan Consistency
    Section 65300.5 of the Government Code states that the general plan
    shall comprise an integrated and internally consistent set of policies.
    The structure of this element is built on the same foundation upon
    which all other elements of the plan were formed. In addition, the
    Housing Element goals complement those found in the other elements
    of the General Plan. Cohesive housing policies that are appropriate to
    Highland were designed through this coordination.
    The City of Highland will maintain consistency as future General Plan
    amendments are processed by evaluating proposed amendments for
    consistency with all elements of the General Plan. Per Government
    Code 65400, the General Plan requires an annual review and report to
    examine amendments and implementation status.
    In line with the other General Plan elements, the goals of the Housing
    Element are to:
           Meet existing housing needs;
           Plan for future growth;
           Protect and enhance Highland’s neighborhoods; and
           Provide new housing opportunities.
    Regional Housing Needs Assessment
    California’s housing element law requires that each city and county
    develop local housing programs designed to meet its existing and
    projected housing needs for all income groups in their community and
    share of the region’s need for housing through the 2014 to 2021
    planning period. Given the fundamental importance of housing to
    quality of life, all communities are required to affirmatively address
    the existing and future housing needs in their community.
    Some housing-related needs include facilitating the development of
    affordable housing, addressing special needs of certain residents;
    rehabilitating existing homes and neighborhoods; strengthening the
8-4                                        May 2013 | City of Highland General Plan

                                                                                                            8. HOUSING ELEMENT
local economy and contribute to economic development goals; and to
support other general plan efforts to improve and maintain the quality
of life in Highland.
California law requires cities to meet the future housing needs of those
who might reasonably be expected to reside in Highland due to
population, household, and employment growth. Every eight years,
the Southern California Association of Governments (SCAG) adopts
growth projections predicting the need for housing throughout the
region. SCAG then disaggregates the growth for every city in the
region, and these projections include housing at all income levels. This
share of the housing need is referred to as the Regional Housing
Needs Assessment (RHNA).
The City of Highland’s share of the region’s housing need for the June
30, 2014, through January 1, 2021 planning period is 1,500 units
divided into four income categories, as shown in Table 8.1.
Contrary to popular belief, city governments are not required to
construct the housing units. However, state law does require cities to
create opportunities for the potential for the growth to occur between
2014 and 2021. Cities plan for this growth by identifying available
land at a variety of densities and instituting programs to encourage
and facilitate new housing.
                   Table 8.1: Highland 2014–2021 RHNA
                 Income Category                                 Units                     Percentage
Very Low (0–50% of median)1                                       349                         23.3%
Low (51–80% of median)                                            246                         16.4%
Moderate (81–120% of median)                                      280                         18.7%
Above Moderate (120% of median)                                   625                         41.7%
Total                                                            1,500                        100%
Source: SCAG 2012
1: Half of the very low income RHNA, 174, is assumed to represent extremely low income households (0–30% of
median).
Housing Element Organization
Section 65583 of the Government Code requires that the housing
element include an evaluation of existing programs, housing trends,
housing needs and constraints, and include creation of housing
programs to respond to those needs and reduce those constraints.
This Housing Element is organized into two sections:
Housing Plan
The Housing Element includes the Housing Plan and Housing
Element Technical Report. The Housing Plan contains the following
three sections:
City of Highland General Plan                                                                                               8-5

                               HIGHLAND…A Great Place to Live
       Introduction – a summary of the law and planning context,
        including public outreach and results.
       Housing Strategy– the City’s housing goals, policies, and programs
        to address its housing needs during the 2014–2021 planning
        period.
       Appendix A: Land Resources – a detailed description of vacant
        and underutilized land resources available for future housing
        development.
       Appendix B: Evaluation of the Previous Housing Program – an
        assessment of the previous Housing Element’s effectiveness.
    Housing Technical Report
    The Technical Report is an essential companion to the Housing Plan
    and contains the information necessary to understand the City’s
    housing needs, its constraints and opportunities. Specifically, it
    contains:
           Demographic Profile – a summary of Highland’s population,
            household, and employment trends.
           Housing Profile – a summary of Highland’s housing stock,
            tenure, affordability, and special needs.
           Future Housing Needs – an analysis of the future housing
            needs of the projected population.
           Housing Constraints– an analysis of government, market, and
            environmental constraints to and resources for future housing
            development.
    Public Participation
    California law requires that local governments include public
    participation as part of the housing element. Specifically, Government
    Code 65583(c)(7) states “that the local government shall make a
    diligent effort to achieve public participation of all economic segments
    of the community in the development of the housing element, and the
    program shall describe this effort.” State law does not specify the
    means or methods for participation; however, it is generally
    recognized that the participation must be inclusive.
    One Housing Element update workshop was held early in the process
    to collect public, stakeholder, and decision-maker input. The
    workshop was held at City Hall on Tuesday, May 15, 2012. The City
    thoroughly advertised the workshop through several mediums
    including local newspapers, postings at City Hall and other public
8-6                                        May 2013 | City of Highland General Plan

                                                                        8. HOUSING ELEMENT
buildings, and notices were mailed to over 115 stakeholders. These
stakeholders represent a variety of housing interests. Recipients
included nonprofit service providers, affordable housing developers,
market rate developers, property owners; special needs program
managers, major employers, regional housing agencies, faith-based
organizations, and San Bernardino County departments.
Staff presented potential land use changes to the Planning
Commission at a Housing Element workshop on Tuesday, August 7,
2012. The meeting was noticed in local newspapers, at City Hall and
other public buildings, and on the City’s website. The land use changes
presented were designed to help the City accommodate higher density
housing and meet the 2014–2021 Regional Housing Needs
Assessment in appropriate locations. The Planning Commission felt
that the changes were appropriate. Although there were several
residents in attendance, none of them made comments about the sites.
City staff reached out to several property owners and developers in the
area and received feedback that economic development and the
quality of residential areas are important. Programs for single-family
rehabilitation, rental rehabilitation, and code enforcement activities
were drafted in response to this concern.
A draft of the Housing Element update, including potential land use
and program changes, was presented to the Planning Commission at a
regularly scheduled public hearing on Tuesday, September 18, 2012
and the City Council on November 13, 2012. The City Council
determined that several program updates were appropriate to reflect
the dissolution of the Redevelopment Agency. The City Council also
determined that no unnecessary changes should be made to the land
inventory because the Housing Element land inventory was certified
by the California Department of Housing and Community
Development (HCD) in 2010. At this meeting, a representative from
the Building Industry Association requested that the City study
development fees and amend the Municipal Code to reflect the
findings of the study, if necessary, before submitting the Housing
Element to HCD. The City Council responded to this request with a
program directing the Public Works/City Engineering Department to
prepare a study of Development Impact Fees after the budget cycle.
Another program was created to direct the Planning Department to
prepare a study of the Inclusionary Housing In-Lieu Fee and present
findings to the City Council before the end of the 4th Cycle planning
period. The City Council determined that the timing suggested by the
speaker was infeasible due to staff, budget, and other limitations,
including the October 15, 2013 Housing Element adoption deadline.
The meetings were noticed in local newspapers, on the City’s website,
and at the required public facilities. These public hearings offer the
community additional opportunities to participate in program
development and raise their concerns about the future of housing in
Highland.
City of Highland General Plan                                                           8-7

                                HIGHLAND…A Great Place to Live
    HOUSING RESOURCES
    The City of Highland has been allocated a RHNA of 1,500 housing
    units for the 2014–2021 planning period. An effective strategy to
    address this need must reflect a diversity of housing types and
    affordability levels. A variety of land resources and multifaceted
    strategies are needed to comprehensively accommodate the RHNA
    and meet Highland’s other housing goals. The City of Highland is
    taking several steps to identify land resources that will exceed the
    housing production goals assigned by the RHNA. A detailed land
    inventory is provided in the Appendix A.
    High Density Special Overlay
    The High Density Special Overlay was first adopted by the City of
    Highland in 2011 to meet State requirements for facilitating and
    encouraging housing to meet a variety of public needs. The
    Residential High Density Special Overlay accommodates residential
    products between 20 and 30 units per acre, such as apartments, lofts,
    condominium, other high-density attached products, or a combination
    of such uses. These uses are permitted by right.
    The High Density Special Overlay in the Golden Triangle Policy Area
    includes 74 vacant and 5 underutilized acres. The Golden Triangle
    Policy Area is generally bound by Greenspot Road on the south,
    Eucalyptus Avenue on the north, Boulder Avenue on the east, and the
    City Creek wash basin on the west. Environmental analysis (including
    a traffic study) has shown that this area is suitable for higher density
    development. The sites within this Policy Area are designated Planned
    Development, the City’s most flexible district, created to encourage
    innovative design concepts in specific plans. However, the City
    applied the HDS Overlay in 2011 to ensure greater certainly to meet
    state housing requirements. The Land Use and Development Code
    permits up to 650 units between 20 and 30 units per acre by right.
    The land is readily available for development, has access to existing
    utilities and other infrastructure, and a developer has chosen to
    initiate a specific plan to develop the site.
    Vacant Land Resources
    Vacant land is the City’s critical resource for accommodating the
    RHNA. Vacant land at a variety of densities has the ability to facilitate
    housing development that can meet different affordability targets. The
    recent downturn of the market significantly reduced housing prices
    throughout Highland. Typically the gap between market-rate and
    what lower and moderate income households can afford is large for
    single-family detached development. However, sales prices in 2012
    have shown that single-family detached housing in Highland is readily
    affordable to moderate income households. As in previous planning
8-8                                        May 2013 | City of Highland General Plan

                                                                                                                 8. HOUSING ELEMENT
periods, lower income households in Highland will benefit from rental
housing opportunities, especially in buildings supported by public
financing. Many state and federal housing development assistance
programs generously fund new projects and rehabilitation efforts that
only target lower income households.
Based on 2012 home sales prices, the vacant land inventory assumes
that densities less than 10 units per acre only yield homes that are
affordable to above moderate income households, densities between
10 and 19 units per acre yield homes that are affordable to moderate
income households, and densities of 20 to 30 units per acre yield
product types that are affordable to lower income households.
Following these density and affordability assumptions, the vacant
sites described in Table 8.3 have the potential to accommodate 720
above moderate income units, 639 moderate income units, and 1,207
lower income units. All of the vacant sites identified in the land
inventory are infill sites adjacent to existing development and within
existing wet and dry utility and transportation networks.
The vacant land development potential does not include units planned
in Harmony, a proposed specific plan that could add over 700 new
single-family homes to Highland between 2014 and 2021. The
development potential for above moderate income housing during the
planning period will significantly increase upon adoption of the
specific plan.
A summary of the potential identified in the vacant land inventory is
provided in Table 8.3 on the following page. A site-specific inventory
is provided in Appendix A.
         Table 8.3: 2014–2021 Vacant Land Summary
                  General                                                        Assumed Yield
                Plan Land                        Assumed
 Zoning             Use            Acres          Density         VL/L           M          AM             Total
    AG             AG/EQ             67.6             2            0             0          135              135
   R-1               LD            115.9             5             0             0          580              580
   R-2               MD               4.5            10            0            45            0               45
  R-2C               MD               9.4            10            0            94            0               94
   R-3               HD               0.2            16            0             3            0               3
   R-4              HDS              27.3            25           682            0            0              682
   MU                MU              10.4            16            0            83            0               83
    PD               PD              34.5            12            0           414            0              414
  HDS1               PD              47.2            25           525            0            0              525
    VR               VR               1.1             5            0             0            5                5
Total                                                            1,207         639          720            2,567
Source: City of Highland, 2012.
Note: VL/L, M, and AM, stand for lower income, moderate income, and above moderate income units, respectively.
   Moderate income affordability assumptions reflect densities between 10 and 19 units per acre. Lower income
   affordability assumptions reflect densities between 20 and 30 units per acre.
1: The HDS Overlay permits up to 650 multifamily units by-right; however some of the sites within this area are
   underutilized. The development potential was divided into 525 on vacant sites and 125 on underutilized sites.
City of Highland General Plan                                                                                                    8-9

                                 HIGHLAND…A Great Place to Live
     Underutilized Land Resources
     The City of Highland recognizes that the recycling of previously
     developed sites can be an important resource for new housing,
     particularly in older areas of the community. In addition to vacant
     lands, the City has identified several underutilized properties with the
     potential to recycle for new residential uses during the 2014–2021
     planning period. Underutilized sites are properties that are marginally
     developed but could accommodate greater densities and a higher
     quality of development when reused. These sites were selected
     through a collaborative process between staff, the Planning
     Commission, and City Council to ensure that the sites listed reflect a
     broad understanding of recent development trends, recent market
     conditions, existing uses, and incentives.
     The City’s underutilized land inventory only includes infill properties.
     The market has shown that infill development in Highland has proven
     to be more cost-effective than developing new neighborhoods on raw
     land. Over the last several years numerous infill projects have been
     proposed in Highland. The majority of these projects are located in
     the oldest part of the community, western and central Highland. Infill
     projects have built-in financial incentives because of existing
     infrastructure such as roads, sidewalks, water and sewer access, and
     public facilities. For reuse or infill projects the City requires access
     improvements only if needed to ensure public safety, rather than
     substantial street improvements or the creation of new streets that are
     typically necessary for greenfield development. The fewer
     improvements needed reduces the overall cost of the project, a savings
     that is reflected in the sales price or asked rent. Two common forms of
     infill projects proposed in Highland’s recent history are small-lot
     single-family detached homes and condominiums. These units are
     readily affordable to low and moderate income households, based on
     2012 State Income Limits for households of three and four persons.
     Existing conditions in Highland provide an environment ripe for
     redevelopment and reinvestment. Numerous underdeveloped
     properties in areas with existing infrastructure have buildings that are
     no longer economically viable or adequate for habitation. The
     development community has approached the City about opportunities
     in several of the underutilized sites as well as several adjacent vacant
     sites. Assembling properties provides several cost-saving advantages,
     such as more design flexibility, accessibility options, larger number of
     housing units, and increasing construction efficiency.
     Marginal uses such as dilapidated homes on large lots and abandoned
     commercial properties offer significant opportunities for new
     multifamily and high density attached housing types. All of the
     underutilized sites except for one are zoned R-4 or within the High
     Density Special Overlay and will permit development between 20 and
     30 units per acre.
8-10                                          May 2013 | City of Highland General Plan

                                                                                                                 8. HOUSING ELEMENT
Potential environmental constraints such as topography and
floodways were taken into consideration during site selection. None of
the parcels identified in the vacant and underutilized land inventory
are located in areas of topographic constraint or have known
environmental hazards. The sites identified are adjacent to existing
urbanized development and are within service hook-up distance of
existing water and sewer systems. The City has already traffic
calculations based on residential development for the underutilized
sites and determined that it would not result in any significant
impacts on levels of service.
As shown in Table 8.4, the City’s high density underutilized lands
could accommodate 804 lower income units at the midrange density
of 25 units per acre. Approximately 27 acres are zoned R-4 and 5 acres
are Planned Development, but within the HDS Overlay. The City’s low
density underutilized site could accommodate 5 above moderate
income units as an assumed density of 5 units per acre. These
underutilized sites are described in detail and mapped in Appendix A.
A lot consolidation priority program is proposed to incentivize the
consolidation of underutilized parcels to support larger housing
projects.
   Table 8.4: 2014–2021 Underutilized Land Inventory
                                                 Summary
                   General                                                       Assumed Yield
                    Plan                         Assumed
 Zoning           Land Use         Acres          Density         VL/L           M          AM             Total
    R-1               LD              1.0             5            0             0            5               5
    R-4              HDS             27.2            25           679            0            0              679
   HDS1               PD              5.1            25           125            0            0              125
                                                                  804            0            5              809
Source: City of Highland, 2012.
Note: VL/L, M, and AM, stand for lower income, moderate income, and above moderate income units, respectively.
   Moderate income affordability assumptions reflect densities between 10 and 19 units per acre. Lower income
   affordability assumptions reflect densities between 20 and 30 units per acre.
1: The HDS Overlay permits up to 650 multifamily units by-right; however some of the sites within this area are
   underutilized. The development potential was divided into 525 on vacant sites and 125 on underutilized sites.
Summary of Land Resources
The City of Highland has a long history of attracting high quality,
single-family detached development. This trend will undoubtedly
continue into the planning period. As such, the City has made a
significant effort to encourage and facilitate the development of a
diverse range of housing types including townhomes, condominiums,
second units, and multifamily buildings. The RHNA for lower,
moderate, and above moderate income households will be met
City of Highland General Plan                                                                                                   8-11

                                       HIGHLAND…A Great Place to Live
     through vacant and underutilized land at various densities.
     Furthermore, several different types of housing are expected to be
     constructed through the specific plan process.
     Table 8.5 summarizes the potential for accommodating new housing
     during the planning period by income category. The City has provided
     a surplus of sites to maintain adequate capacity throughout the long
     duration of the planning period. A surplus of sites is an important tool
     to protect the City from having inadequate capacity to meet the RHNA
     and reduce the need for amendments.
                      Table 8.5: Summary of Land Resources
                                                            Above
              Resource               Lower   Moderate     Moderate         Total
     Vacant Land                      1,207    639            720          2,567
     Underutilized Land                804      0              5            809
     Total                            2,012    639            725          3,375
     RHNA                              595     280            625          1,500
     Surplus                         +1,417   +359           +100         +1,875
     Source: City of Highland, 2012.
     The land resources intentionally exceed the RHNA to help protect the
     City from shortfalls during the 2014–2021 planning period. In
     addition, the Harmony Specific Plan is expected to be adopted in 2013
     and will increase the residential development potential during the
     planning period by over 700 units. Upon adoption, this Specific Plan
     will help ensure that Highland has a large surplus of sites for the
     above moderate income RHNA.
     The City will continue to support and assist lower and moderate
     income households and special needs populations through a variety of
     programs. A comprehensive approach is important for improving the
     City’s existing neighborhoods, attracting high quality new
     development, and continuing Highland’s reputation as a good place to
     call home.
8-12                                         May 2013 | City of Highland General Plan

                                                                        8. HOUSING ELEMENT
HOUSING STRATEGY
The City of Highland’s vision is to be a high quality community of
which residents are proud to call home. This Housing Element
outlines the City’s approach to achieving this vision by improving
existing neighborhoods, ensuring a diversity of housing types and
prices, increasing opportunities for lower and moderate income
households to afford suitable housing, and promote services for
persons with special housing needs. The following section provides
housing goals, policies and programs for the City of Highland.
GOAL 8.1
Preserve and enhance the quality and character of
Highland’s housing stock and existing residential
neighborhoods.
Policies
1) Provide neighborhood improvement and unit rehabilitation
     programs that offer financial and technical assistance to lower
     income single-family homeowners and owners of rental housing.
2)     Encourage housing improvement and rehabilitation and the
       replacement of substandard housing as a means to enhance
       quality of life in Highland. Ultimately the health of the City’s
       existing neighborhoods has great influence over who selects to
       reside, build, work, or start a business in Highland.
3)     Support housing and neighborhood quality through rigorous
       enforcement of building and property maintenance standards,
       the education of landlords and tenants, and the inspection of
       properties.
City of Highland General Plan                                                          8-13

                                HIGHLAND…A Great Place to Live
     1. Single-Family Rehabilitation
     1a. Seek funding resources to continue to implement single-family
     rehabilitation programs that provided lower and moderate income
     home owners with rehabilitation grants and loans (formerly funded by
     the Redevelopment Agency). Repairs include–but are not limited to–
     room additions, septic systems, paint and stucco, acoustic ceilings,
     roofing, and pest control.
             Timing/Objective: Identify funding by 2016
             Responsible Agency: Community Development Department
             Funding Source: Grants, Inclusionary Housing In-Lieu Fees,
              and other alternatives will be explored
     1b. Continue to participate in the “World Changers” Program which
     rehabilitates homes for low to moderate income residents.
             Timing/Objective: Approximately 5 homes per year
             Responsible Agency: Community Development Department
             Funding Source: General Fund
     2. Rental Rehabilitation
     2a. The City of Highland has a significant number of rental properties
     in certain areas of the community that are in disrepair and in need of
     rehabilitation. The City’s current rehabilitation programs focus on
     ownership units but do not extend to rental units. Working in tandem
     with the rental inspection program, a rental-oriented program could
     greatly improve the condition of the existing housing stock and quality
     of life for Highland’s renter community Therefore, the City will
     develop a program to assist the rehabilitation of single- and
     multifamily rental housing.
             Timing/Objective: Adopt program guidelines by March 2014.
              Seek funding in fiscal year 2014/2015.
             Responsible Agency: Community Development Department
             Funding Source: General Fund, Grants, Inclusionary Housing
              In-Lieu Fees, and other alternatives will be explored
     2b. Continue rental inspection program to ensure a high level of rental
     property maintenance. Refer violators to the rental rehabilitation
     program that will be created as stated above.
             Timing/Objective: Ongoing 2014–2021.
             Responsible Agency: Code Enforcement Division
             Funding Source: General Fund
8-14                                        May 2013 | City of Highland General Plan

                                                                           8. HOUSING ELEMENT
3. Code Enforcement
3a. Work with the State Franchise Tax Board in order to enforce the
provisions of California Revenue and Taxation Code Section 17299
and 24436.5, which prohibit owners of substandard housing from
claiming depreciation, amortization, mortgage interest, and property
tax deductions on State income tax.
        Timing/Objective: Initiate coordination with Tax Board by
         December 2014 and establish program by June 2015.
        Responsible Agency: Community Development Department
        Funding Source: General Fund
3b. Perform annual windshield surveys to identify areas with
substandard housing. A proactive approach will increase the ability of
Code Enforcement staff to protect the City’s existing housing stock
from deterioration.
        Timing/Objective: Commence annual windshield surveys and
         identify services to assist the target areas within six months of
         adopting the Housing Element.
        Responsible Agency: Building & Safety Division
        Funding Source: General Fund
3c. Continue to enforce the City's Property Maintenance Ordinance
HMC Section 15.52 (minimum standards for exterior property
maintenance). Owners of a property that does not meet the minimum
requirements will be notified in writing by the Building Inspector or
Code Compliance Officer and given a reasonable period of time to
achieve compliance. Code violators will be provided with information
on the Neighborhood Pride Grant program to assist them in
completing repairs.
        Timing/Objective: Ongoing 2014–2021. Achieve 85%
         compliance rate.
        Responsible Agency: Code Enforcement Division
        Funding Source: General Fund
City of Highland General Plan                                                             8-15

                                 HIGHLAND…A Great Place to Live
     4. Neighborhood Quality
     4a. Continue the Code Enforcement, Police, and Fire for Multi-Family
     Housing program to provide a multi-department, comprehensive
     approach to resolving problems associated with deteriorating housing
     developments.
             Timing/Objective: Ongoing 2014–2021
             Responsible Agency: Code Enforcement Division
             Funding Source: General Fund
     GOAL 8.2
     Facilitate the development of housing suitable for the
     diverse needs of current and future Highland residents.
     Policies
     1) Bolster the City’s affordable housing supply through regulatory
         tools that encourage the development of or funding for quality
         lower and moderate income housing development.
     2) Provide a transparent, timely and cost-effective regulatory review
         process that facilitates the development housing opportunities for
         all income levels.
     3) Ensure new residential projects are adequately served by park and
         recreation, libraries, transportation, public safety, and other
         public services and facilities.
     4) Encourage the development of a range of housing types in targeted
         areas of the City, such as inventoried vacant residential sites,
         Planned Development districts, Mixed Use districts, and special
         Policy Areas identified in the Land Use Element.
     5) Encourage the use of innovative site development and allow the
         use of construction materials and techniques that reduce the cost
         of housing and its impact on the environment.
     6) Provide adequate regulatory tools to preserve the City’s factory-
         built housing stock.
8-16                                       May 2013 | City of Highland General Plan

                                                                           8. HOUSING ELEMENT
5. Inclusionary Housing and Fees
5a. An Inclusionary Housing Ordinance requiring all new housing
construction in the City to provide affordable units on-site, off-site (in
special circumstances), or pay an in-lieu fee of $3,750 per unit into the
City’s housing fund for the preservation and construction of affordable
housing was adopted in 2006.
        Timing/Objective: Ongoing 2014–2021.
        Responsible Agency: Community Development Department
        Funding Source: Development community
5b. Review the in-lieu fee established for the Inclusionary Housing
Ordinance to ensure it remains appropriate. Explore opportunities to
use the in-lieu fee to fund lower income rehabilitation programs
previously funded by the Redevelopment Agency.
        Timing/Objective: Present review of the fee to City Council by
         December 2014; and biannually thereafter
        Responsible Agency: Community Development Department
        Funding Source: General Fund
5c. Evaluate Development Impact Fees to ensure that such fees are the
minimum necessary to cover actual costs, implement the General
Plan, and to ensure protection of public health, safety, and welfare.
Also monitor permit processing times to identify areas in which the
City can streamline development review.
        Timing/Objective: Review bi-annually after the budget cycle.
        Responsible Agency: Public Works/City Engineering
         Department
        Funding Source: General Fund
City of Highland General Plan                                                             8-17

                                 HIGHLAND…A Great Place to Live
     5d. Assist in the development of adequate housing to meet the needs
     of lower and moderate income households by providing a
     comprehensive menu of opportunities. The City will specifically target
     service providers with experience in assisting extremely low income
     households. These opportunities include, but are not limited to using
     housing in-lieu fees to support affordable housing projects, offering
     density bonuses, making Housing Choice Voucher referrals,
     redevelopment activities to build new affordable housing and
     subsidize existing housing, encouraging the development of second
     units, and facilitating the development of emergency shelters,
     transitional housing, permanent supportive housing, and single room
     occupancy units.
            Timing: Various timeframes for individual projects throughout
             2014–2021
            Responsible Agency: Community Development Department
            Funding Source: General Fund, Inclusionary Housing In-Lieu
             Fees, and other resources if available
     6. Regulatory Relief
     6a. Continue to encourage the development of multifamily housing
     types by permitting such units by right in multifamily-zoned sites
     identified in the Housing Element (R-4 and HDS), pursuant to GC
     Section 65583.2 (h) and (I).
            Timing/Objective: Maintain the permitted multifamily uses
             within R-4 and HDS zones as needed to exceed the RHNA for
             lower income households
            Responsible Agency: Community Development Department
            Funding Source: General Fund
     6b. Continue to update the Land Use and Development Code to
     address updates to density bonus laws as needed.
            Timing/Objective: Ongoing 2014–2021
            Responsible Agency: Community Development Department
            Funding Source: Community Development Department
             Budget
8-18                                       May 2013 | City of Highland General Plan

                                                                        8. HOUSING ELEMENT
6c. Incentivize lot consolidation for high density multifamily projects
by expediting the process for sites identified in the Housing Element
as having the potential to accommodate densities at or above 20 units
per acre (shown in Appendix A).
        Timing/Objective: Codify expedited processing for lot
         consolidation applications including multifamily sites
         identified as having potential to accommodate lower income
         housing in the Housing Element for the purpose of facilitating
         larger multifamily projects by December 2014
        Responsible Agency: Community Development Department
        Funding Source: General Fund
7. Developer Outreach
7a. Continue to offer an optional pre-application conference and
advertise the benefits through the City’s website and the “Come Home
to Highland” website. A pre-application conference allows the
applicant to receive invaluable comments from City staff prior to
submitting a plan, thus reducing the time and cost associated with
permit processing.
        Timing/Objective: Ongoing 2014–2021
        Responsible Agency: Community Development Department
        Funding Source: General Fund
7b. Conduct an annual citywide analysis to assess and document the
City’s housing activities in an annual report to HCD.
        Timing/Objective: Ongoing 2014–2014
        Responsible Agency: Community Development Department
        Funding Source: General Fund
7c. Continue to offer the City’s brochure on zoning, development
requirements, development fees, and permitting procedures in City
Hall and online.
        Timing/Objective: Ongoing 2014–2021
        Responsible Agency: Community Development Department
        Funding Source: General Fund
City of Highland General Plan                                                          8-19

                                HIGHLAND…A Great Place to Live
     7d. Continue to utilize a digital database to track development
     applications and periodically post summaries of this information in
     development activity reports on the City’s website.
            Timing/Objective: Ongoing 2014–2021
            Responsible Agency: Community Development Department
            Funding Source: General Fund
     8. Innovative and Efficient Housing
     8a. Encourage development on sites identified in the land resources
     section of the Housing Element by providing the inventory of the
     City’s website.
            Timing/Objective: Provide information on the City’s website
             within three months of Housing Element adoption.
            Responsible Agency: Community Development Department
            Funding Source: General Fund
     8b. Discuss mixed-use housing development opportunities with
     property owners in the Planned Development and Mixed-Use
     districts.
            Timing: Conduct discussions by December 2015.
            Responsible Agency: Community Development Department
            Funding Source: General Fund
     8c. Explore opportunities for incentivizing residential green building
     and renovation efforts.
            Timing: This City Council goal was established for the
             2009/2010 fiscal year. Ongoing 2014–2021.
            Responsible Agency: Community Development Department
            Funding Source: General Fund
8-20                                       May 2013 | City of Highland General Plan

                                                                         8. HOUSING ELEMENT
8d. Continue to allow flexibility in design and development standards
through the Planned Development (PD) district, Mixed Use district,
and through policies provided in the Community Design Element of
the General Plan. The PD zone facilitates more efficient use of the land
and design superior to that which could be achieved through the
application of conventional development standards.
      Timing/Objective: Ongoing 2014–2021
        Responsible Agency: Community Development Department
        Funding Source: General Fund
8e. Contact Southern California Edison (SCE) and The Gas Company
to obtain latest information on energy efficient building technology.
Make this information available at City Hall and on the City’s website.
        Timing/Objective: Provide information by January 2014
        Responsible Agency: Community Development Department
        Funding Source: General Fund
8f. Reduce energy waste by reviewing all residential buildings for
compliance with Title 24, State of California Energy Standards.
        Timing/Objective: Ongoing 2014–2021
        Responsible Agency: Building & Safety Division
        Funding Source: General Fund
City of Highland General Plan                                                           8-21

                                HIGHLAND…A Great Place to Live
     GOAL 8.3
     Identify land uses and available land resources
     appropriate for accommodating a variety of housing
     types.
     Policies
                1) Establish higher density nodes with new housing
                    opportunities intended to serve all income levels.
                2) Provide a variety of home building opportunities for a
                    range of housing types.
                3) Expand the affordable housing stock and provide
                    homeowners with an additional source of income by
                    facilitating the construction of second dwelling units.
     9. Residential High Density Special Overlay (HDS)
     9a. The City will continue the Residential High Density Special
     Overlay in the Golden Triangle Policy Area, which accommodates up
     to 650 multifamily units.
           Timing/Objective: Ongoing
           Responsible Agency: Community Development Department
           Funding Source: General Fund
8-22                                       May 2013 | City of Highland General Plan

                                                                          8. HOUSING ELEMENT
9b. The City will continue to implement a formal ongoing monitoring
procedure to ensure sufficient residential capacity for units affordable
to lower income households is maintained on sites identified to
accommodate the RHNA. Where an approval of a development
(residential, commercial, or other) on a site identified as having lower-
income potential in Appendix A results in a reduction of potential
affordable units below the residential capacity needed to
accommodate the RHNA, the City will identify and designate
additional sites to accommodate the shortfall. The City will report on
the status and implementation of the Housing Element including
development occurring on identified sites, to determine whether
development is occurring at densities consistent with the buildout
projections described in Appendix A (in accordance with Government
Code Section 65583 (a)(3) and 65583.2(h) and (I). As necessary, the
City will identify alternate sites or densities to ensure that higher
density multifamily housing remains a realistic and viable
development strategy.
        Timing/Objective: Establish a Housing Element Site
         Monitoring Program concurrently with amendments to the
         Land Use and Development Code and Zoning Map as detailed
         in Program action 9a.
        Responsible Agency: Community Development Department
        Funding Source: General Fund
10. Town Center, Base Line Corridor, and Victoria Avenue
Corridor Policy Areas
10a. The City of Highland supports regional efforts for an improved
public transportation network and greater linkages between
transportation land use, and housing. In August 2012, the City
completed a Southern California Association of Governments
Compass Blueprint Demonstration Project that explored bringing bus
rapid transit to the Town Center, Base Line Corridor, and Victoria
Avenue Corridor Policy Areas of Highland. The City will continue to
work with SCAG, San Bernardino Associated Governments,
Omnitrans, and neighboring communities to encourage transit
oriented development in the Inland Empire.
        Timing/Objective: Ongoing 2014–2021. Continue to
         collaborate with SCAG, SANBAG, Omnitrans, and Policy Area
         property owners
        Responsible Agency: Community Development
        Funding Source: General Fund (original project funding was
         provided through SCAG via grants from the U.S. Department
         of Transportation)
City of Highland General Plan                                                            8-23

                                 HIGHLAND…A Great Place to Live
     10b. The Compass Blueprint Demonstration Project involved creating
     3-D models and videos of the Base Line corridor and what it could
     look like after residential, mixed use, and commercial infill
     development and multimodal transit improvements. The City will
     leverage this digital resource to attract new residential and mixed use
     development to the area and inspire existing property owners to
     reinvest in their housing structures.
            Timing/Objective: Post videos online and share them with the
             Chamber of Commerce and other interested parties by 2014
            Responsible Agency: Community Development
            Funding Source: General Fund (original project funding was
             provided through SCAG via grants from the U.S. Department
             of Transportation)
     11. Second Units
     11a. Continue to encourage the development of attached or detached
     second units in accordance with HMC Section 16.44.180 Second Units
     Ordinance.
            Timing/Objective: Maintain advertisement of the Second Unit
             Ordinance on the City’s website and the “Come Home to
             Highland” website
            Responsible Agency: Community Development Department
            Funding Source: General Fund
8-24                                        May 2013 | City of Highland General Plan

                                                                            8. HOUSING ELEMENT
GOAL 8.4
Assist in the provision of adequate and affordable
housing for all Highland residents.
Policies
     1) Improve quality of life for lower and moderate income
         Highland residents through providing homeownership
         assistance and promoting County homeowner and renter
         assistance opportunities.
     2) Provide regulatory and financial incentives to encourage the
         development of affordable single- and multifamily housing.
     3) Prohibit housing discrimination and other related
         discriminatory actions in all aspects affecting the sale or rental
         of housing based on race, religion, or other arbitrary
         classification.
12. Homeowner Assistance Programs
12a. Provide additional homeownership resources to Highland
residents by providing information on County homeowner assistance
programs at City Hall and on the City’s website.
        Timing/Objective: Update website in January 2014
        Responsible Agency: Community Development Department
        Funding Source: General Fund
13. Renter Assistance
13a. Support the Housing Authority’s Housing Choice Voucher
program (Section 8 vouchers) by providing program information at
City Hall and on the City’s website. The Housing Choice Voucher
program pays rental subsidies directly to rental property owners to
benefit lower income households.
        Timing/Objective: Ongoing 2014–2021
        Responsible Agency: Community Development Department
        Funding Source: General Fund
City of Highland General Plan                                                              8-25

                                HIGHLAND…A Great Place to Live
     14. Priority Services
     14a. Provide the Housing Element to the City’s water and sewer
     service providers and assist them in drafting policies to provide
     priority water and sewer service to affordable housing projects.
            Timing/Objective: Provide housing element and offer
             assistance upon adoption
            Responsible Agency: Community Development Department
            Funding Source: Community Development Department
             Budget
     15. Fair Housing Mediation
     15a. Increase awareness of the City’s partnership with the Inland Fair
     Housing & Mediation Board (IFHMB) by providing a link to their
     website (www.ifhmb.com) on the City’s website and include an article
     regarding IFHMB services in the City’s annual newsletter. The City
     will make fair housing brochures available at Highland City Hall,
     Highland Senior Center, Highland Library, Highland Family YMCA,
     and the Police Station. The City will continue to refer Highland
     residents, tenants, landlords, and property owners to IFHMB to assist
     in resolving fair housing issues.
            Timing/Objective: Update website and provide brochures by
             January 2014
            Responsible Agency: Community Development Department
            Funding Source: General Fund
     15b. Contribute to the regional evaluation of discriminatory housing
     practices by participating in the County of San Bernardino Analysis of
     Impediments to Fair Housing. The Analysis of Impediments to Fair
     Housing identifies regulations or practices that may create an unequal
     housing environment in San Bernardino County communities.
             Timing/Objective: Complete according to the County’s
             schedule
             Responsible Agency: Community Development Department
             Funding Sources: General Fund
8-26                                       May 2013 | City of Highland General Plan

                                                                          8. HOUSING ELEMENT
16. Housing Preservation Program
16a. Subprime lending practices have resulted in numerous
foreclosures throughout Highland. The City seeks to reduce
foreclosures by providing educational information to its residents. The
City will provide educational homeownership brochures and refer
concerned homeowners and homebuyers to nonprofits such as
Neighborhood Housing Services of the Inland Empire, Inc. and the
Homeownership Preservation Foundation. Information will be made
available at City Hall and on the City’s website.
        Timing/Objective: Provide information by January 2014
        Responsible Agency: Community Development Department
        Funding Source: General Fund
16b. The affordability covenant at Raintree Apartments is expected to
expire in 2020. The City will establish a program to provide outreach
to owners of affordable projects, such as this one, to ensure that they
understand ways to ensure affordability, such as partnering with or
selling to the City or an affordable housing organization. The program
will include providing owners of affordable projects with a list of
affordable housing developers and organizations. An informative
letter will be issued to relevant affordable housing organizations.
        Timing/Objective: Establish program and provide information
         by January 2016
        Responsible Agency: Community Development Department
        Funding Source: General Fund
16c. In the event that the affordability covenants at Raintree
Apartments are planned to expire, the City will notify local affordable
housing entities in an effort to attract interest and resources for
preserving the units. The California Department of Housing and
Community Development maintains a list of qualified entities. These
organizations are leaders in obtaining, maintaining, and managing
affordable housing developments and are logical partners for the City,
the property owner, and other interested nonprofits.
        Timing/Objective: Reach out to qualified entities, if needed, by
         2018.
        Responsible Agency: Community Development Department
        Funding Source: General Fund
City of Highland General Plan                                                            8-27

                                 HIGHLAND…A Great Place to Live
     GOAL 8.5
     Facilitate the development of a broad range of housing
     types to meet the special needs of Highland residents.
     Policies
     1) Provide the regulatory framework necessary to facilitate special
          needs housing in Highland.
     2) Encourage development of accessible housing for the disabled
          through regulatory relief.
     3) Creation of a continuum of care for the homeless in Highland
          through establishing a housing plan for the homeless including
          zoning districts allowing emergency shelter, transitional housing,
          and permanent supportive housing.
     4) Support innovative public, private, and nonprofit efforts in the
          development and financing of affordable, special needs housing.
     17. Housing for Disabled Persons
     17a. Enact a process for disabled individuals, including persons with
     developmental disabilities, or those acting on their behalf to make
     requests for reasonable accommodation in regard to relief from the
     various land use, zoning, or building laws, rules, policies, practices,
     and/or procedures of the City. This process will include a review of the
     zoning code for compliance with fair housing laws and procedures for
     assisting those making the request, and a procedure for appeals.
             Timing/Objective: February 2013
             Responsible Agency: Community Development Department
             Funding Source: General Fund
     17b. Provide informational materials on Southern California Edison’s
     Customer Assistance Program at City Hall. The program is designed to
     help persons with disabilities, including developmental disabilities,
     control their energy use. The program also targets low income, senior
     citizens, and non-English speaking customers.
             Timing/Objective: Ongoing 2014–2021
             Responsible Agency: Building & Safety Division
             Funding Source: General Fund
8-28                                       May 2013 | City of Highland General Plan

                                                                           8. HOUSING ELEMENT
17c. Refer individuals and families with developmental disabilities to
the Inland Regional Center in San Bernardino. The Inland Regional
Center is the largest nonprofit, state-funded social service facility in
the state that focuses on persons with developmental disabilities.
Provide a link to the Inland Regional Center’s website on the City’s
website.
        Timing/Objective: Ongoing 2014–2021
        Responsible Agency: Community Development Department
        Funding Source: General Fund
18. Residential Care Facilities
18a. Update the zoning code to differentiate between residential care
facilities serving six or fewer residents and those serving seven or
more residents. Create separate definitions and permitting processes
for the two types of residential care facilities, and permit those serving
6 or fewer persons by right in all residential zones.
        Timing/Objective: Amend the Land Use and Development
         Code by January 2013
        Responsible Agency: Community Development Department
        Funding Source: General Fund
19. Emergency Shelters, Transitional Housing, and
Permanent Supportive Housing
19a. Address the urgent shelter needs of the homeless by updating the
Land Use and Development Code to permit emergency shelters in the
Business Park district, which has the capacity to provide at least one
year-round shelter for the City’s 112 homeless persons. Address
transitional housing needs by permitting transitional housing and
permanent supportive housing by right of zone.
        Timing/Objective: Amend the Land Use and Development
         Code by January 2013
        Responsible Agency: Community Development Department
        Funding Source: General Fund
City of Highland General Plan                                                             8-29

                                HIGHLAND…A Great Place to Live
     19b. The City has established an emergency shelter, transitional
     housing, and permanent supportive housing subcommittee to prepare
     a study evaluating model ordinances, case studies, zoning districts,
     and development standards to encourage and facilitate these forms of
     special needs housing (including single room occupancy units) in
     accordance with Senate Bill 2. The subcommittee is preparing a plan
     to meet Highland’s emergency shelter, transitional housing, and
     permanent supportive housing needs. The plan will include amending
     the Land Use and Development Code to permit emergency shelters
     without discretionary approval in the Business Park district,
     conditionally permit single room occupancy units in the Business Park
     district, and permit transitional and permanent supportive housing as
     residential uses subject to the same approval process and restrictions
     as similar residential uses in the same zone (based on unit type).
            Timing: Amend the Land Use and Development Code by
             January 2013
            Responsible Agency: Community Development Department
            Funding Source: General Fund
     20. Affordable Housing Preservation
     20a. Continue to monitor existing publicly assisted affordable housing
     and provide technical assistance for those that might convert to
     market rents and displace extremely low, very low, low, and moderate
     income tenants.
            Timing/Objective: Ongoing 2014–2021
            Responsible Agency: Community Development Department
            Funding Source: General Fund
     20b. Update contact list of housing advocacy groups, public agencies,
     and non-profit organizations to have available in the event of
     opportunities for purchasing or managing lower income housing
     projects.
            Timing/Objective: Update contacts annually, ongoing 2014–
             2021.
            Responsible Agency: Community Development Department
            Funding Source: Community Development Department
             Budget
8-30                                       May 2013 | City of Highland General Plan

                                                                       8. HOUSING ELEMENT
20c. Continue to update a list of all available lower and moderate
income housing assistance programs and make the list available on
the City’s website and during developer pre-application conferences.
        Timing/Objective: Ongoing 2014–2021
        Responsible Agency: Community Development Department
        Funding Source: Community Development Department
         Budget
21. Mobile Home Preservation
21a. Based on the provisions of Government Code Section 65863.7,
require the submission of a report detailing the impacts of any
proposed mobile home park conversion with the filing of any
discretionary permit.
        Timing/Objective: Require a report for each proposed
         conversion.
        Responsible Agency: Community Development Department
        Funding Source: General Fund
21b. Require all condominium and mobile home conversion
applicants to relocate displaced residents to the extent required by
law.
        Timing/Objective: Implement on a project-by-project basis
         throughout the planning period.
        Responsible Agency: Community Development Department
        Funding Source: General Fund
21c. Define and distinguish manufactured housing from mobile homes
and travel trailers, as set forth in current HUD codes, and define the
process for approving or disapproving such uses to comply with state
law.
        Timing/Objective: Adopt definitions and permitting
         procedures by January 2014.
        Responsible Agency: Community Development Department
        Funding Source: General Fund
City of Highland General Plan                                                         8-31

                                                                       HIGHLAND…A Great Place to Live
                                            22. Collaborative Partnerships
                                            22a. The City has administered funds for a variety of affordable
                                            housing needs such as construction costs, rent subsidies, and home
                                            improvement grants. Working in collaboration with other entities will
                                            help the City’s resources go farther and meet the needs of additional
                                            lower income households. The City will contact local affordable
                                            housing service providers to discuss partnering and continue to seek
                                            financial assistance from other agencies.
                                                   Timing/Objective: Ongoing 2014–2021
                                                   Responsible Agency: Community Development Department
                                                   Funding Source: Community Development Block Grants, HCD
                                                    Emergency Housing Assistance Program, and Federal
                                                    Emergency Shelter Grants and others
                                            Quantified Objectives 2014–2021
                                            State housing law requires that each jurisdiction establish quantified
                                            objectives for the number of housing units that will be constructed,
                                            rehabilitated, and preserved during the Housing Element planning
                                            period.
                                            The quantified objectives for new construction are conservative and
                                            reflect a slowly improving housing market during the planning period.
                                            The objective for lower income housing construction is 15 percent of
                                            the total lower income development potential shown in the land
                                            inventory; moderate income is 25 percent, and above moderate
                                            income is 50 percent. The objectives for rehabilitation and
                                            preservation are based on City of Highland programs. Table 8.6
                                            provides a summary of quantified objectives by income category.
                                     Table 8.6: Quantified Objectives 2014–2021
                                        Extremely                                                Above
                Resource                   Low          Very Low      Low         Moderate     Moderate         Total
     New Construction                 0               251              252          160            366          1,029
     Rehabilitation                   5               10                20           35             0             70
     Preservation                     15              15               31           31              0            92
     Source: City of Highland, 2012.
8-32                                                                              May 2013 | City of Highland General Plan

Housing Technical Report
HOUSING TECHNICAL REPORT .............................................. I 
     INTRODUCTION ....................................................................................... 1 
         Overview ............................................................................................... 1 
     DEMOGRAPHIC PROFILE....................................................................... 1 
         Population Growth ............................................................................... 2 
         Age Characteristics ............................................................................... 2 
         Race and Ethnicity ............................................................................... 3 
         Employment Characteristics ................................................................ 4 
         Household Type and Size ..................................................................... 5 
         Household Income Trends................................................................... 6 
     HOUSING PROFILE ................................................................................. 7 
         Housing Growth ................................................................................... 7 
         Age of the Housing Stock ..................................................................... 9 
         Tenure and Vacancy ............................................................................. 9 
         Housing Price and Affordability ......................................................... 11 
         Overcrowding ..................................................................................... 13 
         Overpayment ...................................................................................... 13 
         Special Needs Groups......................................................................... 14 
     FUTURE HOUSING NEEDS .................................................................. 22 
         Regional Housing Needs Assessment ................................................ 22 
         Preservation of At-Risk Affordable Housing Units ........................... 23 
     HOUSING CONSTRAINTS..................................................................... 26 
         Governmental Constraints ................................................................. 26 
         Residential Development Standards ................................................. 40 
         Development Fees .............................................................................. 46 
         Permit Approval Process .................................................................... 48 
         Housing for Persons with Disabilities ............................................... 51 
     MARKET CONSTRAINTS ...................................................................... 53 
         Land Costs .......................................................................................... 53 
         Construction Costs ............................................................................. 53 
         Financing ............................................................................................ 54 
     ENVIRONMENTAL CONSTRAINTS ...................................................... 55 
         Earthquake ......................................................................................... 55 
         Fire     ............................................................................................... 55 
         Flooding.............................................................................................. 55 
         Energy Conservation .......................................................................... 56 
City of Highland General Plan                                                                                         8-i

                                                   HIGHLAND…A Great Place to Live
     LIST OF TABLES
     TABLE                                                                                                             PAGE
     Table 8.1: Highland Population Growth 1990–2020 ....................................... 2 
     Table 8.2: Age Characteristics 2000–2012....................................................... 3 
     Table 8.3: Ethnicity 2000–2012 ....................................................................... 4 
     Table 8.4: Employment Status for Highland Residents over 16 2000–2010 .. 4 
     Table 8.5: Highland Employment Profile 2010 ................................................ 5 
     Table 8.6: Highland Household Size 2012 ........................................................ 6 
     Table 8.7: Highland Household Income 2012 and 2017 .................................. 7 
     Table 8.8: Composition of the Housing Stock .................................................. 8 
     Table 8.9: Age of Housing Stock ....................................................................... 9 
     Table 8.10: Occupied Units ............................................................................. 10 
     Table 8.11: Maximum Affordable Price and Rent ............................................ 11 
     Table 8.12: Highland Home Sales Prices 2012 ............................................... 12 
     Table 8.13: Highland Asking Rents ................................................................. 13 
     Table 8.14: Local Resources for Homeless and At-Risk of Homeless Persons
     .......................................................................................................................... 20 
     Table 8.15: Highland 2014–2021 RHNA ........................................................ 22 
     Table 8.16: Restricted Affordable Units in Highland ..................................... 23 
     Table 8.17: Affordable vs Market Rents .......................................................... 24 
     Table 8.18: Residential General Plan Land Uses ............................................ 27 
     Table 8.19: Residential Uses Permitted by Zoning District ............................ 29 
     Table 8.20: Residential Development Standards ........................................... 41 
     Table 8.21: Residential Parking Standards ..................................................... 43 
     Table 8.22: Residential Development Fees..................................................... 47 
     Table 8.23: Permit Processing Times.............................................................. 51 
8-ii                                                                May 2013 | City of Highland General Plan

INTRODUCTION
The Housing Technical Report for the City of Highland is a
description and analysis of demographic, employment, and housing
characteristics that influence housing demand, housing affordability,
and housing needs. The Technical Report includes an evaluation of
existing and projected housing needs and the potential constraints to
meeting them. The findings in this report are the foundation for
establishing meaningful goals, policies, and programs in the City’s
Housing Element.
Overview
Incorporated in 1987, the City of Highland has strived to become a
high quality community for families to call home. Highland boasts
historic neighborhoods, master planned communities, mountain
views, and a rich history dating back to the late-1800s.
The City of Highland has seen significant changes in its housing
market and housing conditions during the last decade. Housing prices
soared in the early 2000s and quickly declined with the market
downturn. Housing and apartment rents have decreased over the last
few years. Although Highland has only been a City for 25 years, much
of the housing stock on the west side predates incorporation so the
revitalization of housing is also a local concern.
The Housing Technical Report recognizes the community’s housing
needs directs the establishment of goals, policies, and programs
designed to address the following issues:
        Adapting to changing housing market conditions.
        Meeting state-mandated regional housing needs goals.
        Furthering quality housing and neighborhoods.
        Accommodating social and economic diversity.
        Assisting residents with special housing needs.
The Housing Technical Report provides the foundation for the
Housing Element to address each of these planning issues in
Highland.
DEMOGRAPHIC PROFILE
A successful strategy for improving housing conditions must be based
on an assessment of existing and future housing needs. An evaluation
of Highland’s demographic characteristics provides insight into the
City of Highland General Plan                                         8-1

                                             HIGHLAND…A Great Place to Live
    City’s population that will influence the development of responsive
    housing goals, policies, and programs.
    Population Growth
    According to the Census, the City of Highland’s population was 34,962
    in 1990 and 44,605 in 2000, a 29 percent increase. Although a major
    local employment center, Norton Air Force Base, closed in 1994,
    Highland’s population has continued to grow due to the development
    of former orchards in east Highland. The City’s population grew an
    additional 21 percent through the 2000s, reaching 53,733 by 2012.
    Without nearby military employment hubs, new population growth in
    Highland and other Inland Empire communities is in part due to the
    availability of more affordable home prices. Individuals and families
    priced out of expensive Los Angeles and Orange Counties often
    relocate to the Inland Empire for home ownership opportunities. As
    the City pursues infill development and continues to develop
    remaining vacant land in the east, population growth will continue to
    occur, but at a slower rate than in decades past. SCAG estimates the
    City’s population will grow to 58,600 by 2020, a 9 percent increase
    from 2012. Table 8.1 summarizes these population estimates for
    Highland from 1990 to2020.
               Table 8.1: Highland Population Growth 1990–2020
              1990                        2000                        2012           2020
             34,621                      44,605                     53,733          58,600
                --                       +28.8%                    +20.5%             +9%
     Source: Claritas, Inc. 2012,SCAG Draft 2012 RTP Growth Forecast.
    Age Characteristics
    Age distribution is an important factor in determining the size, type,
    and tenure of housing needed in a community. Claritas projections for
    2012 indicate that although the under 18 population has declined; this
    age group will continue to be the largest cohort in the City. The decline
    in children is potentially related to the decline in number of
    individuals in the family-forming age group. This trend is projected to
    continue through 2017.Unlike most cities without a 4-year university,
    Highland has experienced a slight increase in college-age residents
    This may be the result of local students staying at home and
    commuting to school rather than relocating closer to campuses, such
    as California State University, San Bernardino and University of
    Redlands, or young persons joining the workforce rather than leaving
    for higher education.
    Reflective of the baby boom generation, the middle-aged group is the
    fastest growing group. Middle-aged residents typically create a high
8-2                                                       May 2013 | City of Highland General Plan

                                                                                         8. HOUSING ELEMENT
demand single-family detached homeownership opportunities and as
children leave, they may begin seek lower maintenance housing types
such as condominiums. Although the senior population is growing, its
share of Highland residents is projected to remain under 10 percent
through 2012 and 2017.
                  Table 8.2: Age Characteristics 2000–2012
                                             2000                   2012          Change
         Age Group                 Number Percent             Number      Percent 00–12
 Children and Youth
                                     15,875            35.6%   17,543      32.7%   -2.9
 (under age 18)
 College Age
                                       4,013             9.0%   5,739      10.7%    1.7
 (Ages 18–24)
 Family-Forming Adults
                                     13,377            30.0%   14,163      26.4%   -3.6
 (Ages 25–44)
 Middle Age Adults
                                       8,453           19.0%   12,309      30.0%    3.9
 (Ages 45–64)
 Senior Adults
                                       2,887             6.5%   3,979       7.4%    0.9
 (Ages 65+ and above)
 Total                               44,605             100%   53,733       100%    --
 Median Age                                  27.9                    30.1            2.2
 Source: US Bureau of the Census 2000; Claritas, Inc. 2012.
Highland’s age profile suggests a need for single-family home
ownership opportunities and family-sized rentals. The family-forming
and middle-aged groups typically create demand for housing in units
large enough to accommodate children (two or more bedrooms).
These prime working age groups tend to have higher incomes and
larger household sizes than their younger and older cohorts. With 10
percent of residents between 18 and 24 years, there may be demand
for multifamily rental housing and second units.
Race and Ethnicity
Like much of southern California, Highland is becoming more racially
and ethnically diverse. In 2012 the majority of Highland residents
reported being White, but the number of Hispanic residents (who may
be of any race) is increasing. The most growth projected through 2017
is in the Hispanic Origin and Asian and Pacific Islander groups,
similar to race and ethnic changes projected for San Bernardino
County as a whole. Table 8.3 shows Highland’s racial and ethnic
trends from 2000 and 2012.
City of Highland General Plan                                                                            8-3

                                              HIGHLAND…A Great Place to Live
                                  Table 8.3: Ethnicity 2000–2012
                                                  2000                            2012         Change
                                     Number              Percent         Number       Percent   00–12
     White                              25,089            56.2%            27,462       51.1%     -6.0
     Black                               5,403            12.1%              6,115      11.4%     -0.7
     American Indian                       581             1.3%                514       1.0%     -0.3
     Asian/Pacific Islander              2,892             6.5%              4,224       7.9%       1.4
     Other Alone                         8,307            18.6%            12,424       23.1%       4.5
     Two or more races                   2,333             5.2%              2,994       5.6%       0.4
     Total                              44,605          100%               53,733      100.%
     Hispanic Origin1                   16,342            36.6%            26,636       49.6%     13.0
     Source: 2000 US Bureau of the Census; Claritas Inc. 2012.
     1: Persons of Hispanic origin may be of any race or multiple races.
    Employment Characteristics
    Estimates for 2010 identify 36,394 people aged 16 and older in the
    labor force, a slight increase from 2000 (see Table 8.4). The increase
    in employed persons may correlate to the City’s growing middle-aged
    population and the development of industrial spaces and offices in
    Highland and throughout the Inland Empire. Overall, the City’s
    general labor force characteristics and unemployment rate have
    changed little since 2000.
      Table 8.4: Employment Status for Highland Residents over 16
                                                   2000–2010
                                                2000                           2010           Change
           Labor Force               Number           Percent          Number       Percent   00–10
     In Armed Forces                         27           0.1%               14       0.04%    -0.1 %
     Civilian–Employed                  17,058          56.4%            21,349      58.66%     2.3%
     Civilian–Unemployed                 1,978            6.5%            2,570       7.06%     0.6%
     Not in Labor Force                 11,204          37.2%            12,461      34.24%    -3.0%
     Total                              30,267         100%              36,394      100%        --
     Source: US Bureau of the Census 2000; American Community Survey 2010 5-Year Estimates.
    According to the Bureau of Labor Statistics, in 2010 the majority of
    Highland residents, approximately 90 percent, were employed outside
    of the city. As shown in Table 8.5, the largest percentage of Highland’s
    population was employed in health care and social assistance
    industries, followed by educational services and retail trade. The
    largest percentage of jobs offered in Highland are in the health care
    and social assistance industries, followed by accommodation and food
    service and other services. Several medical facilities are located in the
    area, including Patton State Hospital and Community Hospital of San
    Bernardino Adult Day Care Center, and associated supportive
    services. Approximately 10 percent of San Bernardino County
    residents that work in Highland reside in the city. The majority of
8-4                                                           May 2013 | City of Highland General Plan

                                                                                                      8. HOUSING ELEMENT
employees (61 percent) of Highland businesses reside in San
Bernardino County and 18 percent reside in Riverside County.
               Table 8.5: Highland Employment Profile 2010
                                                        Jobs held By
                                                          Residents              Jobs Offered in City
                 Industry                           Number        Percent        Number      Percent
 Health Care/Social Assistance                       3,032          16.6%          843         19.9%
 Educational Services                                2,141          11.7%          408          9.6%
 Retail Trade                                        1,917          10.5%          456         10.7%
 Public Administration                               1,626           8.9%           63          1.5%
 Accommodation & Food Service                        1,366           7.5%          500         11.8%
 Manufacturing                                       1,107           6.1%          299          7.0%
 Other Services                                        839           4.6%          478         11.3%
 Transportation and Warehousing                        819           4.5%           77          1.8%
 Wholesale Trade                                       812           4.5%          103          2.4%
 Construction                                          720           3.9%          282          6.6%
 Professional, Scientific & Technical
 Services                                              698           3.8%          109          2.6%
 Arts, Entertainment & Recreation                      650           3.6%           45          1.1%
 Finance & Insurance                                   471           2.6%           90          2.1%
 Information                                           235           1.3%           18          0.4%
 Real Estate, Rental & Leasing                         233           1.3%           44          1.0%
 Management of Companies &
 Enterprises                                           219           1.2%           41          1.0%
 Utilities                                             165           0.9%           23          0.5%
 Agriculture, Forestry, Fishing &
 Hunting                                               158           0.9%             1         0.0%
 Mining, Quarrying, Oil & Gas
 Extraction                                             12           0.1%             2         0.0%
 Source: US Bureau of Labor Statistics Longitudinal Employment and Household Dynamics 2010.
American Community Survey income data from 2010 indicates that
more than half of employed Highland residents have relatively low-
paying jobs that could result in challenges to affording adequate
housing, depending on the incomes of other household members (if
other household members are wage earners). Approximately 6 percent
of employed residents earn annual incomes of $14,999 or less, and
approximately 50 percent earn between $15,000 and $49,999. Some
generally low-wage earning occupations such as medical assistant,
teaching aide, sales clerk, and cashier are common in the industries
primarily employing Highland residents–health care, educational
services, and retail trade.
Household Type and Size
A household consists of all persons residing in a dwelling unit,
regardless of relationship. Household type and size affect the type of
City of Highland General Plan                                                                                         8-5

                                     HIGHLAND…A Great Place to Live
    housing and number of bedrooms per unit demanded in the
    community.
    Families comprise the majority of the households in the City of
    Highland. As shown in Table 8.6, 2012 Claritas estimates reported
    that 70 percent of family households consist of two to four members.
    These small families range from couples of any age to families with
    children, and therefore could be served by a variety of housing types.
    In Highland, families typically create demand for single-family rentals
    and ownership opportunities in single-family detached units or
    amenity-rich single-family attached projects.
    An estimated 30 percent of Highland’s family households are large
    families of five or more persons. Large families, particularly those
    with children, typically seek homeownership opportunities in single-
    family detached homes for the space and financial investment
    benefits. However, since more income is needed to support more
    people, many large families face financial hardship in affording
    adequately sized housing, a topic discussed later in this report.
    Nonfamily households, which often consist of individuals living alone
    or with unrelated persons, make up 20 percent of Highland’s total
    households. The majority of nonfamily households, 73 percent, are
    one-person households. One-person households generally seek small
    housing units, such as apartments, second units, and condominiums.
                         Table 8.6: Highland Household Size 2012
          Household Size                  Family                    Nonfamily
     1 Person                           0          0.0%      2,292           73.1%
     2 Person                        3179         25.3%        637           20.3%
     3 Person                        2860         22.8%        111            3.5%
     4 Person                        2739         21.8%          55           1.8%
     5 or More Persons              3,770         30.0%          42           1.3%
     Total                         12,548        100%        3,137         100%
     Average Household Size                             3.41
     Source: Claritas, Inc. 2012.
    Comparisons to 2012 data and 2017 projections indicate that the
    City’s household types and sizes will remain at the same proportion
    through the planning period. As a result, the composition of housing
    (e.g., large versus smaller units) will likely remain unchanged based
    on the population aging within the community.
    Household Income Trends
    Household income is a critical factor in determining housing
    opportunity. As shown in Table 8.7, estimates provided by Claritas
    show Highland’s 2012 median income is $50,874, which is lower than
    the San Bernardino County median of $63,300, pursuant to the State
8-6                                           May 2013 | City of Highland General Plan

                                                                                                   8. HOUSING ELEMENT
of California Income Limits. The City’s median income is projected to
increase to $53,081by 2017. The most growth is expected in the
households earning annual incomes ranging from $100,000 to
$149,999. These upper income households have access to the greatest
variety of housing types, sizes, and amenities. However, the largest
percentage of Highland households is projected to remain in the less
than $25,000 category, followed closely by those earning between
$25,000 and $49,999. These households are likely to face difficulty in
affording housing regardless of household size.
     Table 8.7: Highland Household Income 2012 and 2017
                                           2012                   2017 Projection1          Change
  Household Income               Number Percent                  Number Percent             00–12
Less than $25,000                  3,961            25.2%          3,997             24.4%   -0.8%
$25,000 – $49,999                  3,794            24.2%          3,828             23.4%   -0.8%
$50,000– $74,999                   2,759            17.6%          2,881             17.6%    0.0%
$75,000 – $99,999                  1,945            12.4%          2,025             12.4%    0.0%
$100,000 – $149,999                2,108            13.4%          2,321             14.2%    0.8%
$150,000 – $199,000                  613             3.9%            695               4.2%   0.3%
$200,000 or more                     514             3.3%            613               3.7%   0.5%
Total                            15,694           100%            16,360            100%       --
Median Income                             $50,874                       $53,081                --
Source: Claritas, Inc., 2012.
1: Forecasts are expressed in current dollars and include an adjustment for inflation.
With regard to income by household type, married families without
children under 18 earn the highest median income, presumably
because in many families both adults are wage earners. Family
households with children generally earn less, likely due to one parent
staying at home or working part-time, or perhaps both parents
working part time, in order to tend to children. Other families and
nonfamilies typically earn the lowest incomes. These households often
consist of single parents, unrelated young adults sharing living
quarters, and persons living alone, including seniors on fixed incomes.
HOUSING PROFILE
This section describes and evaluates housing characteristics to
identify existing trends and potential needs. These characteristics
include housing growth, housing age and condition, housing prices
and rents, tenure, and vacancy. Understanding housing trends can
indicate the City’s ability to meet future housing needs.
Housing Growth
The amount and type of housing available within a community reflects
the existing housing stock’s ability to serve expected population
growth and a range of incomes, lifestyles, and family types and sizes.
City of Highland General Plan                                                                                      8-7

                                             HIGHLAND…A Great Place to Live
    Highland’s housing stock was shaped by the City’s history as an
    agricultural area. In the 1940s, large citrus groves gave way to
    suburban neighborhoods in west Highland. Housing growth moved
    east, eventually stopping at City Creek. Housing development east of
    City Creek primarily occurred decades later, spurred by the
    development of the East Highlands Ranch community in the 1980s.
    This pattern of housing growth resulted in two Highlands; the west
    side has established neighborhoods and the east side has master
    planned communities.
    Recent housing growth primarily consists of single-family
    neighborhoods in planned unit developments. Infill development
    opportunities are located in west Highland. Larger development
    opportunities are generally on the east side. Two specific plans in
    progress on the east side will offer a range of housing types from
    single-family detached homes to multifamily units.
    As shown in Table 8.8, according to Department of Finance estimates
    the City grew to an estimated total of 15,884 units in 2010,
    representing a 6.43 percent increase from 2000. The largest portion of
    Highland’s housing stock consists of single-family detached units,
    comprising 74.7 percent of the City’s housing stock. Between 2000
    and 2010 most of the City’s housing growth occurred in single-family
    detached and attached units. Mobile homes also increased during the
    past ten years.
                   Table 8.8: Composition of the Housing Stock
                                         2000                         2010
                             Number            Percent        Number       Percent     % Change
    Single-Family              11,312            76.1%         13,113      78.5%         15.9%
      Detached                 10,800            72.7%         12,558      75.2%         16.3%
      Attached                     512            3.4%            555        3.3%          8.4%
    Multifamily                  2,741           18.4%          2,727      16.3%          -0.5%
      2–4 Units                    612            4.1%            598        3.6%         -2.3%
      5+ Units                   2,129           14.3%          2,129      12.7%           0.0%
    Mobile Homes                   809            5.4%            861        5.2%          6.4%
    Total                      14,862           100%           16,701     100%           12.4%
    Source: California Department of Finance, 2000 and 2010.
    The increase in single-family detached and attached housing reflects
    development trends from the early 2000s that favored single-family
    housing in this area. In recent years, developers have proposed a
    wider variety of housing types, reflecting emerging market trends that
    favor rental housing. During the Housing Element planning period,
    single-family and multiple-family dwellings are expected to be
    constructed on infill sites and through ongoing specific plans.
8-8                                                          May 2013 | City of Highland General Plan

                                                                        8. HOUSING ELEMENT
Age of the Housing Stock
Providing safe and attractive housing improves quality of life for
residents as well as the City’s image. One measure of housing
condition is age. As shown in Table 8.9, the City experienced a boom
in housing construction during the 1970s, 1980s, and early 1990s.
Units constructed 30 years ago often require minor rehabilitation to
comply with new safety standards and repair signs of inadequate
maintenance. Housing units over 50 years of age are more likely to be
in need of substantial rehabilitation. According to Claritas estimates,
23 percent of the City’s housing stock is between 30 and 50 years of
age, and 27 percent was built over 50 years ago. Based on the City’s
west-to-east development pattern, it is assumed that these older units
are primarily in west Highland.
Code enforcement activities have been effective in reducing the
number of units needing substantial rehabilitation. The City estimates
that approximately 200 units, only 1.2 percent of the housing stock,
may be in need of substantial rehabilitation. Most of the remaining
units needing substantial rehabilitation are older single-family units
in west Highland.
                         Table 8.9: Age of Housing Stock
          Year Built                 Number               Percent
         2000 or later                 1,623               10.2%
         1990 to 1999                  3,106               19.6%
         1980 to 1989                  3,167               19.9%
         1970 to 1979                  1,820               11.5%
         1960 to 1969                  1,842               11.6%
         1950 to 1959                  2,638               16.6%
         1940 to 1949                    959                6%
        1939 or Earlier                  729                4.6%
             Total                    15,884              100%
 Source: US Census Bureau, 2010.
Tenure and Vacancy
Ownership rates reflect the ability of the housing stock to meet the
needs of households looking for investment or those not ready for the
responsibilities, cost, or permanence of home ownership.
As shown in Table 8.10, tenure in Highland has remained stable.
There has only been a one percent change in rental versus home
ownership numbers between 2000 and 2012. During the 1990s,
owner-occupancy rates in Highland increased as more single-family
homes were built. This development trend resulted in a relatively high
percentage of owner-occupied units. Although the type of housing
primarily developed in Highland favors homeownership, in recent
City of Highland General Plan                                                           8-9

                                          HIGHLAND…A Great Place to Live
     years the single-family detached housing stock has begun to provide
     renter opportunities in the form of second units and homes available
     for lease.
                                  Table 8.10: Occupied Units
                                             2000                        2010
             Tenure               Number          Percent      Number           Percent
      Owner-Occupied                8,980          66.6%        9,479            65.1%
      Renter-Occupied               4,498          33.4%        5,068            34.9%
      Total                        13,478         100%         14,547           100%
      Source: US Census Bureau, 2008 – 2010.
     The vacancy rate is a strong indicator of the housing market and the
     ability for the housing stock to accommodate changing housing needs.
     A high vacancy rate can contribute to more affordable housing, while a
     low vacancy rate indicates a tighter market with fewer opportunities.
     A vacancy rate of 4 to 6 percent in a mature community generally
     indicates a stable housing market. Lower rates imply a market in
     which housing demand exceeds supply, while higher rates indicate an
     excess supply of units.
     According to 2011 American Community Survey estimates, only 5
     percent of owned units are vacant and an estimated 10.4 percent of
     rental units are vacant in Highland. According to the Department of
     Finance, the 2010 overall vacancy rate in Highland is 9.29 percent. In
     comparison, San Bernardino County’s vacancy rate is much higher
     (11.6 percent). Highland’s vacancy rate indicates that the existing
     housing stock slightly exceeds demand. Demand is affected by
     employment opportunities in the area. These vacancy rates also relate
     to the downturn of the housing market in which there is a greater
     supply of homes available in the Inland Empire than there are
     qualified buyers, which may result in many single-family homes being
     turned into rentals.
8-10                                                May 2013 | City of Highland General Plan

                                                                                                                 8. HOUSING ELEMENT
Housing Price and Affordability
Highland has undergone unprecedented changes to its housing costs
for ownership and rental units that have improved the affordability of
housing for low, moderate, and above-moderate income residents.
The following describes the affordability of the City’s housing.
Home Purchase Price
Historically, Highland has attracted residents for its quality and
affordable housing prices and rents. Like other cities in the Inland
Empire, there was a period in the early 2000d when housing prices
soared in Highland. Much of the appreciation was due to rising
housing demand throughout the region, the availability of lower
interest loans, and the desirability of new housing products on the
market.
With the downturn in the California economy and collapse of the
housing market, home sales prices have adjusted to reflect the
oversupply of single-family detached homes and shortage of qualified
buyers. There are extensive causes for the decrease in home prices,
including the proliferation of adjustable rate mortgages in the early
2000s, the reduction in income and down payment required by
financial institutions, subprime lending practices and the resulting
increase in home foreclosures. The affordability of housing is
determined by market prices and current residents’ ability to pay.
Maximum affordable purchase prices by income category for two-
person and four-person households were calculated based on 2012
state income limits. The figures shown in Table 8.11 are meant as a
guideline to compare to the current market.
              Table 8.11: Maximum Affordable Price and Rent
    Household                                                                                          Above
         Size                 Very Low                   Low                 Moderate               Moderate
  Homeowner
      2-Person              $105,729                 $174,573               $266,364              >$266,364
      3-Person              $120,001                 $197,573               $300,616              >$300,616
      4-Person              $134,386                 $220,423               $335,139              >$335,139
  Renter
      2-Person                    $633                   $1,013                 $1,520              >$1,520
      3-Person                    $712                   $1,139                 $1,709              >$1,709
      4-Person                    $791                   $1,266                 $1,899              >$1,899
  Note: Annual income limits based on California State income limits for 2012; acceptable expenditure for rental
    housing calculated as 30 percent of income divided by 12 months assumes set-asides for utilities; acceptable
    expenditure for ownership housing was calculated as 35 percent of income and includes 10 percent down
    payment provided by the owner and assumes set-asides for utilities, real estate taxes, and homeowners
    insurance. Various local, state, and federal housing programs may require different calculations of maximum
    affordable rent or purchase prices.
City of Highland General Plan                                                                                                   8-11

                                     HIGHLAND…A Great Place to Live
     The median owner-occupied sales price in the City in 2011 was
     $176,000, higher than the San Bernardino County median of
     $150,000. According to DataQuick, the median single-family detached
     home sales price in August 2012 was $178,000 for a single-family
     detached home and $47,000 for a condominium. These median home
     sales prices and how they compare to a year ago are shown in Table
     8.12.
     A new trend in housing is emerging from the foreclosure crisis—
     smaller and relatively more affordable units. Detached small-lot
     projects have been constructed in Highland during this difficult time.
     For example, a small-lot detached home project built in 2007 sold for
     an average price of $160,000. This home sales price is readily
     affordable to moderate income households and even can be afforded
     by low income families
                    Table 8.12: Highland Home Sales Prices 2012
             Housing Type               Median Price            Change Since 2010
     Single-Family Detached              $178,000                      -6.8%
     Condominium                          $47,000                      21.6%
     Source: DataQuick, August 2012.
     Rental Prices
     Rental housing serves many needs, such as young adults not ready for
     the cost or responsibilities of homeownership, seniors seeking less
     costly and lower maintenance dwellings, and families who benefit
     from the lower cost of rental housing and on-site amenities such as tot
     lots and swimming pools. Very low income households are often on
     fixed incomes and are best served by rental housing. Overall, the
     rental market provides affordable housing opportunities to a great
     range of household sizes and incomes.
     An internet survey provided asking prices for multifamily, single-
     family attached and single-family detached rentals in August 2012. As
     shown in Table 8.13, single-family homes rent at prices affordable to
     low and moderate income households. Multifamily units in Highland
     are affordable to very low income households able to expend slightly
     more than 30 percent of their income on housing. This snapshot in
     time survey shows that the rental housing stock in Highland is
     generally affordable to lower and moderate income households.
8-12                                          May 2013 | City of Highland General Plan

                                                                               8. HOUSING ELEMENT
                           Table 8.13: Highland Asking Rents
                                                   Single-Family Single-Family
       Unit Size                   Multifamily       Attached      Detached
      1 Bedroom                     $650                 --            --
      2 Bedroom                     $774              $841           $886
      3 Bedroom                   $1,050            $1,500          $1,504
      4 Bedroom                           --        $1,932          $1,821
      5 Bedroom                           --             --         $1,899
 Source: Trulia rental database search, July 2012.
Overcrowding
Lower income households sometimes settle for smaller, less adequate
housing. This may result in overcrowding. Overcrowding places a
strain on physical facilities and does not provide a satisfying living
environment. While some families with low incomes may opt for
overcrowding to deduce spending, many lower-income residents often
have no choice but to live in overcrowded housing. Overcrowded
housing occurs when there are more persons than habitable rooms.
According to the American Community Survey, there are
approximately 1,500 overcrowded units in Highland, representing
10.5 percent of all households. In Highland, overcrowding is more
prevalent in renter households; 19.7 percent of renter households
compared to 6.1 percent of owner households meet the definition of
overcrowded. The existing rental housing stock may not meet the unit
size and affordability needs of a portion of Highland’s lower income
households.
Overpayment
An important factor in determining existing housing need is the
affordability of housing. One measure of housing affordability is the
percentage of a household's gross income needed to meet monthly
mortgage payments. According to SCAG and the United States
Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD), housing
costs should not exceed 30 percent of a household's gross income.
Households expending more than 30 percent for housing are
overpaying, thus limiting their ability to afford other important
expenses. This may cause a series of related financial problems, which
may result in a deterioration of housing stock because costs associated
with maintenance must be sacrificed for more immediate expenses
such as food, clothing, health care, and utilities. It may also result in
the selection of inappropriately sized units that do not suit the space
or amenity needs of the household.
According to the American Community Survey data used in the SCAG
RHNA Methodology, 58.6 percent of renter households and 39.5
City of Highland General Plan                                                                 8-13

                                 HIGHLAND…A Great Place to Live
     percent of owner households overpay. Of these households, 36.0
     percent of renters and 16.8 percent of home owners severely overpay,
     expending 50 percent or more of their income on housing. Ownership
     households generally have higher incomes and equity for loans that
     enable them to expend less of their annual income on housing.
     Special Needs Groups
     Individuals and families in certain subpopulations face significant
     challenges to finding and affording adequate housing. As determined
     by state housing element law, subpopulations with special
     circumstances affecting housing include disabled persons, elderly
     persons, large households, farmworkers, female-headed households,
     and the homeless.
     Persons with Disabilities (Including
     Developmental Disabilities)
     Disabled persons often have special housing needs with regard to
     accessibility, location, and transportation. Disabled persons often face
     employment hardships and many may rely on fixed incomes,
     therefore reducing their ability to afford adequate housing. The
     breadth and variety of disabilities presents a range of challenges for
     meeting the needs of disabled persons, including persons with
     developmental disabilities.
     The American Community Survey and 2010 Census did not track
     disabilities. According to the 2000 Census, approximately 19.6
     percent of Highland residents over 5 years of age had a disability. The
     2000 Census reports on several categories of disabilities:
            Employment disabilities that restrict a person’s ability to work
             outside the home
            Go-outside-home conditions that restrict a person’s ability to
             go outside the home without assistance
            Mental conditions lasting over 6 months that impair memory
             or concentration
            Physical disabilities that limits basic activities like walking or
             reaching
            Self-care disabilities that restrict a person’s ability to feed,
             dress or bath themselves
            Sensory disabilities like blindness, deafness or other severe
             vision and hearing impairments
8-14                                       May 2013 | City of Highland General Plan

                                                                            8. HOUSING ELEMENT
The 2000 Census identified 7,979 individuals in Highland with one or
more disabilities. Of those disabled persons, 6,580 are under 65 years
of age. Persons with an employment disability represent the largest
share of disabled people at 46.2 percent, followed by physical
disabilities at 39.2 percent and going outside the home disabilities at
34.9 percent. Persons with mental disabilities comprise 27.8 percent
of the community’s disabled population. Lastly, sensory and self-care
disabilities account for 17.5 and 14.1 percent of disabled residents,
respectively. The City of Highland is working with a property owner
that intends to provide mental health services housing within an
existing apartment complex in the City.
There are also disabilities that are not tracked by the Census. For
example, the Census does not record persons or households affected
by developmental disabilities, including autism spectrum disorders.
Federal law defines developmental disability as a severe, chronic
disability that:
        Is attributable to a mental or physical impairment or a
         combination of mental and physical impairments;
        Is manifested before the individual attains age 22;
        Is likely to continue indefinitely;
        Results in substantial functional limitations to three or more of
         the following areas of major life activities; self-care, receptive
         and expressive language, learning, mobility, self-direction,
         capacity for independent living, and economic self-sufficiency;
         and
        Reflects the individual’s need for a combination and sequence
         of special, interdisciplinary, or generic services, supports, or
         other assistance that is of lifelong or extended duration and is
         individually planned and coordinated, except that such term,
         when applied to infants and young children means individuals
         from birth to age 5, inclusive, who has substantial
         developmental delay or specific congenial or acquired
         conditions with a high probability of resulting in
         developmental disabilities if services are not provided.
The U.S. Administration of Developmental Disabilities estimates that
1.5 percent of a community’s population may have a developmental
disability. The City’s population estimate for 2012 is 53,733, indicating
that there could be approximately 800 persons with developmental
disabilities in Highland.
Some residents with developmental disabilities may live comfortably
without special accommodations, but others require a supervised
living situation such as group housing or an assisted living facility.
Highland residents with developmental disabilities can seek
assistance from the Autism Society Inland Empire in Corona or at the
Inland Regional Center in San Bernardino, the largest regional
City of Highland General Plan                                                              8-15

                                 HIGHLAND…A Great Place to Live
     developmental disability support center in the State of California.
     Some people with disabilities may require modifications that allow
     freedom of movement to/from and within a housing unit. California
     Code of Regulations Title 24 sets forth accessibility and adaptability
     requirements for public buildings. There are also state and federal
     minimum standards for multifamily housing. However, as these
     standards are not mandatory for single-family homes, so in-home
     accessibility can be an issue for people with disabilities. The City of
     Highland permits encroachments into setbacks for any accessory
     structure (such as a wheelchair ramp) and is in the process of
     adopting a reasonable accommodation ordinance (expected in early
     2013). A reasonable accommodation ordinance establishes a clear
     process for approving adjustments to development standards to
     address a special need for a disabled person.
     Elderly Persons
     Elderly persons often seek housing based on affordability, proximity
     to services, proximity to public transportation, and accessibility.
     Senior households may reside on fixed incomes, resulting in limited
     housing opportunities and sensitivity to market increases in housing
     costs. According to the SCAG RHNA methodology, of the City of
     Highland’s renter households, 392 are age 65 and above (8 percent of
     all renters). An estimated 1,335 senior households owned their homes
     (14 percent of all owners).
     Disabilities also create special housing needs for the elderly. Limited
     mobility or sensory abilities make accessible, barrier-free housing and
     proximity to public transportation a priority for some senior
     households. According to the 2000 Census, 24 percent of all Highland
     residents aged 65 years and over suffer from one type of disability,
     while 23 percent suffer from two or more disabilities. Physical and
     self-care disabilities are particularly prevalent, making senior care
     housing an important need. Moreover, elderly residents seeking to
     remain independent benefit from programs that help them
     rehabilitate and improve their home. The City’s Neighborhood Repair
     Grant program provides up to $25,000 for home improvement
     projects, including accessibility improvements.
     The City of Highland is developing a reasonable accommodation
     ordinance to provide disabled seniors a clear process for removing
     impediments to fully accessible housing.
     Jeffrey Court provides 60 very low income and 124 low income
     apartments to seniors. For seniors requiring assisted care, the City has
     three residential care facilities for the elderly serving 17 residents and
     13 adult residential care facilities with the capacity to serve 71
     residents. The Highland Senior Center and Highland District Council
     on Aging, Inc. provides seniors with social events, planned trips,
     enrichment classes, transportation assistance, and a visitors and
     phone pal program for homebound seniors.
8-16                                        May 2013 | City of Highland General Plan

                                                                        8. HOUSING ELEMENT
Large and Single-Parent Families
Increasing living costs have placed an additional hardship on lower
and moderate income large families, defined as five or more members.
Large families are considered a special needs group due to the limited
supply of housing adequately sized to accommodate a large family
without overcrowding. Single-parent households face additional
challenges. Single-parent households have lower incomes than two-
parent households, yet must afford housing and childcare on one
income. Based on income statistics, female-headed households and
female single-parents are considered to have a special housing need
due to relatively low incomes.
According to the SCAG RHNA methodology, in 2011 3,770 large
families resided in Highland, representing 24.0 percent of all
households. Of these large families, 1,346 were renters and 2,094 were
owners. According to the SCAG RHNA methodology, of Highland’s
female-headed households, 1,491 were renters and 1,045 were owners.
In 2012, the number of single-parent households with children under
the age of 18 was 2,521, representing 16 percent of the City’s
households. There were 1,667 female-headed households with
children under the age of 18, representing 20.1 percent of the City’s
households. Single-parent household incomes tend to be lower than
their two-parent counterparts, potentially because the parent may
have to take part time employment due to child care needs.
Single-family detached rentals and multifamily housing with child-
oriented amenities, such as playgrounds and onsite childcare, would
help meet the housing needs of Highland’s large family and single-
parent households. Affordable attached housing, such as
condominiums, can also help meet the needs of female-headed and
single-parent households in Highland.
Farm Workers
The economy in Highland was once driven by the citrus industry. As
orchards turned into neighborhoods the number of farm workers
employed in Highland decreased. According to the Bureau of Labor
Statistics, in 2010 approximately 157 Highland residents reported
employment in agricultural, forestry, fishing, or hunting industries in
other cities. Only one person reported having agricultural or related
employment located in Highland. Farm workers have special housing
needs because they generally move based on seasons, earn lower
incomes, and are known to double up in order to afford housing. In
agriculture-dependent areas, affordable seasonal or permanent
housing is an important component of the special needs housing
stock. Housing targeted specifically to farm workers is unnecessary in
Highland.
City of Highland General Plan                                                          8-17

                                HIGHLAND…A Great Place to Live
     Extremely Low Income Households
     Extremely low income (ELI) households earn annual incomes that are
     30 percent or less of the area median income. Based on state income
     limits for 2012, a four-person, ELI household earns no more than
     $20,100 and can afford $502 per month for rent (expending 30
     percent of annual income on housing). These households are generally
     living paycheck-to-paycheck and could be at risk of homelessness in
     the event of unemployment or a large expense such as medical
     treatment.
     Households with extremely low incomes often experience severe
     overpayment and overcrowding. The relatively affordable rental
     housing stock in Highland provides ELI households with more options
     than they would have elsewhere, but they typically spend more than
     30 percent of their income on housing.
     Utilizing American Community Survey data, the Southern California
     Association of Governments estimates that there are 1,857 ELI
     households in Highland (13.8 percent of all households). Small
     extremely low income households can often be accommodated
     through second units and single room occupancy units, however, large
     ELI households may face greater difficulty in finding affordable
     housing. Subsidized housing appropriate for extremely low income
     families can be provided in many forms including affordable rental
     multifamily units, townhomes, or condominiums.
     The City’s Residential High Density Special land use permits housing
     between 20 and 30 units per acre; densities that could potentially
     accommodate housing for lower income households. Higher density
     multifamily projects may serve as a future resource for the City’s
     extremely low income population. The Housing Plan puts forth a
     policy to contact non-profits that serve ELI households to explore
     potential opportunities in the City of Highland.
     Homeless Persons
     The homeless are the community’s most vulnerable residents. The
     homeless often face chemical dependency, mental health problems,
     domestic violence, and other life-threatening conditions. Individuals
     and families experience homelessness for a variety of reasons, and
     therefore a homeless population may have a variety of needs. A
     homeless person may need medical care, childcare assistance, credit
     counseling, substance abuse treatment, job training, and/or English
     language education, among other services.
     The Community Action Partnership of San Bernardino County
     conducted a countywide housing needs assessment and provided the
     results for each city in 2007. More recent studies were only reported
     at the countywide level so data specific to the City of Highland was not
     available. The data collected in February 2007 includes a point-in-
     time homeless persons count and an evaluation of the homeless
8-18                                      May 2013 | City of Highland General Plan

                                                                         8. HOUSING ELEMENT
population and their needs through homeless peer interviews.
Homeless service providers, formerly homeless persons, and some
currently homeless persons were trained to collect the data.
The point-in-time survey reported 95 unsheltered homeless
individuals, a sheltered 4-person family, and 13 persons living in cars,
RVs, or encampments for a total of 112 homeless persons in Highland.
This represents approximately 1.5 percent of the county’s homeless
population. The City’s extremely low income families and individuals
are potentially at risk of homelessness.
There are a variety of emergency and transitional housing service
providers in the Highland area to address a range of needs (see Table
8.14). Facilities in Highland provide air-conditioned rest areas in
dangerously hot weather, emergency food provisions, employment
assistance, marriage counseling, psychiatric evaluation and
counseling, and transitional housing with supportive services. The
Frazee Community Center operates the Palm House in Highland, a
transitional housing facility offering a range of life-improvement
services including substance abuse treatment for women and women
with children. This facility has the capacity to serve 20 homeless
women and children. Other nearby communities offer additional
resources for the homeless.
City of Highland General Plan                                                           8-19

                                                                      HIGHLAND…A Great Place to Live
                 Table 8.14: Local Resources for Homeless and At-Risk of Homeless Persons
                                                                                                                    Target
                 Name                    Location                               Services                        Population
 Cedar House                            Bloomington   Substance abuse rehabilitation (131 beds)                  Individuals
 Bethel Christian Fellowship              Fontana     Emergency food, clothing, counseling, and referrals             All
 Employment Development
                                          Fontana     Job training and employment assistance                          All
 Department
 Peace in the Valley Rehab Center         Fontana     Substance abuse rehabilitation (6 beds)                    Individuals
                                                      Emergency food and clothing, residential care for
 Set Free                                 Fontana                                                                     All
                                                      substance abusers undergoing rehabilitation
 Transitional Assistance Department       Fontana     Motel vouchers, permanent housing, and utility deposits         All
                                                      Transitional housing with substance abuse treatment      Women (w/ or
 Frazee Palm House                        Highland
                                                      (approximately 20 beds)                                   w/o children)
                                                      Air conditioned facilities during dangerously hot
 Patton State Hospital Senior Center      Highland                                                                    All
                                                      weather
 Saint Adelaide Catholic Church           Highland    Emergency food, employment and marriage counseling              All
 Vista Guidance Centers of                            Psychiatric evaluation and counseling and referral
                                          Highland                                                                    All
 Highland                                             services
 Inland Temporary Homes                 Loma Linda    Transitional housing and case management                     Families
 Jerry L. Pratts Memorial Veterans                    Clothing, substance abuse treatment, job training,
                                        Loma Linda                                                                 Veterans
 Affairs Medical Center                               transportation, and case management
 Saint Joseph the Worker                Loma Linda    Food on Saturday mornings                                       All
 Abundant Living Outreach Center     Rancho Cucamonga Food, clothing, and hygiene products                            All
                                                      Motel vouchers, emergency food, clothing, counseling,
 Family Services Association             Redlands                                                                     All
                                                      and case management
 Family Services Association Home                     Self-sufficiency training, child care, food, and
                                         Redlands                                                                     All
 Again Project                                        counseling
 First Assembly of God                   Redlands     Emergency food                                                  All
 Salvation Army                          Redlands     Emergency food, counseling, and utility assistance              All
 Help Unlimited Outreach, Inc.             Rialto     Staff training and outreach                                     All
                                                                                                                  Pregnant
 House of Mercy                            Rialto     Miscellaneous assistance
                                                                                                                    women
                                                      Substance abuse treatment, counseling, and case
 Bienstar Human services               San Bernardino                                                                 All
                                                      management
 Catholic Charities                    San Bernardino Motel vouchers, emergency food, and utility assistance          All
 Central City Lutheran Mission         San Bernardino Cold weather shelter and food (November to April)               Men
                                                      Transitional and emergency housing, motel vouchers,          Men with
 Central City Lutheran Mission         San Bernardino
                                                      food, clothing, counseling, and youth programs               HIV/AIDS
 Children's Fund                       San Bernardino Education First school, clothing, and furniture                Youth
 Community Action Partnership of
                                                      No-cost home weatherization services and utility
 San Bernardino County Energy          San Bernardino                                                                  All
                                                      assistance
 Conservation Program
 Community Action Partnership of
                                                      Motel vouchers, rental assistance, food, miscellaneous
 San Bernardino County Family          San Bernardino                                                               Families
                                                      family self-sufficiency supportive services
 Development Program
 Cornerstone Compassion Center         San Bernardino Emergency food and clothing                                      All
 Department of Behavioral Health                                                                                  Mentally ill
                                       San Bernardino Supportive permanent housing and counseling services
 Homeless Program                                                                                                   persons
 Faith, Inc.                           San Bernardino Sober living program (6 beds for women, 6 for men)          Individuals
 Foothill Family Shelter               San Bernardino Transitional housing (8 units) and case management            Families
8-20                                                                                May 2013 | City of Highland General Plan

                                                                                                         8. HOUSING ELEMENT
                Table 8.14: Local Resources for Homeless and At-Risk of Homeless Persons
                                                                                                                                 Target
                Name                                   Location                              Services                        Population
                                                                    Emergency and transitional shelter with supportive
Frazee Community Center                            San Bernardino                                                                  All
                                                                    services
                                                                    Prevention education, Hispanic outreach program,
Hase and Associates Systems, Inc.                  San Bernardino   outpatient substance abuse treatment, employment               All
                                                                    assistance, and DUI program
Hernandez Community Center                         San Bernardino   Food distribution and youth activities                         All
                                                                    Emergency, transitional, and permanent housing,
                                                                                                                            Persons with
Inland AIDS Project                                San Bernardino   emergency rent and utility assistance, and residential
                                                                                                                               HIV/AIDS
                                                                    care for chronically ill
Inland Behavioral and Health
                                                   San Bernardino   Case management and various emergency services                 All
Services
Knotts Family Agency                               San Bernardino   Transitional housing                                         Youth
Mary's Mercy Center                                San Bernardino   Emergency food, clothing, and showers                          All
                                                                                                                            Women with
New House Women with Children                      San Bernardino   Substance abuse rehabilitation
                                                                                                                                Children
New House, Inc.                                    San Bernardino   Substance abuse rehabilitation (39 beds)                 Individuals
                                                                                                                                Female
Operation Grace                                    San Bernardino   Emergency and transitional shelter
                                                                                                                              individuals
Our Lady of Fatima                                 San Bernardino   Emergency food                                                 All
Our Lady of Hope                                   San Bernardino   Emergency food and clothing                                    All
                                                                    Case management and housing, education, and            Emancipated
Priscilla's Helping Hand                           San Bernardino
                                                                    employment assistance                                   foster youths
                                                                    Advocacy, housing and personal assistance referrals,        Disabled
Rolling Start, Inc.                                San Bernardino
                                                                    and independent living skills training                      persons
Salvation Army                                     San Bernardino   Emergency shelter (70 beds)                                    All
                                                                                                                               Individual
Salvation Army ARC                                 San Bernardino   Alcohol abuse treatment program (65 beds)
                                                                                                                                 males
San Bernardino City Mission                        San Bernardino   Emergency food and clothing                                    All
San Bernardino County                                                                                                      Veterans and
                                                   San Bernardino   Assistance with benefits and pension claims
Department of Veterans Affairs                                                                                               dependents
San Bernardino Sexual Assault                                                                                                  Victims of
                                                   San Bernardino   Counseling, hospital, and court accompaniment
Services                                                                                                                   sexual assault
Set Free Christian Fellowship                      San Bernardino   Substance abuse transitional living (35 beds)            Individuals
Taft T. Newman, Inc.                               San Bernardino   Substance abuse rehabilitation and case management             All
Veterans Alcoholic Rehab Program
                                                   San Bernardino   Substance abuse rehabilitation                             Veterans
(VARP) Harris House
                                                                                                                                Female
VARP Gibson House for Women                        San Bernardino   Substance abuse rehabilitation
                                                                                                                                veterans
Veronica's Home of Mercy                           San Bernardino   Christian transitional housing (14 beds)                    Women
Veterans Alcoholic Rehabilitation
Program (VARP) Gibson House for                    San Bernardino   Substance abuse rehabilitation                         Male veterans
Men
Veterans Counseling Center                         San Bernardino   Individual and group counseling                            Veterans
Victory Outreach                                   San Bernardino   Substance abuse rehabilitation (10 beds)                       All
Vista Guidance Center                              San Bernardino   Drop-in center with clothing and laundry facilities            All
                                                                    Motel vouchers, food, clothing, and rent/utility
Westside Community Center                          San Bernardino                                                                  All
                                                                    assistance
Source: Community Action Partnership of San Bernardino County 2012.
City of Highland General Plan                                                                                                          8-21
                                              HIGHLAND…A Great Place to Live
     FUTURE HOUSING NEEDS
     Regional Housing Needs Assessment
     Under state guidelines, SCAG is required to identify regional housing
     needs by income category. This housing need provides the basis for
     distributing fair-share housing allocations among jurisdictions in
     order to accommodate population and employment growth from June
     30, 2014, to January 1, 2021.
     The City of Highland’s share of the region’s housing need for the
     2014—2021 planning period is 1,500 units divided into income
     categories: 349 very low, 246 low, 280 moderate, and 625 above
     moderate income units. Accordingly, 39.7 percent are collectively
     allocated to the very low and low income households (referred to as
     lower income households), 18.7 percent to moderate income, and 41.7
     percent to above moderate income households.
     The City assumes that one-half of its very low income RHNA is
     equivalent to the number of projected extremely low income
     households. With a Regional Housing Needs Assessment (RHNA) of
     349 very low income households, an estimated 174 are projected to be
     extremely low income (earning up to 30 percent of the area median
     income).
     In the 2006–2014 Housing Element the City committed to rezoning
     selected sites to accommodating the lower income RHNA. The City of
     Highland successfully implemented the rezoning program and
     therefore does not have to carry any unmet RHNA over from the
     previous cycle. The RHNA for the 2014–2021 planning period is listed
     in Table 8.15.
                            Table 8.15: Highland 2014–2021 RHNA
                       Income Category                                   Units                    Percent
      Very Low (0–50% of median)1                                        349                        23.3%
      Low (51–80% of median)                                             246                        16.4%
      Moderate (81–120% of median)                                       280                        18.7%
      Above Moderate (120% above median)                                 625                        41.7%
      Total                                                            1,500                       100%
      Source: Southern California Association of Governments, 2012.
      1: Half of the very low income RHNA, 174, is assumed to represent extremely low income households (0–30% of
         median).
8-22                                                         May 2013 | City of Highland General Plan

                                                                                                             8. HOUSING ELEMENT
Preservation of At-Risk Affordable
Housing Units
At-risk affordable projects are those that could convert to market
rents within 10 years from the planning period. Affordable units may
convert to market rate prices due to prepayment of HUD mortgages,
opt-outs, and expiration of Section 8 contracts, and expiration dates
established by other funding sources.
City records identified that one project is at risk of converting to
market rate during the planning period. According to the County of
San Bernardino Department of Community Development and
Housing, the assisted units at Raintree Apartments are the only
housing units in Highland restricted through County tax-exempt bond
financing. Raintree Apartments currently provides 61 units affordable
to low income households and 31units affordable to moderate income
households. All of the units have one or two bedrooms. The
affordability covenant was scheduled to expire June 15, 2015.
Amendments to the loan agreement extended the affordability
covenant to August 2020.
Upon affordability expiration, the City may pursue subsidizing the
units, purchasing Raintree Apartments and placing a long-term
affordability covenant on the units, or constructing replacement units.
If the property owner does not extend the affordability covenant, the
City will reach out to numerous qualified entities determined by HCD
as having the ability to purchase and manage the property for
continuous affordable housing.
The County of San Bernardino currently owns and operates 12 public
housing units in Highland. There is no expiration date for the
affordability of these units. The County Housing Authority also issues
approximately 405 Housing Choice Vouchers in Highland. Program
participants my use their vouchers throughout San Bernardino
County. There are no Section 8 restricted buildings in Highland. Table
8.16 provides an inventory of the City’s restricted affordable housing.
             Table 8.16: Restricted Affordable Units in Highland
      Unique Identifier                 Very Low                Low    Moderate           Expiration Date
  Senior Housing
  Jeffrey Court                              60                 124          0               March 2053
  Family Housing
  Habitat for Humanity                        0                    3         0                July 2032
  Raintree Apartments                         0                  61        31                 June 2020
  E. 9th Street Apartments                             12              0                         N/A
  Source: City of Highland Planning Division, 2012.
  1: The E. 9th Street Apartments are owned and operated by the County Housing Authority. The County Housing
     Authority reports that there is no affordability expiration date.
City of Highland General Plan                                                                                               8-23

                                               HIGHLAND…A Great Place to Live
     Preservation Costs
     The financial cost of replacing rent subsidies depends on the rent for
     the apartment and the income level of the tenant. Raintree
     Apartments includes 61 units affordable to low income households
     and 53 affordable to moderate income households. The maximum
     affordable rents are higher than current market rents in the City of
     Highland, as shown in 8-17, below (additional rental market
     information is provided in Table 8-13).
                           Table 8.17: Affordable vs Market Rents
          Income                Affordable               Affordable               Affordable             Average
         Category                   Rent                     Rent                   Rent 3            Market Rent
                                  1 Person                2 Person                 Persons
      Low Income                    $886                    $1,013                  $1,139
      Moderate                                                                                          $650/$744
                                   $1,329                   $1,520                  $1,709
      Income
      Source: City of Highland Planning Division, 2012, and Trulia rental database search, July 2012.
      Note: Annual income limits based on California State income limits for 2012; acceptable expenditure for rental
        housing calculated as 30 percent of income divided by 12 months assumes set-asides for utilities.
     Typically, the amount of subsidy needed is the difference between
     what a household can afford to pay (no more than 30 percent of
     annual income) and the fair market rent for the unit. Fair market
     rents are competitive and affordable to lower and moderate income
     households; thus, no subsidies are needed to maintain affordability at
     Raintree Apartments. Long-term trends in rental housing prices in
     Highland indicate that rental units will continue to be affordable to
     moderate and lower income households throughout the planning
     period. For example, apartment rents in Highland remained
     affordable during the subprime mortgage crisis in which foreclosures
     and changes in lending practices forced more households into the
     rental market.
     Given this ongoing market trend, the City would not need to subsidize
     the expiring Raintree Apartment units because market rents are
     affordable to low and moderate income households. However, if the
     units were improved and rents were significantly increased, a financial
     resource would be necessary to pay the difference between the higher
     rents and the market rents to maintain affordability.
     Preservation Resources
     The City of Highland is committed to working with affordable housing
     property owners for solutions to prevent the expiration of affordability
     covenants. In the event that the City cannot make an agreement with a
     property owner, the City will notify qualified entities to spur interest
     in preserving the units through outside resources. Qualified entities
     are housing nonprofits that have been approved by the Department of
     Housing and Community Development. To qualify, an entity must be
     able to manage the project, maintain affordability for at least 30 years
8-24                                                           May 2013 | City of Highland General Plan

                                                                         8. HOUSING ELEMENT
or the remaining term of assistance, preserve the existing occupancy
profile, maintain rents at a predetermined level of affordability, and
agree to renew subsidies if available.
Here are some local housing developers and managers that the City
may contact:
      BRIDGE Housing Corporation,
        California Housing Partnership Cooperation,
        Jamboree Housing Corporation,
        LINC Housing,
        Mercy Housing,
        Neighborhood Housing Services of the Inland Empire, and
        National Core
Highland is a member of the San Bernardino County Urban County
Consortium and participates in countywide efforts to receive federal
housing and community development funds. These funds are
potential resources for affordable housing construction, rehabilitation,
and preservation. The San Bernardino County Consolidated Plan is an
assessment of existing affordable housing and community
development needs that informs the U.S. Department of Housing and
Urban Development as part of a federal fund awarding process
granted to participating jurisdictions like Highland to create and
rehabilitate affordable housing for lower income households.
Multifamily Mortgage Revenue Bonds administered by the County of
San Bernardino provides below-market interest rate loans for
development of new multifamily rental units, or acquisition and
rehabilitation of existing multifamily rental units within the county
and its cooperating cities. San Bernardino County currently
administers contracts for more than 1,000 units of bond-funded
affordable housing in incorporated cities.
Low Income Housing Tax Credits (LIHTC) is another financial
resource to preserve and create new affordable housing. A nonprofit
housing corporation could purchase the at-risk project, rehabilitate it
using tax credits, and extend affordability controls. The California Tax
Credit Allocation Committee oversees the application and allocation
process for all LIHTC project. Applicants compete for the funds,
which are prioritized based on location, affordability terms, housing
needs, and project amenities.
A shorter term solution to affordable housing stock limitation is the
County’s Housing Choice Voucher program provides rent subsidies to
extremely low- and very low-income households with a housing cost
burden, or who are at risk of becoming homeless or being displaced.
Voucher recipients rent housing from private landlords and pay a
portion of their income toward rent (usually up to 30% of their
City of Highland General Plan                                                           8-25

                                HIGHLAND…A Great Place to Live
     income). The County Housing Authority subsidizes the difference in
     monthly payments to the owner. The Housing Authority receives
     funding for more than 8,000 housing vouchers on an annual basis. In
     2012, 405 vouchers were used in Highland.
     Replacement Unit Cost
     Another option is to replace lost affordable units with new
     construction. The final cost of constructing deed-restricted affordable
     housing units depends on whether the developer needs to purchase
     land or whether the City can transfer the land at a subsidized price,
     and how well the private developer’s initial financial contribution can
     be leveraged with other funding sources.
     Based on one- and two-bedroom multifamily affordable housing
     developments built in a nearby city, the replacement unit cost in is
     estimated to be $150,000 per unit for a 100-unit project in which half
     of the units have two bedrooms. This construction cost is higher than
     multifamily housing in Highland. Adjustments made to reflect the
     local Highland market indicate that replacement units could cost up to
     $120,000 per unit over the 8-year planning period. This cost estimate
     is greater than the per unit cost of typical apartment development due
     to the desire to create highly amenitized apartments that will be
     welcome in any neighborhood.
     HOUSING CONSTRAINTS
     Various factors influence the City’s ability to meet its housing goals.
     These include governmental constraints, such as land use regulations,
     and nongovernmental constraints, such as market and environmental
     factors. This section provides the requisite analysis of potential and
     actual market, governmental, and environmental constraints to the
     production, maintenance, and improvement of housing pursuant to
     state law.
     Governmental Constraints
     The General Plan Land Use Element sets forth land use designations
     to guide the location, type, and intensity or density of permitted uses
     of land. The Land Use and Development Code implements the General
     Plan by providing specific direction and development standards
     within each of the use categories. These land use controls can facilitate
     or limit certain types of development.
     General Plan
     State law requires that each city have a General Plan that establishes
     policy guidelines for future development. The City of Highland
     adopted a comprehensive update of the General Plan in 2006. The
8-26                                       May 2013 | City of Highland General Plan

                                                                                                      8. HOUSING ELEMENT
Land Use Element describes the land use policies and designations
used to guide physical development of the City though the location,
distribution, and density of uses. Predominately a residential
community, over 60 percent of the City’s 11,948 acres of land is
planned for residential development.
As shown in Table 8.18 the Land Use Element describes seven land
uses allowing housing, including a historic preservation district and
one mixed commercial, office, and residential land use. The Planned
Development (PD) designation allows flexibility in development
standards to encourage creativity and site-specific design. The PD
district is an opportunity for master planning without a specific plan,
potentially providing a cost savings to the developer, buyer, and
renter.
               Table 8.18: Residential General Plan Land Uses
        Land Use
      Designation                Acres                             Description
                                           Rural and equestrian-oriented residential development at
Agricultural/Equestrian           899
                                           a maximum density of 2 units per acre
                                           Single-family detached homes, including mobile homes,
      Low Density                2,460
                                           at a maximum density of 6 units per acre.
                                           Small lot single-family detached or attached housing,
    Medium Density                179      mobile homes, and multifamily housing at a maximum
                                           density of 12 units per acre.
                                           Multifamily housing at a maximum density of 18 units per
      High Density                 46
                                           acre.
 High Density Special              59      Multifamily housing between 20 and 30 units per acre.
                                           Low density residential development within the Historic
  Village Residential             32
                                           Village District at a maximum density of 6 units per acre.
                                           Horizontal and vertical mixed-use housing types at a
       Mixed Use                   58
                                           maximum density of 18 units per acre.
                                           Specific plan areas in which housing types and densities
Planned Development              3,455
                                           may vary, but typically range from 5 to 12 units per acre.
Source: City of Highland GIS database, 2012.
The program provided by the General Plan Land Use Element
establishes 15 goals for future development within the City. These
goals are intended to:
           Plan for future growth;
           Provide clarity in land use guidance;
           Maintain a mix of development with urban, suburban, and
            rural character;
           Create places for people to live, shop, work, learn, and
            recreate;
           Protect and enhance Highland’s neighborhoods;
City of Highland General Plan                                                                                        8-27

                               HIGHLAND…A Great Place to Live
            Provide new housing opportunities;
            Strengthen commercial opportunities;
            Expand the employment base;
            Ensure land use compatibility; and
            Preserve natural resources.
     The land use controls provided in the General Plan and Land Use and
     Development Code guide the development of new housing to meet
     existing and future needs, maintain the existing character, and
     improve neighborhoods and the housing stock. A new land use,
     Residential High Density Special (R-4), was established as part of the
     implementation of the 2006–2014 Housing Element. This land use
     allows densities between 20 and 30 units per acre to facilitate the
     development of multifamily and high density attached housing types.
     Land Use and Development Code
     Zoning regulations are intended to ensure that development does not
     negatively affect community health, safety, and welfare. The City’s
     Land Use and Development Code regulates housing opportunities by
     establishing permitted uses and development standards. Several
     zoning districts respond to specific existing conditions, such as
     compatibility with the historic development in the original Highland
     Townsite, and appropriate design for busy transportation corridors.
     Residential uses allowed in Highland are listed by Zoning District in
     Table 8.19. Uses permitted by right are indicated by the “P,”
     conditionally permitted are indicated by the “C,” and permitted uses
     that may require staff approval are indicated by “SR.”
8-28                                      May 2013 | City of Highland General Plan

                                                                                                                         8. HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                              Table 8.19: Residential Uses Permitted by Zoning District
                                                               Single-                                                                            Residential
                                    Agricultural               Family              Two-Family                                  Multifamily       High Density              Village              Corridor              Mixed
                                     Equestrian             Residential            Residential           Multifamily               (R-4)            Special            Residential            Residential               Use
             Use                         (A/EQ)                 (R-1)                  (R-2)                 (R-3)                                   (HDS)                   (VR)                (R-2C)                (MU)
 Single-Family
 Detached (2–4                               P                     P                    SR                                                                                  P                   SR                   SR
 units/parcel)
 Single-Family
 Detached (5+                                                                          C                      C                    SR                                                           C                   SR
 units/parcel)
 Second Unit                                 P                     P                     P                      P                     P                  P                     P                    P                    P
 Single-Family Attached                                                               SR                     SR                                                                               SR                 C/SR1
 Multifamily Attached                                                                  C                      C                    SR                 SR                                         C                 C/SR1
 Mobile Home
                                           SR                     SR                     C                      C                                                                                                    
 Subdivisions
 Mobile Home parks                                                C                     C                      C                                                                                                    
 Mobile Home on
                                           SR                     SR                    SR                     SR                                                                                                    
 Foundation
 Group homes,
 boarding or rooming                                              C                     C                      C                     C                  C                     C                    C                    
 houses (3+ persons)
 Residential Care
                                                                                       C                      C                     C                  C                                         C                    
 Facility (7+ persons)
 Senior Independent
                                           SR                     SR                     C                      C                     C                  C                    SR                    C                    C
 Living
 Senior Congregate
                                                                                       C                      C                     C                  C                                         C                    C
 Care/ Assisted Living
 Convalescent Care                                                                     C                      C                     C                  C                                         C                    C
 Emergency Shelter2                                                                                                                                                                                              
 Transitional Housing2                                                                                                                                                                                           
 Permanent Supportive
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
 Housing2
 Source: City of Highland Land Use and Development Code, 2012.
 Note: Assisted living, live/work, multifamily dwellings, residential accessory structures, senior housing, single-family dwellings, and townhomes are permitted by right in Planning Area 2 – Residential Villages and Planning
    Area 3 – Village Center of the draft Greenspot Village and Marketplace Specific Plan.
 1: Single-family attached and multifamily housing are conditionally permitted in attached mixed use structures and permitted by staff review in separate multiple use projects.
 2: Emergency shelters will be permitted in the Business Park district and transitional and permanent supportive housing will be permitted by right of zone, in accordance with SB 2. Amendments expected in January 2013.
City of Highland General Plan                                                                                                                                                                                            8-29

This page intentionally left blank.
8-30                                May 2013 | City of Highland General Plan
                                                                           8. HOUSING ELEMENT
Permitting Process
Development review is the primary way that to ensure that the
construction of projects contributes in a positive manner to the
community and quality of life. Residential development projects
typically undergo several types of approvals. This section outlines the
development review process for various types of housing.
Single-Family
Single-family detached homes are the most common housing type in
Highland, making up approximately three-quarters of the entire
housing stock. Single-family detached housing is permitted by right in
three zoning districts (A/EQ, R-1, and VR), and permitted following
Staff Review in two districts (R-2 and R-2C). Single-family attached
housing, such as condominiums, is permitted in the R-2, R-2C, and R-
3 zones with a Staff Review Permit. Large single-family detached and
single-family attached projects that require tract maps are ultimately
reviewed by the Planning Commission. In 2009, the City of Highland
merged the former Design Review Board with the Planning
Commission in order to reduce the amount of time spent on design
issues and streamline the project approval process without
diminishing quality. The Planning Commission now performs design
review at the same time as other reviews that may be necessary
depending on the permit at hand.
In the case of a hypothetical 25-unit single-family detached project,
the City's Planning Division will coordinate a pre-application meeting
between the Applicant and the Project Review Committee, which
consists of members of the City's Planning Division, Building & Safety
Division, Engineering & Public Works Department, and Fire
Department. The pre-application meeting provides the Applicant an
early opportunity to present their project to the City before submitting
a development application(s) and it provides the City an opportunity
to inform the Applicant of all the City's requirements. This initial step
has proven to be successful in the past because it discloses
infrastructure or other issues that are more cost-effective to address
early in the project design phase. Identifying potential issues prior to
submitting a development application saves developers a significant
amount of time and money.
The applications required for this hypothetical project are a Tentative
Tract Map Application (for the subdivision of lots) and a Design
Review Application (for the housing product). After the Planning
Division determines the applications to be complete, they are routed
to the Project Review Committee for their formal review and
comments. Applications are also routed to utility companies and
outside responsible agencies that have requested to be notified.
Project notices are mailed to surrounding property owners within 300
feet of the subject project to solicit comments as well. At this time, the
Planning Division also starts the California Environmental Quality Act
City of Highland General Plan                                                             8-31
                                 HIGHLAND…A Great Place to Live
     process to determine any environmental impacts and the appropriate
     environmental document needed to approve the project (i.e.
     exemption, negative declaration, mitigated negative declaration, or
     environmental impact report). Once the project's environmental
     review and public comment process have been completed, the
     Planning Division provides a copy of all the comments to the
     Applicant for review and discussion with the City's Project Review
     Committee. Once the comments have been reviewed by all parties, a
     public hearing before the City's Planning Commission is scheduled
     and the tract map plans and housing product design plans are
     packaged into a single staff report to the Planning Commission. The
     Applicant is provided with a copy of the public hearing notice and staff
     report with condition and findings of facts for their review. The
     conditions clearly outline all the requirements needed to record a final
     map, as well as any conditions related to the construction of the
     housing units. Common conditions include sidewalk installation,
     precise grading plans, and type and location of landscaping and
     lighting. These conditions ensure public safety.
     The decision of the Planning Commission is final unless appealed to
     the City Council within 10 calendar days. The final step for the
     Applicant is complying with all their conditions of approval, recording
     a final map, submitting construction plans for grading and building
     permits.
     The same process applies to single-family attached projects. The only
     distinct difference is that an attached project will require a different
     type of map and the application asks questions pertinent to attached
     structures.
     Second Units
     Second dwelling units may be detached from or attached to the
     primary single-family dwelling unit. Second units are capable of
     providing housing below market prices and often meet the special
     needs of young persons, seniors, and disabled persons. In accordance
     with Assembly Bill 1866 (Government Code Section 65852.2), the City
     amended the Land Use and Development Code to make permitting a
     second unit in single-family zones a ministerial action; which does not
     require public notice, public hearing, or discretionary approval.
     Understanding that second units provide opportunities for affordable
     housing without changing the City’s small-town character; Highland
     facilitates the development of attached and detached second dwelling
     units by permitting them in all residential zones.
     Second units may be developed on parcels of no less than 7,200
     square feet that contain an existing or proposed primary dwelling
     unit. To avoid compatibility and privacy issues, second units shall be
     one story, not to exceed 16 feet in height, and subject to the same side
     and rear yard setbacks as the primary dwelling(s). Highland’s parking
     standards for second units are more lenient than in other cities. One
8-32                                       May 2013 | City of Highland General Plan

                                                                        8. HOUSING ELEMENT
uncovered parking space is required per bedroom and can be tandem
and/or located in the front building setback.
Existing development standards for second units do not constrain the
development of this form of housing. From 2006 to mid-2012, the
City approved 25 second units. Based on this record, the City assumes
that 30 second units could be permitted during the planning period.
As the City’s senior and college-age population increases, as projected
for the planning period, the City expects to process more second unit
applications per year. Second units in Highland rent for less than
$1,000 per month and can be an important housing resource for small
lower income households.
Multifamily Housing
Multifamily housing makes up approximately 17 percent of the City’s
housing stock. Multifamily housing is currently conditionally
permitted in the three multifamily zones, R-2, R-2C, R-3 and
permitted by-right in the R-4 zone and High Density Special Overlay
(HDS). The conditional use permit (CUP) process is the City’s
opportunity to ensure compatibility with surrounding uses and this
review can occur concurrently with Major Design Review. In the case
of the R-4 and HDS, only a Design Review Process is required.
The permitting procedure for a multifamily housing project is similar
to that for a large single-family detached or attached project. In the
case of a hypothetical 50-unit multifamily project, the City's Planning
Division will coordinate a pre-application meeting between the
Applicant and the Project Review Committee to identify potential
issues that should be considered early in the planning and design
process.
The by-right-of zone approach streamlines the permitting process for
projects that are most likely to meet the needs of the City’s lower and
moderate income households. Residential projects in the R-4 and
HDS districts are required to be reviewed for design adequacy.
Compatibility with design standards, such as setbacks, landscaping,
and other basic aspects of project design for multifamily projects
permitted by right of zone would be reviewed by the Planning
Commission like other uses. The intent of this process is to ensure
high quality design, and is not a substitute for the review of the use
itself.
Manufactured Housing
California Government Code specifies that permanently sited
manufactured homes that are built to the HUD Code may generally
not be excluded from lots zoned for single-family homes (unless more
than 10 years old) and are subject to the same rules as site-built
homes, except for certain architectural requirements. A city may not
require an administrative permit, planning or development process,
City of Highland General Plan                                                          8-33

                                  HIGHLAND…A Great Place to Live
     or other requirement not imposed on a conventional single-family
     dwelling.
     Single mobile home units placed on a permanent foundation, certified
     under the National Mobile Home Construction and Safety Standards
     Act of 1974 and constructed after October, 1976, are permitted in
     AQ/E, R-1, R-2, and R-3 zones following Staff Review approved by the
     Community Development Director. The review ensures that the units
     comply with state and local standards of the underlying zoning
     district.
     The Highland Land Use and Development Code broadly defines
     manufactured housing to include three related uses–a mobile home, a
     manufactured home, or travel trailer. This creates confusion as to
     whether certain uses can or cannot be permitted and whether design
     regulations can be required. The Housing Plan specifies a program to
     define and distinguish manufactured housing from mobile homes and
     travel trailers, as set forth in current HUD codes, and define the
     process for approving or disapproving such uses in a manner
     compliant with state law.
     Special Needs Housing
     Group Homes
     State law prevents cities from imposing overly restrictive regulations
     on community care facilities. The Health and Safety Code (§§ 1500 et
     seq.) requires that group homes serving six or fewer persons be (1)
     treated the same as any other residential use, (2) allowed by right in
     all residential zones, and (3) be subject to the same development
     standards, fees, taxes, and permit procedures as those imposed on the
     same type of housing in the same zone.
     According to the City’s Land Use and Development Code, a residential
     care facility is a state-authorized, certified, or licensed facility that
     provides non-medical residential care, day treatment, rehabilitative
     care, and adult day care, residential care for the elderly, transitional
     housing placement, substance abuse recovery, or foster family agency
     services. According to the permitted uses table in the Land Use and
     Development Code, residential care facilities serving seven or more
     persons are conditionally permitted in multifamily zones (R-2, R-2C,
     R-3, R-4, and HDS).
     To comply with the intent of fair housing laws and ensure clarity in
     the permitting process, the Housing Element contains a program to
     differentiate between residential care facilities serving six or fewer
     residents and those serving seven or more residents. The City has
     developed separate definitions and will approve permitting processes
     for the two types of residential care facilities, and permit those serving
     six or fewer persons by right in all residential zones (expected in
     January 2013). This will ensure that licensed facilities are
8-34                                        May 2013 | City of Highland General Plan

                                                                        8. HOUSING ELEMENT
appropriately permitted in a manner consistent with the Government
Code and fair housing law.
Boarding Houses
Although a boarding or rooming house may provide housing to
unrelated individuals, it is not considered a community care facility.
Highland’s Land Use and Development Code defines a boarding or
rooming house as a residence or portion thereof, other than a hotel, to
accommodate three or more unrelated individuals for compensation.
A boarding or rooming house does not provide on- or off-site
supportive services. Boarding and rooming houses are conditionally
permitted in all residential zones other than the A/EQ district and
may not be located within 500 feet of the same use. Furthermore, to
prevent a concentration of parolees, no more than one federal, state or
youth authority parolee shall be allowed to live in boarding or
rooming house at any one time. If a boarding or rooming facility
includes ten or more units, then there may be one additional parolee
for every ten units. The location and parolee restrictions were enacted
in response to public concerns about boarding and rooming housing
affecting community safety and welfare.
Senior Housing
As the City’s middle age and senior populations are expected to grow
during the planning period, it is important that a range of housing
types are available to serve their special needs such as smaller and
more affordable units (including second dwelling units), senior
housing, and various forms of care housing. Care housing that assists
special needs seniors include senior independent living projects,
residential care homes for the elderly, congregate care, and
convalescent care. Senior independent living projects are permitted
with a Staff Review Permit in the A/EQ, R-1, and VR zones and
conditionally permitted in multifamily zones. Congregate care and
convalescent care homes are conditionally permitted in multifamily
and commercial zones. Residential care facilities for the elderly,
serving seven or more persons, are conditionally permitted in
multifamily zones (R-2, R-2C, R-3, R-4, and HDS). Smaller facilities
will be permitted by right following a Land Use and Development
Code amendment in 2013.
Emergency Shelters, Transitional Housing, and
Permanent Supportive Housing
Recent legislation provides direction in the ways in which local
governments address housing for the homeless or those at-risk of
homelessness. Senate Bill 2 was passed to address the need for a
continuum of housing for homeless people, including emergency
shelter, transitional housing, and permanent supportive housing.
Emergency shelters are the first step in a homeless continuum of care
program designed to allow homeless people a temporary place of stay.
City of Highland General Plan                                                          8-35

                                 HIGHLAND…A Great Place to Live
     Transitional housing accommodates homeless people for up to two
     years as they stabilize their lives. Supportive housing is affordable
     housing with on- or off-site services that help a person with barriers to
     a stable living situation. SB 2 requires jurisdictions to identify a zone
     where emergency shelters will be permitted by right and the zone
     must have sufficient capacity to accommodate one year-round
     emergency shelter. Transitional and supportive housing must also be
     permitted like any other single- or multifamily residential project.
     The City of Highland is in the process of adopting an ordinance to
     comply with SB 2. The intent is to allow emergency shelters by right in
     the Business Park (BP) district. There are approximately 250 acres
     designated BP (116 of which are vacant), generally located along the
     southwestern city boundary. The average lot size is 20,800 square feet
     and could accommodate a multi-service facility for all of the City’s 112
     homeless persons. The BP designation allows for light industry,
     research and development, office uses, and business and commercial
     uses that support the employees and clients of the area. The Land Use
     and Development Code is on track to be amended in January 2013.
     Should an emergency shelter be provided in the BP district, residents
     would benefit from access to public transit, retail uses, and regional
     employment growth in nearby businesses. Residents will also be
     connected to other areas of the community and adjacent cities by
     buses. The local bus transit service provider, Omnitrans, operates two
     routes that serve this area (Route 8 and Route 15).
     Single Room Occupancy Units
     Another potential source of housing for the homeless or formerly
     homeless are single room occupancy (SRO) units. SRO units are very
     small-attached units intended for no more than one or two people. An
     agency or organization generally oversees the project and provides
     ongoing supportive services to promote self-sufficiency. The City
     permits single room occupancy units in the BP zoning district.
     Facilitating Affordable Housing
     Residential High Density Special Land Use
     Designation
     The Residential High Density Special (HDS) and R-4 zoning district
     accommodates residential products between 20 and 30 units per acre.
     A conditional use permit is not be required for multifamily uses on R-
     4, HDS. This by-right of zone use is intended to streamline the
     permitting process for projects in areas expected to assist the City’s
     higher density housing needs, per State law.
8-36                                        May 2013 | City of Highland General Plan

                                                                         8. HOUSING ELEMENT
Residential High Density Special Overlay
The City established a High Density Special Overlay on approximately
35 acres zoned as Planned Development (PD) within the General Plan
Golden Triangle Policy Area. The Overlay area is generally bound by
Greenspot Road on the south, Eucalyptus Avenue on the north,
Boulder Avenue on the east, and the City Creek wash basin on the
west. The Overlay allows the permitting of up to 650 multifamily units
(by right) at a minimum density of 20 units per acre and a maximum
density of 30 units per acre.
Lot Consolidation Incentives
Lot consolidation can increase the efficiency of land use and create the
critical mass needed for a quality multifamily housing project. The
City has identified numerous vacant and underutilized parcels that
have the potential to accommodate multifamily projects. Their
development potential could be improved through lot consolidation.
Although the development community is aware of the inherent
benefits of acquiring larger sites, the City seeks to promote this
process. Through the implementation of the Housing Plan, the City is
committing to providing expedited processing for the consolidation of
lots identified in Appendices A and B as having the potential to
accommodate lower income households.
Inclusionary Housing Ordinance
The City’s Land Use and Development Code facilitates the
development of affordable housing. Part of the Land Use and
Development Code, the Inclusionary Housing Ordinance, provides
guidelines for the development of restricted units, payment of an in-
lieu fee, or dedication of land for affordable housing.
All new residential development projects within the City must
dedicate at least 15 percent of the units for affordable housing.
Restricted for sale units must be sold at prices affordable to low and
moderate income households. Rental projects must rent at least 10
percent of the units to very low income households, with the
remaining affordable units rented to low or moderate income
households. In exchange for the construction of affordable units the
City allows unit size reduction and different interior finishes for
affordable units, as long as they are of durable quality and consistent
with the current building code.
In lieu of constructing all or any the affordable units on site, a
developer can pay an affordable housing in-lieu fee of $3,750 per unit
to the City. In lieu of building inclusionary units, the developer may
also choose to dedicate land within the city to the City. Dedicated
parcels must be suitable for the construction of inclusionary units and
equivalent to greater in value than what would be produced by
applying the City's in-lieu fee to the project. All in-lieu fees are
City of Highland General Plan                                                           8-37

                                HIGHLAND…A Great Place to Live
     deposited in an inclusionary housing fund to be spent on affordable
     housing development and programs.
     The City provides regulatory relief for developers of sites that cannot
     accommodate affordable units. If the City determines that providing
     on-site inclusionary housing is infeasible, the developer may construct
     affordable units on another site within the City prior to constructing
     the market rate project.
     Should a developer provide more affordable units than required by the
     inclusionary obligation, but fewer than required by state density
     bonus law, they may request a density bonus through the City or may
     transfer credit for those affordable units to their next project in
     Highland.
     Density Bonus
     A density bonus is a an entitlement to build additional residential
     units above the maximum number of units allowed per the Municipal
     Code in exchange for providing affordable housing specified by as
     Government Code Section 65915-65918.
     Jurisdictions must grant concessions or incentives reducing
     development standards, depending on the percentage of affordable
     units. Concessions and incentives include reductions in zoning
     standards, other development standards, design requirements, and
     other incentives that may reduce costs for the developer. Any project
     that meets the minimum criteria for a density bonus is entitled to at
     least one concession and may be entitled to as many as three
     concessions depending on the amount of affordable housing provided:
            One incentive or concession for projects including at least 10
             percent of the total units for lower income households, at least
             5 percent for very low income households, or at least 10
             percent for moderate income households
            Two incentives of concessions for projects including at least 20
             percent of the total units for lower income households, at least
             10 percent for very low income households, or at least 20
             percent for moderate income households
            Three incentives or concessions for projects that include at
             least 30 percent of the total units for lower income households,
             at least 15 percent for very low income households, or at least
             30 percent for moderate income households.
     The City’s Municipal Code permits a density bonus of 20 percent
     above the maximum permitted density if a development provides at
     least 5 percent of the units at rates that are affordable to very low
     income households or 10 percent of the units at rates that are
     affordable to low income households. If 10 percent of condominium or
     planned development units are affordable to moderate income
8-38                                       May 2013 | City of Highland General Plan

                                                                         8. HOUSING ELEMENT
households, then the project is eligible to receive a 5 percent density
bonus.
In addition, a sliding scale requires additional density bonuses above
the 20 percent threshold (up to a maximum density bonus of 35
percent):
        an additional 2.5 percent density bonus for each additional
         increase of 1 percent very low income units above the initial 5
         percent threshold;
        a density increase of 1.5 percent for each additional 1 percent
         increase in low income units above the initial 10 percent
         threshold; and
        a 1 percent density increase for each 1 percent increase in
         moderate income units above the initial 10 percent threshold.
Density bonus projects also qualify for reduced parking requirements.
These numbers are inclusive of guest parking and handicapped
parking and may be tandem or uncovered (but cannot be on-street).
Parking requirements are one on-site parking space for zero to one-
bedroom units; two on-site parking spaces for two to three bedroom
units; and two and one-half on-site parking spaces for four or more
bedroom units.
Dissolution of Redevelopment Agencies
The City of Highland Redevelopment Agency played an important role
in facilitating the development and preservation of affordable
housing. In 2012, the State of California dissolved all redevelopment
agencies, changing the ability of the City of Highland to fund housing
programs for lower and moderate income households. The dissolution
of redevelopment agencies is a new constraint that is not within the
City of Highland’s control.
Assembly Bill X1 26 (AB X1 26) and Assembly Bill X1 27 (AB X1 27)
were signed by the Governor on June 29, 2011, making certain
changes to the distribution of tax increment collected by
Redevelopment Agencies. The California Redevelopment Association
and League of California Cities filed a lawsuit in the Supreme Court of
California alleging that AB X1 26 and AB X1 27 are unconstitutional.
On December 29, 2011, the Supreme Court issued its opinion largely
upholding AB X1 26, invalidating AB X1 27, and holding that AB X1 26
may be severed from AB X1 27 and enforced independently. As a
result of the Supreme Court’s decision, on February 1, 2012, all
redevelopment agencies were dissolved and successor agencies were
mandated to wind down all outstanding redevelopment projects.
By virtue of law, Highland’s physical housing assets previously owned
by its Redevelopment Agency were transferred to the Highland
Housing Authority. The housing assets include loans made to the
City of Highland General Plan                                                           8-39

                                 HIGHLAND…A Great Place to Live
     owners of Jeffrey Court and loans and grants made to various
     homeowners who participated in the City’s Neighborhood Pride Grant
     Program and Down Payment Assistance Programs. Also transferred
     were 13 residential lots adjacent to Highland Community Park and a
     single residential lot south of Jeffrey Court. The Housing Authority is
     mandated to continue monitoring activities, but has no long-term
     funding source.
     While the physical assets may continue to be managed by the
     Highland Housing Authority, all monetary assets including the
     unencumbered housing fund balance will be remitted to the State for
     redistribution to other taxing agencies. The fate of housing funds
     collected in conjunction with bond sales remains uncertain.
     Given the dissolution of the Highland Redevelopment Agency, the City
     has little ability to provide funding for the construction, preservation
     or rehabilitation of lower and moderate-income housing. Highland
     has suspended its Neighborhood Pride Grant Program for
     rehabilitation of single-family residences and Down-Payment
     Assistance Program, but is seeking alternative sources of funding.
     Residential Development Standards
     The General Plan Land Use Element establishes where housing can be
     located in Highland and the maximum density. The Land Use and
     Development Code provides more specific residential development
     standards that determine building height, density, setbacks, parking,
     etc. Development standards tailored to each zoning district and
     certain specific uses are provided to ensure quality design to protect
     the health, safety, and welfare of the public as well as enhance the
     appearance of the community. Development standards improve the
     quality and livability of housing development in Highland.
     Table 8.20 lists the minimum acceptable standards for development
     within the City’s residential districts to assure safe and attractive
     development without hindering the production of housing.
8-40                                       May 2013 | City of Highland General Plan

                                                     Table 8.20: Residential Development Standards
      Standard            A/EQ                 R-1                R-2             R-3             R-4           HDS               VR               R-2C
 Maximum Density
                            2.0                6.0               12.0            18.0             30.0          30.0             6.0               9..0
   (units per acre)
 Minimum Building
                                                                                                 43,560        43,560                             43,560
  Site (net area in      20,000              7,200               7,200          10,000                                          7,200
                                                                                               (1 acre)1     (1 acre)1                          (1 acre)1
          so)
    Minimum Lot                                                             100 ft., 110 ft.
                         100 ft.              60 ft.             60 ft.                           None          None           100 ft.             22 ft.
        Width                                                               for corner lots
    Minimum Lot
                         120 ft.             100 ft.            100 ft.         100 ft.           None          None           100 ft.             40 ft.
        Depth
                                                                                                                                              15 ft. at any
                    35 ft., but 65 ft. 25 ft., but 55 ft.                                                                                  given point, but
   Minimum Front
                      from street        from street             20 ft.          25 ft.       15 or 25 ft.  15 or 25 ft.         15           an average
       Setback
                       centerline         centerline                                                                                        minimum of 20
                                                                                                                                                    ft.
                                                                                                                         An aggregate of   0 ft. for attached
  Minimum Interior                                                                                                       15 ft. compatible  units and 3 ft.
                    10% of lot width    5 ft. and 10 ft.   5 ft. and 10 ft.  10 ft.–15 ft.        15 ft.        15 ft.
      Setback2                                                                                                            with adjacent      for detached
                                                                                                                             setbacks              units
                                                                                                                                              15 ft. at any
                                                                                                                                           given point, but
  Minimum Street
                    15% of lot width          15 ft.             15 ft.          20 ft.           15 ft.        15 ft.          15 ft.        an average
    Side Setback2
                                                                                                                                            minimum of 20
                                                                                                                                                    ft.
   Minimum Rear                                                                                                                            10 ft. for 1- or 2-
                          35 ft.              20 ft.             20 ft.      15 ft.–20 ft.        15 ft.        15 ft.          20 ft.
       Setback                                                                                                                                 story units
    Maximum Lot
                          30%                 40%                40%             60%              None          None            30%                40%
      Coverage
                      35 ft. or 2 ½      35 ft. or 2 ½      35 ft. or 2 ½    35 ft. or 2 ½                                                     35 ft. or 2
                                                                                                                         Compatible with
                        stories,            stories,           stories,         stories,                                                         stories,
  Maximum Height                                                                                  55 ft.        55 ft.     surrounding
                     whichever is        whichever is       whichever is     whichever is                                                    whichever is
                                                                                                                             buildings
                        greater             greater            greater          greater                                                          greater
                                                                                                                                           0 ft. for attached
 Minimum Building                                                                             Per Uniform   Per Uniform                     units and 3 ft.
                          15 ft.              10 ft.             10 ft.          15 ft.                                         10 ft.
     Separation3                                                                             Building Code Building Code                     for detached
                                                                                                                                                   units
City of Highland General Plan                                                                                                                             8-41

                                                                  Table 8.19: Residential Development Standards
      Standard                     A/EQ                     R-1                     R-2                       R-3                     R-4                    HDS                       VR                    R-2C
                                                                                                                                 Studio: 425             Studio: 425
       Minimum
                                                                                                                               1 bedroom: 650          1 bedroom: 650
 Dwelling Unit Size                800                      800                     800                       800                                                                     800                    800
                                                                                                                                   2 or more              2 or more
          (sf)
                                                                                                                               bedrooms: 800           bedrooms: 800
 Source: City of Highland Land Use and Development Code, 2012.
 1. R-2C parcels smaller than one acre in size may be developed if they cannot be consolidated with adjacent parcels and are either bordered on all sides by property zoned for non-R-2C uses; or bordered on three sides
    by roadways.
 2: Except for development in the R-2C District, a minimum 10-foot setback shall be maintained for all two-story or higher elements.
 3: Minimum distance between buildings includes main dwellings and accessory structures. Within a planned development, building separations may be reduced to zero feet, provided that fire walls are to UBC standards
    and subject to review and approval of the Forestry and Fire Warden Department.
8-42                                                                                                                                                             May 2013 | City of Highland General Plan
                                                                       8. HOUSING ELEMENT
Parking Requirements
Parking requirements must relate to the housing type to provide
adequate and appropriately located parking facilities. Parking spaces
reduce the amount of land available for housing, but are a necessary
part of development. Adequate parking for residential projects
contributes to the value of a project, the safety of residents, its
appearance, and livability. However, excessive parking standards that
do not reflect actual parking demand can unduly increase
development costs and reduce the potential land availability for
project amenities or additional units.
Highland’s parking requirements are similar to other cities and are
not considered a constraint to affordable housing development.
Rather, reductions in parking requirements are made possible
through parking studies for senior housing types and the Community
Development Director may approve reduced parking requirements for
projects that incorporate affordable units but do not qualify for
density bonus incentives. Table 8.21 displays City residential parking
requirements.
City of Highland General Plan                                                         8-43

                                                HIGHLAND…A Great Place to Live
                         Table 8.21: Residential Parking Standards
                   Use                                    Minimum Off-Street Requirements
                                          Resident parking: 2 enclosed garage spaces
                                          Guest parking: If guest parking is not permitted on the street,
     Single-Family Detached1
                                          then one visitor space per unit is required within 100 ft. of each
                                          unit’s frontage and cannot be tandem
                                          Resident parking: 1 additional off-street parking space, tandem
     Second Units
                                          allowed, allowed in the front yard setback
                                          Resident Parking
                                          Studio: 1 covered or garage space assigned to each unit
                                          1 bedroom: 1 covered or garage space, and .5 uncovered
     Single-Family Attached               space
     and Multifamily(R-2, R-              2 or more bedrooms: 1 covered or garage space and 1
     2c, R-3)2,3                          uncovered space
                                          Guest parking: On-street parking can count for visitor parking if
                                          the spaces are within 250 feet of each unit’s frontage,
                                          otherwise .5 uncovered space per unit is required
                                          Resident Parking
                                          Studio and 1 bedroom: 1.5 per unit (at least 1 space within a
                                          garage or carport)
     Multifamily(R-4) 6,7                 2 bedrooms: 1.9 per unit
                                          3 bedrooms: 2.1 per unit
                                          4 bedrooms: 2.4 per unit
                                          Guest parking: 0.3 spaces per unit
     Group, Boarding, or                  Parking requirements identical to those for the housing product
     Rooming Homes                        (single-family detached, single-family attached, or multifamily)
                                          Resident parking: 1 covered space per unit
     Senior Housing
                                          Guest parking: .25 uncovered space per unit
                                          Resident parking: 5 covered spaces per unit or as determined
     Senior Congregate                    by the Planning Commission. For multiple-family units, the
     Care4                                parking shall be within 150 feet of the dwelling it serves
                                          Guest parking: .25 uncovered space per unit
     Mobile Home Parks and                Resident parking: 2 spaces per unit, tandem allowed
     Subdivisions                         Guest parking: 1 space for each 5 units or fraction thereof
     Model Home                           3 spaces per model home plus 1 space per salesperson
     Complexes5
     Source: City of Highland Land Use and Development Code, 2012.
     1: Within the VR district no more than a two-car space and no less than a one-car space shall be provided within a
        garage, and the exterior garage door shall be a minimum of 45 ft. from the front property line.
     2: For R-2 and R-2C districts, covered spaces may be required to be provided in an enclosed garage. If it is not
        adjacent, the garage shall be within 150 feet of the unit being served.
     3: Covered spaces for apartment buildings are garage spaces.
     4: Applicant shall submit a parking study for reduced parking standards.
     5: On-street parking adjacent to the model home complex may be counted toward the parking requirement if it is
        found that on-street parking will not impact residential parking and will not obstruct traffic flow.
     6: Minimum of one parking space shall be covered within a garage or carport
     7: Guest spaces may be uncovered
8-44                                                             May 2013 | City of Highland General Plan

                                                                        8. HOUSING ELEMENT
Building Codes
Building and safety codes regulate construction and design methods
to protect public health, safety, and welfare. However, these codes
have the potential to increase the cost of housing construction and
rehabilitation. Highland has adopted the 2010 California Building
Code Series. Except for seismic standards and some additional
requirements for fire hazards, the City’s Building Codes do not impose
additional requirements that would materially raise the cost of
housing. These types of improvements are common for all cities in
San Bernardino County. Therefore, these on- and off-site
improvement standards would not make it less financially feasible to
build housing in one jurisdiction over another.
Code enforcement is a critical component of retaining quality
neighborhoods and residential structures. The City employs full-time
building inspectors and code enforcement officers to examine
properties in response to a complaint or as part of an ongoing
proactive program to identify substandard housing. The City’s
proactive rental inspection program ensures rental housing is well-
maintained, safe, and adequate for habitation. The City assigns one
code enforcement staff to annually inspect and monitor all rental units
(including single-family units).
On- and Off-Site Improvements
The City of Highland requires that adequate access, landscaping,
lighting, water, and sewer improvements accompany residential
development or the expansion of existing residential projects. Typical
off-site improvements include curb, gutter, and sidewalk installation
and the undergrounding of existing overhead utility lines. As a
condition of approval, the City may require the construction of
reasonable on- and off-site improvements to serve the project. These
types of improvements are common for all cities in San Bernardino
County. Therefore, these on- and off-site improvement standards
would not make it less financially feasible to build housing in one
jurisdiction over another.
Streets
All residential projects must provide appropriate roadways consistent
with the City’s Circulation Element and adopted road standards.
Collector streets are 44 feet, curb-to-curb, within 66 foot rights-of-
ways. Residential local streets generally require a 36-foot right-of-
way. The City does not require infill projects to provide road
improvements beyond those necessary for safe access. This reduces
the cost of infill housing development, a savings that may be passed
on to the future buyer or renter. For any area of the City, additional
improvements, easements, and other dedications may be identified
during site plan review.
City of Highland General Plan                                                          8-45

                                HIGHLAND…A Great Place to Live
     Curbs, Gutters, and Sidewalks
     While much of west Highland is developed with curbs, gutters, and
     sidewalks, there are some infill sites without such amenities.
     Greenfield sites on the eastside are also often in need of such
     improvements. All new residential development is required to provide
     a public sidewalk system with curbs and gutters unless deemed
     unnecessary by the Planning Commission. Public sidewalks are
     adjacent to public streets and have a minimum width of 5 feet.
     Interior walkway systems may have varying widths, with a minimum
     width of 4 feet. The cost of these improvements increases the cost of
     development, but is necessary to facilitate pedestrian access and
     movement in urban areas of the City.
     Water, Sewer, and Storm Drain
     Consistent with state law, all projects must demonstrate the ability to
     meet water, sewer, and drainage requirements consistent with San
     Bernardino Flood Control District’s comprehensive plan. Fees and
     infrastructure requirements are established by the East Valley Water
     District and similar for all communities in the region. Careful site
     design and location can reduce or mitigate the associated cost of these
     improvements. For example, vacant land in an infill area could
     provide affordable housing where there is existing and adequate
     water, sewer, and drainage infrastructure.
     Infrastructure
     The City of Highland contains both developed and largely
     undeveloped residentially zoned areas. In developed areas, the
     existing infrastructure system is sufficient to support Highland’s
     population, but curbs, gutters, sidewalks, water and sewer, and
     streetlights are limited in undeveloped areas within the City.
     Infrastructure in currently un-served areas will be planned and
     constructed as necessary to serve new development. These
     improvements are typically dedicated to the City, which is then
     responsible for maintenance and/or improvement.
     The City of Highland is primarily served by the East Valley Water
     District (EVWD). The EVWD also maintains Highland’s sewer system
     and has a joint powers agreement with the City of San Bernardino to
     accept all sewage generated within the District’s boundaries. The
     existing sewer system can adequately serve the sites identified in the
     land inventory.
     All development plans in Highland must be coordinated with the
     EVWD to meet wastewater disposal and treatment requirements
     established by the California Department of Health Services.
     Development impact fees will allow the water and wastewater districts
     to provide necessary connections and services.
8-46                                      May 2013 | City of Highland General Plan

                                                                         8. HOUSING ELEMENT
Development Fees
A variety of fees and assessments are charged by the City and other
agencies to cover the cost of processing development permits and
providing local services. These fees are necessary to ensure quality
project review and to cover costs associated with the impact of new
housing. Development fees and exactions increase the cost of
development. These costs are passed down to the homeowner and
renter, reducing the affordability of housing.
Community development and engineering fees are established to
cover the cost of staff review. Without entitlement processing fees, the
City would be unable to provide quality review of each project,
resulting in inappropriate or inadequate development. These fees
offset the City’s development review costs and are not designed to
increase the cost of development. The affordable housing fee is a per-
unit fee that may be paid by the applicant in lieu of providing
affordable housing as discussed in the Inclusionary Housing
Ordinance section.
When processing a Major Design Review and CUP concurrently, the
city provides relief to the applicant by only charging one deposit up-
front. The City takes a deposit for the CUP only and applies any
unused funds from the CUP deposit to cover the design review. This
prevents the applicant from spending a financial resource earlier than
necessary.
Development impact fees are charged on a per-unit basis to provide
funds to offset the anticipated impacts of population growth. New
housing, and therefore more Highland residents, may result in an
increase in vehicle trips, park usage, school enrollment, and
emergency service calls. Development impact fees are carefully
created to ensure that quality services and facilities are provided to
Highland residents without unduly burdening development. The City
annually reviews its development impact fees to ensure the fees are
fair and adequate. In 2012 the City Council approved a Development
Impact Fee reprieve of 23.306% for commercial and residential
projects. This reduction fosters development activity and reduces the
cost of developing in the City of Highland. The reasoning behind the
reprieve was to keep the 2012 Development Impact Fee the same as
2011. Table 8.22 displays fees charged for new housing projects in
Highland.
City of Highland General Plan                                                           8-47

                                                HIGHLAND…A Great Place to Live
                           Table 8.22: Residential Development Fees
                                                                                                    Single-Family
                                                                                                       Attached/
                                Fee                                     Single-Family                Multifamily
                                        Minor Project (no more than 3 units)
     Community Development Fees
     Inclusionary Housing                                                   $3,750.00                   $3,750.00
     Staff Review Permit                                                     No Fee                       No Fee
     Minor Design Review                                                    $2,505.00                   $2,505.00
     Engineering Fees1
     Parcel Map Review(≤4 lots)                                             $2,420.00                   $2,420.00
     Impact Fees
     Law Enforcement                                                         $173.90                     $275.00
     Fire Suppression                                                        $617.66                     $200.46
     Local Circulation System                                               $2,338.77                   $1,561.11
     Regional Circulation System                                            $8,238.77                   $5,500.17
     Regional Flood Control                                                  $545.19                     $233.29
     General Facilities, Vehicles & Equipment                                $771.00                     $771.00
     Library                                                                 $709.32                     $682.76
     Community Center                                                        $884.09                     $850.68
     Park Land Acquisition & Park Facilities
                                                                            $2,879.26                   $2,770.47
     Development
     Total Fees Per Unit                                                   $25,832.56                 $21,519.94
                                           Major Project (more than 3 units)
     Community Development Fees
     Affordable Housing                                                     $3,750.00                   $3,750.00
     Major Design Review Deposit                                            $7,400.00                   $7,400.00
     Major Conditional Use Permit Review
                                                                            $9,400.00                 $9,400.00 2
     Deposit
     Engineering Fees1
     Parcel Map Review (≥5 lots)                                            $2,420.00                   $2,420.00
     Final Tract Map Review (≥5 lots)2                                      $2,255.00                   $2,255.00
     Impact Fees
     Law Enforcement                                                         $173.90                     $275.00
     Fire Suppression                                                        $617.66                     $200.46
     Local Circulation System                                               $2,338.77                   $1,561.11
     Regional Circulation System                                            $8,238.37                   $5,500.17
     Regional Flood Control                                                  $545.19                     $233.29
     General Facilities, Vehicles & Equipment                                $771.00                     $771.00
     Library                                                                 $709.32                     $682.76
     Community Center                                                        $884.09                     $850.68
     Park Land Acquisition & Park Facilities
                                                                            $2,879.26                   $2,770.47
     Development
     Total Fees Per Unit                                                   $39,962.56                 $35,649.94
     Source: City of Highland Planning Division, 2012.
     1: Some engineering fees not included, such as grading plan check and grading inspection, because fee is based on
        project specifics such as a dollar amount per cubic yard of soil moved.
     2: Major Conditional Use Permit Review Deposit will not be needed for multifamily projects on multifamily sites
        identified in the Housing Element as having potential to accommodate the RHNA
     3: Final tract map review engineering fee is $2,255 plus $40 per lot.
8-48                                                             May 2013 | City of Highland General Plan

                                                                          8. HOUSING ELEMENT
Permit Approval Process
Highland’s permitting process is designed to ensure high quality and
aesthetically pleasing development that is compatible with adjacent
uses and the City’s rural charm. Development and design review fees,
as well as the time these processes take, increase the cost of
constructing new housing or rehabilitating existing units. To ensure
that the permit approval process is not overly burdensome, the City
established the “Come Home to Highland” program, which commits
the City to being an active partner in providing housing. The program
is intended to:
        Improve and enhance Highland through the promotion of its
         residential lifestyle and family-oriented community;
        Encourage housing maintenance, rehabilitation, development,
         and occupation;
        Encourage cooperation between City government, local service
         providers, and residents in facilitating responsible growth; and
        Increase staff accountability through the preparation of
         housing project status reports for the City Council every six
         months.
Three levels of decision-making bodies in the City govern the
development review process: the Community Development
Department, the Planning Commission, and the City Council.
Applicants are encouraged to meet with City staff to discuss a project
prior to submitting an application. This process provides the applicant
with an opportunity to make changes that will ultimately save time
and money by having a complete application from the start. When an
application is determined complete (within 30 days, as required by
the Permit Streamlining Act), the Planning Division indicates whether
or not a use requires discretionary review. The Come Home to
Highland program guarantees that any request for an entitlement that
requires approval by the Planning Commission be presented to the
necessary body within 90 days of the application being deemed
complete (excluding time for CEQA review). This practice reduces the
impact of design review and other forms of discretionary review.
There are several types of review necessitated by certain project
characteristics.
Staff Review Permit
Staff Review Permit (SR) is a review of the project use to ensure
compatibility with the City’s land uses and development standards.
Approval is determined by the Community Development Director or
his designee (typically the City’s Planning Technician). The SR permit
is processed concurrently with the Minor Design Review process when
applicable. The SR approval by Community Development Director or
City of Highland General Plan                                                            8-49

                                HIGHLAND…A Great Place to Live
     designee is final unless appealed to the Planning Commission. The
     Planning Commission’s determination is appealable to the City
     Council.
     Minor Design Review
     The Planning Division provides this form of administrative design
     review for permitted housing projects of fewer than three units to
     ensure compliance with City’s land use and development standards.
     The Planning Division makes standard findings regarding project
     design, which include compliance with adopted residential design
     standards and consistency with the City’s General Plan Land Use
     Element and Community Design Element. Small (three units or less)
     multifamily projects permitted by right-of-zone due to site
     identification in the Housing Element will be subject to Minor Design
     Review, but no a conditional use permit. Approval is determined by
     the Community Development Director or designee and is deemed final
     unless appealed to the Planning Commission. The Planning
     Commission’s determination can then be appealed to the City Council.
     Major Design Review
     The Major Design Review (Major DR) applies to new housing projects
     consisting of four or more units. Major DR used to be performed by
     the Planning Commission (PC). Major DR provides the Planning
     Commission with an opportunity to assess the project for potential
     conflicts with the goals, policies, and objectives in the General Plan
     Land Use Element and Community Design Element, and identify
     potential design issues that may detract from the aesthetics, health,
     and safety of neighborhoods. Multifamily projects on multifamily sites
     will not be subject to a conditional use review. These projects will be
     reviewed for consistency with the design and development standards
     provided in the Land Use and Development Code, General Plan Land
     Use Element, and Community Design Element. Planning Commission
     review takes place during the time period the development application
     is routed for agency comments and/or the CEQA process; thus,
     minimizing overall processing time for the project. Planning
     Commission approval is final unless appealed to City Council.
     Conditional Use Permit
     The existing Land Use and Development Code requires a conditional
     use permit for multifamily projects, with the exception of single-
     family attached units which are permitted by right or by SR permit
     and multifamily uses on multifamily sites identified in the Housing
     Element.
8-50                                       May 2013 | City of Highland General Plan

                                                                          8. HOUSING ELEMENT
Multifamily projects will be subject to meeting the basic design and
development standards provided in the Land Use and Development
Code, General Plan Land Use Element, and Community Design
Element.
The Planning Commission is responsible for reviewing all applications
that require a CUP and the design review of a project. Typical findings
for CUP approval include consistency with the goals, policies, and
objectives of the General Plan, suitability of the site for the proposed
use or development, and adequacy of water, sanitation, and utilities.
Design review is based on criteria included within the General Plan
Land Use Element and Community Design Element. The CUP (with
Major DR) process typically takes four or five weeks, not including the
time required by CEQA if an EIR is necessary.
General Plan Amendment/Zone Change
Projects requiring a General Plan Amendment or zone change require
review by the Planning Commission and approval by the City Council,
regardless of proposed use. However, the City typically reduces the
timeframe for this legislative step by processing, where feasible, the
discretionary permits at the same time.
Processing Time
Developmental review is the primary way to ensure that new
residential projects reflect the community’s goals and contribute to
improving local quality of life. The time it takes to obtain permits from
the City can affect overall project cost and therefore impact the cost of
housing and the success of development in the community.
Highland values the time and money of its development applicants.
The City reduced its processing times through enforcement of the
“Come Home to Highland” program, which commits the City to
refund remaining development entitlement deposits to the applicant
within 30 days of the project’s conclusion. The program also commits
the City to establishing fixed fees for several forms of review and
ensures that a discretionary permit application are brought to the
appropriate review body within 90 days of the application
completeness determination. Administratively permitted projects are
reviewed within 30 working days of application completion. In
Calendar Year 2011, the average time for a discretionary review
approval was 36 days. Table 8.23 shows the average processing times
for various project applications and reviews.
City of Highland General Plan                                                            8-51

                                         HIGHLAND…A Great Place to Live
                             Table 8.23: Permit Processing Times
                                                               Timeframe
                       Type of Application            (Average Number of Weeks)
      Zone Change                                                  18
      Tentative Tract or Parcel Map                                12
      Conditional Use Permit                                        4
      Variance Review                                               4
      Lot Line Adjustment                                           4
      Staff Review (Design/Use)                                     1
      Minor Design Review                                           1
      Major Design Review                                           4
      Source: City of Highland, 2012.
     Housing for Persons with Disabilities
     Effective on January 1, 2002, Senate Bill 520 amended housing
     element law and Government Code Section 65008 to require localities
     to analyze the constraints on housing for persons with disabilities. The
     City’s adopted building codes (including the Uniform Building Code,
     adopted in 2007) require that new residential construction comply
     with the Federal Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA). Highland has
     the authority to enforce state accessibility laws and regulations
     (California Code of Regulations Title 24) when evaluating new
     construction requests. ADA provisions include requirements for a
     minimum percentage of units in new development to be fully
     accessible to the physically disabled.
     Reasonable Accommodation
     The City of Highland understands the importance of reducing barriers
     to adequate housing for disabled persons. However, the Land Use and
     Development Code does not provide any specific information
     regarding housing or housing modification permitting or other
     reasonable accommodations for persons with disabilities. A
     reasonable accommodation refers to actions that a city takes to modify
     land use and zoning regulations affecting housing for people with
     disabilities. A reasonable modification is typically a structural change
     made to existing premises so that a disabled person can fully utilize
     the premises.
     The City has not received any requests for accommodation, and if a
     request were made to place a ramp or other accessibility structure in a
     setback, the City has an unofficially policy to be flexible in those
     instances. The Land Use and Development Code allows a maximum
     three-foot projection into front- and rear-yard setbacks and one-half
     of a required side yard setback.
     The City is in the process of adopting an ordinance to enact a formal
     process for disabled individuals or those acting on their behalf to
8-52                                           May 2013 | City of Highland General Plan

                                                                          8. HOUSING ELEMENT
make requests for relief from the various land use, zoning, or building
laws, rules, policies, practices, and/or procedures of the City (expected
February 2013). The City will make information regarding reasonable
accommodation available at City Hall, on the City’s website, and its’
Come Home to Highland program website.
The City’s parking requirements for handicapped spaces are intended
to be identical to the requirements established by the state of
California. Residential projects providing handicapped spaces are
required to locate the spaces as close to building entrances as possible
and follow citywide regulations in terms of size, striping, and signage.
Disabled parking standards for residential uses are not different from
parking standards for other uses.
Group Homes
Group homes, boarding houses, and residential care facilities are often
a resource for disabled persons in need of special care. The City
conditionally permits boarding and rooming houses for three or more
unrelated individuals in all residential zones except the A/EQ zone
and all commercial zones (includes homes with six or more residents).
According to the state Community Care Licensing Division, in 2008
there are three licensed group homes operating in Highland. The City
does not have any occupancy restrictions based on relatedness or
family ties in any land uses or zoning designations. Residential care
facilities may provide safe living environments for special needs adults
and children. The Land Use and Development Code conditionally
permits residential care facilities serving seven or more residents in
multifamily zones.
The City is in the process of adding such facilities serving six or fewer
residents to the code. The Housing Plan provides a program to define
and permit residential care facilities serving six or fewer residents, as
mandated by state law.
Senior Group Homes and Facilities
Other forms of housing that may assist disabled persons include
senior independent living projects, residential care homes for the
elderly, congregate care homes, and convalescent care. Senior
independent living projects are permitted through staff review in the
A/EQ, R-1, and VR zones. They are conditionally permitted in all
multifamily zones. Congregate care and convalescent care homes are
conditionally permitted in multifamily and commercial zones. The
City’s regulations do not pose a constraint to the provision of group
homes and similar facilities for seniors.
City of Highland General Plan                                                            8-53

                                 HIGHLAND…A Great Place to Live
     MARKET CONSTRAINTS
     Market constraints to the development of residential housing include
     the cost of land, the cost of construction, and financing. Unlike past
     years when the housing market was experiencing a bubble effect,
     market factors now pose fewer constraints to the development of new
     housing. Changes in the financial markets, changes in construction
     material costs, and other factors have all affected the feasibility of
     developing new housing in Highland. This section discusses land
     costs, construction costs, and financing issues.
     Land Costs
     Land costs, when compared with projected rents and sales prices of
     housing, affect the feasibility of construction. The cost of land is
     typically a major factor in determining the cost of developing housing.
     Land costs are influenced by many variables, including supply,
     demand, location, site constraints, and the availability of public
     utilities and other infrastructure. In recent years, many developers
     have purchased overvalued land based on the historic increase in
     housing prices. With the housing downturn and economic recession,
     many developers overpaid for the land and can no longer develop the
     site and make a profit with forecasted sales or rents.
     According to August 2012 vacant single-family land sales prices such
     land in Highland, on average, sells for $2.85 per square foot. Vacant
     multifamily land sells, on average, for $2.93 per square foot. These
     land prices are in-line or lower than in other cities in San Bernardino
     County and much lower than typical residential land in Los Angeles
     and Orange counties.
     In addition to the basic cost of land, the holding cost is also a
     consideration in the price of housing. Holding costs vary depending
     on interest rates for acquisition and development loans. Interest rates
     are beyond the control of local jurisdictions. However, land holding
     costs can be lessened by reducing processing times for building
     permits in most jurisdictions.
     Construction Costs
     Construction costs are influenced by the cost of materials. As the
     softening of the housing market decreases the amount of homes being
     constructed throughout southern California, the cost of many
     construction materials have decreased, reflecting the lack of demand.
     Construction costs will also vary based on the type of material used,
     structural features present, and project characteristics such as the
     type and quality of the unit. For example, the increasing worldwide
     demand for steel has made wood-frame construction significantly
8-54                                       May 2013 | City of Highland General Plan

                                                                          8. HOUSING ELEMENT
more affordable than steel. The quality and cost of framing and
finishing materials may affect the types of development pursued.
Housing construction costs constitute about half the cost of a single-
family home. The square footage cost of new housing averages
approximately $110 per square foot for a single-family detached unit
and an average of $60 per square foot for a stacked flat single-family
unit (does not include the cost of providing a garage). Apartments of
three stories or less achieve an economy of scale, provided that the
building has typical amenities and no structured parking. Mobile
homes are significantly less expensive, as are precision or factory-built
housing products.
Labor costs are generally two to three times the cost of construction
materials. With the slowdown in the housing market, however, real
wages have also depressed and are significantly more affordable than
in the early 2000s. As wage levels are relatively uniform across the
Inland Empire, wages are not considered a constraint to the
development of housing.
Financing
Construction financing costs also affect the feasibility of building new
housing. During the housing boom of the late 1980s, it was not
uncommon for developers to receive construction loans for 100% or
more of a project's estimated future value. Following the housing
market downturn of the early 1990s, however, financial institutions
tightened regulations for construction loans, often requiring
developers to put up at least 25% of the project value.
This cycle has repeated itself with the housing market boom of the
early 2000s. Relaxed lending rules allowed developers to secure a loan
with only a nominal equity contribution, interest rates varied from 5
to 7 percent, and downpayments ranged from 0 to 10 percent. With
the downturn, however, expected housing prices have significantly
declined, lending practices have become more conservative, and
interest rates have decreased.
Although there is no hard threshold for how much required upfront
equity is too much before a residential project would be infeasible, the
higher the proportion of equity required, the more unlikely that a
developer would proceed with the project. Not only would it require
more up-front cash, but higher equity contribution means a project
must be able to achieve an even higher value at completion in order to
generate the cash flow needed to meet acceptable cash-on-cash
returns. These trends are anticipated to continue during the planning
period.
City of Highland General Plan                                                            8-55
                                HIGHLAND…A Great Place to Live
     ENVIRONMENTAL CONSTRAINTS
     Environmental hazards affecting housing development and resident
     safety include fire, seismic activity, and flooding. These hazards
     provide the greatest threat to the built environment. Development
     should be carefully controlled in potentially hazardous areas. The City
     of Highland Land Use and Safety Elements, which provide policy
     guidance about environmental constraints, were adopted in 2006 and
     cover all of the areas within the land inventory.
     Earthquake
     Like the entire southern California region, the City of Highland is
     within an area of high seismic activity. It can be expected, therefore,
     that a significant seismic event will occur in the City. The timing and
     magnitude of such an event cannot be predicted, although planning
     efforts for emergency response must be predicated on the certainty of
     such an event. North and south branches of the San Andreas Fault, a
     known active fault, run through Highland. The San Jacinto Fault is
     approximately 4.5 miles southwest of the City. The City’s Safety
     Element requires residential development to be set back a minimum
     of 50 feet from active and potentially active fault lines. The Safety
     Element includes other policies to increase mitigation measures and
     further study possible geologic- and seismic-related hazards.
     Fire
     The City of Highland’s building codes require new housing to include
     fire sprinkler systems to protect residents and property. Wildland fires
     are a present threat, as there large expanses of undeveloped hillsides
     in and adjacent to Highland. Precautions such as fuel modification
     zones and vegetation maintenance help protect Highland’s natural
     and developed areas from wildfire. The California Department of
     Forestry and Fire Protection (CDF) provides fire prevention and
     suppression services to the City and unincorporated areas east of the
     City. Additional wildland fire protection services are provided by the
     US Forest Service on National Forest Lands adjacent to the City.
     Flooding
     Several areas of Highland are within 100- and 500-year floodplains.
     Property owners in 100-year floodplains may receive insurance from
     the Federal Emergency Management Agency’s National Flood
     Insurance Program (NFIP). In return for NFIP offering coverage, the
     City of Highland regulates new development in flood prone areas to
     ensure public safety and protection of property. Highland has adopted
     special standards, such as minimum building elevations, flood
     proofing, and anchoring, for development in flood-prone areas. Any
     housing sites identified in the Housing Plan that may be located in a
8-56                                        May 2013 | City of Highland General Plan

                                                                          8. HOUSING ELEMENT
100- or 500-year floodplain, or other flood hazard zone, will be
developed in accordance with strict regulations to property mitigate
flooding hazards.
Energy Conservation
Rising energy costs, dependence on fossil fuels, and increasing
evidence of the adverse impacts of global warming have provoked the
need in California and nationwide to improve energy management
strategies. Although California has always been a leader in energy
conservation, recent regulations specifically target energy
independence and Greenhouse Gas emissions. In 2006, the State
Legislature adopted the Global Warming Solutions Act of 2006, which
created the first comprehensive, state regulatory program to reduce
GHG emissions to 80% below 1990 levels by 2050. Promoting energy
conservation has become a consistent theme in California’s
regulations.
Highland understands that energy efficiency can greatly reduce the
impact of residential development and provide cost savings for its     
residents. On a regulatory level, the City enforces the State Energy   For additional information on energy
Conservation Standards (California Code of Regulations Title 24).      conservation, please visit the following
These standards incorporated into the City’s Building Code provide a   websites:
great deal of flexibility for individual builders to achieve a minimum  Southern California Edison –
                                                                          www.sce.com
“energy budget” with various performance standards. These               The U.S. Department of Energy –
requirements apply to all new residential and commercial                  www.eere.energy.gov/
construction and to remodeling and rehabilitation construction only     Power Protection –
where square footage is added. Compliance with Title 24 of the            www.powerprotectiononline.org
California Administrative Code on the use of energy-efficient           The California Energy Commission –
                                                                          www.consumerenergycenter.org
appliances and insulation has reduced energy demand stemming from
                                                                        Energy Star Program –
new residential development.                                              www.energystar.gov
                                                                        The Energy Commission –
Residential development in Highland is evaluated for energy               www.energy.ca.gov/efficiency/index.html
efficiency during the plan review process. Every residential project    Flex Your Power Official Site –
must submit calculations per model showing compliance with Title          www.flexyourpower.ca.gov
24. The applicant must describe the type of heating system and          Southern California Gas Company –
                                                                          www.socalgas.com
maximum capacity and provide the make, size, and model number for
                                                                        American Institute of Architects –
all air conditioning units, furnaces, and water heating equipment.        www.aia.org/cote
More energy efficiency could be encouraged through an incentives
program.
The City of Highland educates the development community and
residents through informative materials made available in public
buildings, the City’s website, and the General Plan Open Space and
Conservation Element. Part of this effort is promoting energy
efficiency in existing structures through rehabilitation and appliance
replacement and in new development through incentive programs
provided by utility companies. The City also has policies that
encourage energy conservation and housing objectives. For example,
infill development discussed in the Housing Element and Land Use
City of Highland General Plan                                                                                     8-57

                               HIGHLAND…A Great Place to Live
     Element encourage housing development opportunities without
     creating sprawl. The General Plan update also resulted in the creation
     of the Corridor Residential (R-2C) zone, a residential district to
     facilitate the development of midblock infill housing along the City’s
     thoroughfares. The 2006–2014 Housing Element update resulted in
     the creation of two high density housing designations, permitting
     housing by-right between 20 and 30 units per acre. These
     development types are consistent with State goals to encourage
     compact, walkable, and energy-efficient neighborhoods.
8-58                                    May 2013 | City of Highland General Plan

Appendix A: Land Inventory
City of Highland General Plan
This page intentionally left blank.
                                    May 2013 | City of Highland General Plan
                                                                8. HOUSING ELEMENT
LAND INVENTORY
The majority of sites in the Land Inventory are vacant infill sites.
However, there are approximately 33 acres of underutilized sites that
are available for residential redevelopment.
Underutilized sites 27, 37, 38, 46, 48, and 49 include 7.0 acres of R4
land near Sterling Avenue and 9th Street. The existing uses include two
single-family homes built in 1915 and 1952 (of no historic
significance), a 10-unit multifamily complex constructed in 1956, a
church structure that is no longer in use, and abandoned commercial
building. These existing uses are considered ripe for recycling because
the scale and quality of the buildings do not reflect the development
potential permitted under the current or proposed zoning, and
interest from the development community has been brought forward
to the City to develop multifamily housing in the southern portion of
the site. The owner of sites 46 and adjacent vacant sites has contacted
the City and about multifamily housing.
Underutilized sites 66, 75, 84, 86, 87, 148 and 152 consist of 13.6 acres
of R4 land near Pacific Avenue and Miller Lane. The existing
structures are barns and homes primarily constructed in the 1950s.
None of the buildings are of any historic significance. The owners of
sites 75, 148, 152, and two adjacent vacant properties have been in
contact with the City about higher density residential development
opportunities. Surrounding uses include Interstate 210 to the north,
single-family residential to the east and south, single-family
residential to the west, and is within walking distance of San Andreas
High School and a community garden.
City of Highland General Plan
Underutilized sites 127, 130, and 134 consist of 6.6 acres of R4 land
near Central Avenue and 10th Street. The properties are large lots with
decaying single-family homes built in the 1920s. The homes do not
have any historical significance. A developer approached the City with
a proposal for attached housing on site 127, but did not pursue the
project due to the downturn of the housing market.
Underutilized sites 274, 275, 276, 281, 282, 283, and 284 include 5.1
acres within the 79-acre High Density Special Overlay in the Golden
Triangle Policy Area. The Overlay is generally bound by Greenspot
Road on the south, Eucalyptus Avenue on the north, Boulder Avenue
on the east, and the City Creek wash basin on the west. The Overlay
                                    May 2013 | City of Highland General Plan
                                                                8. HOUSING ELEMENT
allows up to 650 multifamily units at a minimum density of 20 units
per acre. The Overlay allows multifamily uses permitted by right,
without a CUP, specific plan, planned unit development, or other
similar discretionary action.
Underutilized site 52 is 1.0 acre zoned for R1. The underutilized parcel
was once developed with a drinking and dining establishment that is
no longer in use. The structure is required to be demolished through
code enforcement proceedings. Adjacent uses include vacant
residential to the east and west, single-family residential to the south,
and an elementary and junior high school to the north.
City of Highland General Plan
                            Table 8.1A: Land Inventory
                                  General Plan
                       Zoning      Land Use
                      Current/      Current/   Assumed                    Unit
Map ID      Acres     Proposed     Proposed     Density  VL/L   M   AM    Yield
     1       0.28    R‐1         LD                    5      0   0    1       1
     2       0.33    R‐1         LD                    5      0   0    2       2
     3       1.04    R‐1         LD                    5      0   0    5       5
     4       0.17    R‐1         LD                    5      0   0    1       1
     5       0.23    R‐1         LD                    5      0   0    1       1
     6       0.21    R‐1         LD                    5      0   0    1       1
     7       0.11    R‐1         LD                    5      0   0    1       1
     8       0.23    R‐1         LD                    5      0   0    1       1
     9       0.25    R‐1         LD                    5      0   0    1       1
   10        0.24    R‐1         LD                    5      0   0    1       1
   11        0.22    R‐1         LD                    5      0   0    1       1
   12        1.00    R‐2         MD                  10       0  10    0     10
   13        0.69    R‐1         LD                    5      0   0    3       3
   14        0.52    R‐1         LD                    5      0   0    3       3
   15        0.21    R‐1         LD                    5      0   0    1       1
   16        0.20    R‐1         LD                    5      0   0    1       1
   17        1.33    R‐1         LD                    5      0   0    7       7
   18        0.23    R‐1         LD                    5      0   0    1       1
   19        0.01    R‐1         LD                    5      0   0    1       1
   20        1.14    R‐1         LD                    5      0   0    6       6
   21        2.21    R‐1         LD                    5      0   0  11      11
   22        2.27    R‐1         LD                    5      0   0  11      11
   23        0.24    R‐1         LD                    5      0   0    1       1
   24        5.86    R‐1         LD                    5      0   0  29      29
   25        0.30    R‐1         LD                    5      0   0    2       2
   26        0.17    R‐1         LD                    5      0   0    1       1
   27        0.22    R‐4         RHS                 25       6   0    0       6
   28        0.33    R‐2C        MD                  10       0   3    0       3
   29        0.12    R‐2C        MD                  10       0   1    0       1
   30        0.21    R‐2C        MD                  10       0   2    0       2
   31        0.13    R‐2         MD                  10       0   1    0       1
   32        3.06    R‐4         RHS                 25      98   0    0     98
   33        0.09    R‐1         LD                    5      0   0    1       1
   34        0.23    R‐1         LD                    5      0   0    1       1
   35        0.23    R‐4         RHS                 25       8   0    0       8
   36        0.45    R‐1         LD                    5      0   0    2       2
   37        3.80    R‐4         RHS                 25    141    0    0   141
        City of Highland General Plan

                                                                          8. HOUSING ELEMENT
                                      Table 8.1A: Land Inventory
                                           General Plan
                                 Zoning     Land Use
                                Current/     Current/   Assumed                     Unit
              Map ID     Acres  Proposed    Proposed     Density  VL/L   M    AM    Yield
                  38      0.82 R‐4        RHS                 25      31   0     0     31
                  39      1.76 R‐4        RHS                 25      68   0     0     68
                  40      0.21 R‐2        MD                  10       0   2     0       2
                  41      0.45 R‐1        LD                    5      0   0     2       2
                  42      0.23 R‐1        LD                    5      0   0     1       1
                  43      0.11 R‐1        LD                    5      0   0     1       1
                  44      4.24 R‐4        RHS                 25    187    0     0   187
                  45      0.23 R‐1        LD                    5      0   0     1       1
                  46      0.71 R‐4        RHS                 25      33   0     0     33
                  47      0.32 R‐1        LD                    5      0   0     2       2
                  48      0.31 R‐4        RHS                 25      15   0     0     15
                  49      1.10 R‐4        RHS                 25      54   0     0     54
                  50      0.20 R‐1        LD                    5      0   0     1       1
                  51      0.53 R‐4        RHS                   5      0   0     3       3
                  52      0.93 R‐4        RHS                   5      0   0     5       5
                  53      0.97 R‐4        RHS                   5      0   0     5       5
                  54      0.21 R‐4        RHS                   5      0   0     1       1
                  55      0.21 R‐4        RHS                   5      0   0     1       1
                  56      0.21 R‐4        RHS                   5      0   0     1       1
                  57      0.41 R‐4        RHS                   5      0   0     2       2
                  58      0.40 R‐2        MD                  10       0   4     0       4
                  59      0.16 R‐1        LD                    5      0   0     1       1
                  60      0.17 R‐1        LD                    5      0   0     1       1
                  61      0.17 R‐1        LD                    5      0   0     1       1
                  62      0.25 R‐1        LD                    5      0   0     1       1
                  63      0.07 R‐1        LD                    5      0   0     1       1
                  64      0.18 R‐1        LD                    5      0   0     1       1
                  65      0.55 R‐2        MD                  10       0   6     0       6
                  66      0.76 R‐4        RHS                 25      19   0     0     19
                  67      0.16 R‐1        LD                    5      0   0     1       1
                  68      0.09 R‐1        LD                    5      0   0     1       1
                  69      1.51 R‐1        LD                    5      0   0     8       8
                  70      0.15 R‐1        LD                    5      0   0     1       1
                  71      0.21 PD         PD                  12       0   2     0       2
                  72      0.21 PD         PD                  12       0   2     0       2
                  73      0.17 R‐1        LD                    5      0   0     1       1
                  74      0.23 R‐1        LD                    5      0   0     1       1
City of Highland General Plan

                    Table 8.1A: Land Inventory
                         General Plan
               Zoning     Land Use
              Current/     Current/   Assumed                              Unit
Map ID Acres  Proposed    Proposed     Density  VL/L      M       AM       Yield
   75   1.32 R‐4        RHS                 25      33      0         0       33
   76   0.36 VR         HVD                   5      0      0         2         2
   77   0.22 R‐1        LD                    5      0      0         1         1
   78   0.09 VR         HVD                   5      0      0         1         1
   79   0.16 R‐1        LD                    5      0      0         1         1
   80   0.09 R‐1        LD                    5      0      0         1         1
   81   0.58 R‐2        MD                  10       0      6         0         6
   82   0.67 R‐4        RHS                 25      17      0         0       17
   83   0.71 R‐4        RHS                 25      18      0         0       18
   84   0.71 R‐4        RHS                 25      18      0         0       18
   85   0.14 VR         HVD                   5      0      0         1         1
   86   0.35 R‐4        RHS                 25       9      0         0         9
   87   0.66 R‐4        RHS                 25      16      0         0       16
   88   0.41 R‐4        RHS                 25      10      0         0       10
   89   1.98 R‐4        RHS                 25      49      0         0       49
   90   0.35 R‐1        LD                    5      0      0         2         2
   91   0.19 VR         HVD                   5      0      0         1         1
   92   0.13 R‐1        LD                    5      0      0         1         1
   93   0.30 R‐4        RHS                 25       8      0         0         8
   94   0.15 R‐1        LD                    5      0      0         1         1
   95   0.22 R‐1        LD                    5      0      0         1         1
   96   0.24 R‐1        LD                    5      0      0         1         1
   97   0.21 R‐1        LD                    5      0      0         1         1
   98   0.22 R‐1        LD                    5      0      0         1         1
   99   0.21 R‐1        LD                    5      0      0         1         1
  100   0.17 R‐1        LD                    5      0      0         1         1
  101   0.14 R‐1        LD                    5      0      0         1         1
  102   0.22 R‐1        LD                    5      0      0         1         1
  103   0.23 R‐1        LD                    5      0      0         1         1
  104   0.25 R‐1        LD                    5      0      0         1         1
  105   4.56 R‐4        RHS                 25    114       0         0     114
  106   0.10 R‐1        LD                    5      0      0         1         1
  107   4.57 MU         MU                  16       0     37         0       37
  108   0.44 R‐2        MD                  10       0      4         0         4
  109   0.16 R‐1        LD                    5      0      0         1         1
  110   0.15 R‐1        LD                    5      0      0         1         1
  111   0.18 R‐1        LD                    5      0      0         1         1
                                                     May 2013 | City of Highland General Plan

                                                                          8. HOUSING ELEMENT
                                      Table 8.1A: Land Inventory
                                           General Plan
                                 Zoning     Land Use
                                Current/     Current/   Assumed                     Unit
              Map ID     Acres  Proposed    Proposed     Density  VL/L   M    AM    Yield
                112       0.15 R‐1        LD                    5      0   0     1       1
                113       0.15 R‐1        LD                    5      0   0     1       1
                114       4.94 R‐2C       MD                  10       0  49     0     49
                115       1.82 R‐4        RHS                 25      45   0     0     45
                116       1.90 R‐2C       MD                  10       0  19     0     19
                117       0.40 R‐1        LD                    5      0   0     2       2
                118       0.16 R‐1        LD                    5      0   0     1       1
                119       0.47 R‐1        LD                    5      0   0     2       2
                120       0.23 R‐1        LD                    5      0   0     1       1
                121       0.12 R‐1        LD                    5      0   0     1       1
                122       2.16 R‐1        LD                    5      0   0   11      11
                123       0.21 R‐1        LD                    5      0   0     1       1
                124       0.25 R‐1        LD                    5      0   0     1       1
                125       0.29 R‐1        LD                    5      0   0     1       1
                126       0.17 R‐1        LD                    5      0   0     1       1
                127       1.74 R‐4        RHS                 25      43   0     0     43
                128       0.69 R‐1        LD                    5      0   0     3       3
                129       0.22 R‐2        MD                  10       0   2     0       2
                130       2.14 R‐4        RHS                 25      54   0     0     54
                131       0.19 R‐2C       MD                  10       0   2     0       2
                132       0.18 R‐2C       MD                  10       0   2     0       2
                133       0.18 R‐2C       MD                  10       0   2     0       2
                134       2.70 R‐4        RHS                 25      67   0     0     67
                135       0.17 R‐1        LD                    5      0   0     1       1
                136       0.18 R‐2C       MD                  10       0   2     0       2
                137       0.18 R‐2C       MD                  10       0   2     0       2
                138       0.09 R‐2C       MD                  10       0   1     0       1
                139       0.22 R‐1        LD                    5      0   0     1       1
                140       0.18 R‐1        LD                    5      0   0     1       1
                141       0.19 R‐1        LD                    5      0   0     1       1
                142       0.16 R‐1        LD                    5      0   0     1       1
                143       0.16 R‐1        LD                    5      0   0     1       1
                144       0.16 R‐1        LD                    5      0   0     1       1
                145       0.18 R‐1        LD                    5      0   0     1       1
                146       0.17 R‐1        LD                    5      0   0     1       1
                147       0.40 R‐1        LD                    5      0   0     2       2
                148       4.91 R‐4        RHS                 25    123    0     0   123
City of Highland General Plan

                    Table 8.1A: Land Inventory
                         General Plan
               Zoning     Land Use
              Current/     Current/   Assumed                              Unit
Map ID Acres  Proposed    Proposed     Density  VL/L      M       AM       Yield
  149   0.17 R‐3        HD                  16       0      3         0         3
  150   0.17 VR         HVD                   5      0      0         1         1
  151   0.12 VR         HVD                   5      0      0         1         1
  152   4.92 R‐4        RHS                 25    123       0         0     123
  153   0.23 R‐2        MD                  10       0      2         0         2
  154   0.32 R‐1        LD                    5      0      0         2         2
  155   1.21 R‐1        LD                    5      0      0         6         6
  156   0.70 R‐1        LD                    5      0      0         4         4
  157   1.78 R‐1        LD                    5      0      0         9         9
  158   0.15 R‐1        LD                    5      0      0         1         1
  159   0.15 R‐1        LD                    5      0      0         1         1
  160  22.97 PD         PD                  12       0    276         0     276
  161   0.25 R‐1        LD                    5      0      0         1         1
  162   0.25 R‐1        LD                    5      0      0         1         1
  163   0.17 R‐1        LD                    5      0      0         1         1
  164   1.38 R‐1        LD                    5      0      0         7         7
  165   0.71 R‐1        LD                    5      0      0         4         4
  166   2.75 A/EQ       AG/EQ                 2      0      0         5         5
  167   1.88 R‐4        RHS                 25      47      0         0       47
  168   0.33 R‐1        LD                    5      0      0         2         2
  169   0.13 R‐1        LD                    5      0      0         1         1
  170   2.93 R‐1        LD                    5      0      0       15        15
  171   0.15 EHV        LD                    5      0      0         1         1
  172   0.18 EHV        LD                    5      0      0         1         1
  173   0.16 R‐1        LD                    5      0      0         1         1
  174   6.96 R‐1        LD                    5      0      0       35        35
  175   0.18 R‐1        LD                    5      0      0         1         1
  176   0.27 R‐1        LD                    5      0      0         1         1
  177   0.21 R‐1        LD                    5      0      0         1         1
  178   0.21 R‐1        LD                    5      0      0         1         1
  179   1.95 R‐1        LD                    5      0      0       10        10
  180   1.27 R‐1        LD                    5      0      0         6         6
  181   2.41 PD         PD                  12       0     29         0       29
  182   0.57 R‐1        LD                    5      0      0         3         3
  183   9.87 A/EQ       AG/EQ                 2      0      0       20        20
  184   0.17 R‐4        RHS                 25       4      0         0         4
  185   0.16 R‐4        RHS                 25       4      0         0         4
                                                     May 2013 | City of Highland General Plan

                                                                          8. HOUSING ELEMENT
                                      Table 8.1A: Land Inventory
                                           General Plan
                                 Zoning     Land Use
                                Current/     Current/   Assumed                     Unit
              Map ID     Acres  Proposed    Proposed     Density  VL/L   M    AM    Yield
                186       0.16 R‐4        RHS                 25       4   0     0       4
                187       0.56 PD         PD                  12       0   7     0       7
                188       0.18 R‐1        LD                    5      0   0     1       1
                189       0.15 R‐1        LD                    5      0   0     1       1
                190       0.14 R‐2C       MD                  10       0   1     0       1
                191       0.17 R‐2C       MD                  10       0   2     0       2
                192       4.49 MU         MU                  16       0  36     0     36
                193       0.17 R‐2C       MD                  10       0   2     0       2
                194       0.81 R‐4        RHS                 25      20   0     0     20
                195       0.17 R‐4        RHS                 25       4   0     0       4
                196       0.17 R‐4        RHS                 25       4   0     0       4
                197       0.42 R‐2C       MD                  10       0   4     0       4
                198       0.16 R‐1        LD                    5      0   0     1       1
                199       0.98 PD         PD                  12       0  12     0     12
                200       0.15 R‐1        LD                    5      0   0     1       1
                201       0.32 R‐1        LD                    5      0   0     2       2
                202       0.15 R‐1        LD                    5      0   0     1       1
                203       0.16 R‐1        LD                    5      0   0     1       1
                204       1.35 MU         MU                  16       0  11     0     11
                208      10.04 A/EQ       AG/EQ                 2      0   0   20      20
                209       9.97 A/EQ       AG/EQ                 2      0   0   20      20
                210       8.95 A/EQ       AG/EQ                 2      0   0   18      18
                211       9.88 A/EQ       AG/EQ                 2      0   0   20      20
                212       4.94 A/EQ       AG/EQ                 2      0   0   10      10
                213       4.94 A/EQ       AG/EQ                 2      0   0   10      10
                214       4.75 R‐1        LD                    5      0   0   24      24
                215       0.17 R‐1        LD                    5      0   0     1       1
                216       1.42 R‐1        LD                    5      0   0     7       7
                217       0.22 R‐1        LD                    5      0   0     1       1
                218       0.21 R‐1        LD                    5      0   0     1       1
                219       0.75 R‐1        LD                    5      0   0     4       4
                220       0.22 R‐1        LD                    5      0   0     1       1
                221       0.22 R‐1        LD                    5      0   0     1       1
                222       0.17 R‐1        LD                    5      0   0     1       1
                223       0.11 R‐1        LD                    5      0   0     1       1
                224       0.29 R‐1        LD                    5      0   0     1       1
                225       0.30 R‐1        LD                    5      0   0     2       2
City of Highland General Plan

                    Table 8.1A: Land Inventory
                         General Plan
               Zoning     Land Use
              Current/     Current/   Assumed                              Unit
Map ID Acres  Proposed    Proposed     Density  VL/L      M       AM       Yield
  226   0.30 R‐1        LD                    5      0      0         2         2
  227   0.16 R‐1        LD                    5      0      0         1         1
  228   0.15 R‐1        LD                    5      0      0         1         1
  229   0.20 R‐1        LD                    5      0      0         1         1
  230   2.00 PD         PD                  12       0     24         0       24
  231   0.17 R‐1        LD                    5      0      0         1         1
  232   0.66 R‐1        LD                    5      0      0         3         3
  233   0.17 R‐1        LD                    5      0      0         1         1
  234   0.17 R‐1        LD                    5      0      0         1         1
  235   3.06 A/EQ       AG/EQ                 2      0      0         6         6
  236   0.18 R‐1        LD                    5      0      0         1         1
  237   0.27 R‐1        LD                    5      0      0         1         1
  238   0.26 R‐1        LD                    5      0      0         1         1
  239   0.26 R‐1        LD                    5      0      0         1         1
  240   4.46 R‐1        LD                    5      0      0       22        22
  241   0.37 R‐4        RHS                 25       9      0         0         9
  242   0.44 R‐1        LD                    5      0      0         2         2
  243   2.44 R‐4        RHS                 25      61      0         0       61
  244   1.66 A/EQ       AG/EQ                 2      0      0         3         3
  245   1.18 R‐1        LD                    5      0      0         6         6
  246   4.19 PD         PD                  12       0     50         0       50
  247   1.23 R‐4        RHS                 25      31      0         0       31
  248   1.52 A/EQ       AG/EQ                 2      0      0         3         3
  249   1.00 PD         PD                  12       0     12         0       12
  254   3.35 R‐1        LD                    5      0      0       17        17
  255   0.19 R‐1        LD                    5      0      0         1         1
  256   0.19 R‐1        LD                    5      0      0         1         1
  257   0.19 R‐1        LD                    5      0      0         1         1
  258   0.19 R‐1        LD                    5      0      0         1         1
  259   0.19 R‐1        LD                    5      0      0         1         1
  260   0.19 R‐1        LD                    5      0      0         1         1
  261   0.19 R‐1        LD                    5      0      0         1         1
  262   0.19 R‐1        LD                    5      0      0         1         1
  263   0.19 R‐1        LD                    5      0      0         1         1
  264   0.19 R‐1        LD                    5      0      0         1         1
  265   0.19 R‐1        LD                    5      0      0         1         1
  266   0.19 R‐1        LD                    5      0      0         1         1
                                                     May 2013 | City of Highland General Plan

                                                                          8. HOUSING ELEMENT
                                      Table 8.1A: Land Inventory
                                           General Plan
                                 Zoning     Land Use
                                Current/     Current/   Assumed                     Unit
              Map ID     Acres  Proposed    Proposed     Density  VL/L   M    AM    Yield
                267       1.62 R‐1        LD                    5      0   0     8       8
                268       0.19 R‐1        LD                    5      0   0     1       1
                270      10.29 R‐1        LD                    5      0   0   51      51
                271       1.96 R‐1        LD                    5      0   0   10      10
                272       0.21 R‐1        LD                    5      0   0     1       1
                273       1.04 R‐1        LD                    5      0   0     5       5
                277       0.88 R‐1        LD                    5      0   0     4       4
                278      10.20 R‐1        LD                    5      0   0   51      51
                285       0.35 R‐2        MD                  10       0   3     0       3
                286       0.37 R‐2        MD                  10       0   4     0       4
                290       0.24 R‐1        LD                    5      0   0     1       1
                291       0.24 R‐1        LD                    5      0   0     1       1
                292       0.19 R‐1        LD                    5      0   0     1       1
                293       0.19 R‐1        LD                    5      0   0     1       1
                294       0.19 R‐1        LD                    5      0   0     1       1
                295       0.19 R‐1        LD                    5      0   0     1       1
                296       0.19 R‐1        LD                    5      0   0     1       1
                297       0.19 R‐1        LD                    5      0   0     1       1
                298       0.19 R‐1        LD                    5      0   0     1       1
                299       0.20 R‐1        LD                    5      0   0     1       1
                300       0.18 R‐1        LD                    5      0   0     1       1
                301       0.18 R‐1        LD                    5      0   0     1       1
                302       0.18 R‐1        LD                    5      0   0     1       1
                303       0.24 R‐1        LD                    5      0   0     1       1
                304       0.24 R‐1        LD                    5      0   0     1       1
                305       0.24 R‐1        LD                    5      0   0     1       1
                306       0.24 R‐1        LD                    5      0   0     1       1
                307       0.25 R‐1        LD                    5      0   0     1       1
                308       0.20 R‐1        LD                    5      0   0     1       1
                309       0.20 R‐1        LD                    5      0   0     1       1
                205       1.35 PD/HDS     PD 
                206       2.54 PD/HDS     PD 
                207       6.29 PD/HDS     PD 
                250       3.05 PD/HDS     PD 
                251       2.00 PD/HDS     PD 
                252       2.00 PD/HDS     PD 
                253       2.34 PD/HDS     PD                  25    650    0     0   650
City of Highland General Plan

                                Table 8.1A: Land Inventory
                                       General Plan
                           Zoning        Land Use
                          Current/       Current/        Assumed                                   Unit
Map ID       Acres       Proposed        Proposed         Density    VL/L      M          AM      Yield
   269       10.39      PD/HDS        PD 
   274         0.58     PD/HDS        PD 
   275         0.45     PD/HDS        PD 
   276         1.63     PD/HDS        PD 
   279         1.10     PD/HDS        PD 
   280         1.00     PD/HDS        PD 
   281         0.98     PD/HDS        PD 
   282         1.10     PD/HDS        PD 
   283         1.19     PD/HDS        PD 
   284         0.26     PD/HDS        PD 
   287         4.95     PD/HDS        PD 
   288         4.11     PD/HDS        PD 
   289         5.00     PD/HDS        PD 
Total        351.26 --                --                 --           2,012     639        725     3,375
Source: City of Highland, 2012.
Note: Gray italicized text denotes underutilized properties.
Sites 205–207, 250–253, 269, 247–276, 279, 280–284, and 287–289 are in the HDS Overlay, which
allows up to 650 units between 20 and 30 units per acre to be developed anywhere within the 52.3-acre
Overlay.
                                                                          May 2013 | City of Highland General Plan

9. Economic Development Elemen
This page intentionally left blank
Chapter 9. Economic Development Element
INTRODUCTION
Well Positioned for the Future
S
        ituated in the fastest growing region of the State, Highland is well
        positioned for a prosperous economic future. Its location near
        major interstate and state highways (I-10, I-215, SR-30, SR-330)
makes it a convenient place to live, visit, do business and work. Its wide
range of housing options and affordability make it a practical place to live
for a diverse labor force. Its supply of vacant land provides unusual
opportunities for commercial, residential and industrial development. Its
tradition as a frugal, “can do” City with a high quality of life gives it the
base from which to grow in ways that enhance its small town pride and
improve its economic viability.
After being overlooked for many years by commercial developers,
intense interest is now being focused on key Highland locations. The
proximity of the expanding San Bernardino International Airport is of
great strategic value. Commercial opportunities within the new Town
Center on Base Line Road are increasing. Due to growth in western
areas of the Inland Empire, demand for industrial and business park
uses is moving toward Highland.                                               The growth and development of the San
                                                                              Bernardino International Airport could add
                                                                              long-term strategic value to Highland’s
Despite these positive trends, the City of Highland is realistic in the face  economy.
of economic challenges as well. Due to its relatively low proportion of
revenue-producing land, the City must plan as efficiently as possible.
It must pay for services to newly annexed areas to the east. It must
improve its weak retail sales by enticing residents to spend more of their
money within the City. It must carefully plan to consolidate its strip
commercial areas, develop a new Town Center and incorporate in-fill
housing that supports a more efficient balance of land uses. This element
addresses these challenges and lays out the goals and policies for
solidifying a prosperous and sustainable future for Highland.
City of Highland General Plan                                                                                            9-1

                                                 HIGHLAND…A Great Place to Live
    An Economic Guide to the Future
    The purpose of the Economic Development Element is to guide the City
    of Highland in expanding, maintaining and enhancing a local economy
    that provides jobs, attracts and retains business, supports diverse and
    vibrant commercial areas, and provides sufficient revenue to local
    government. Economic development is not a State-mandated element
    of the General Plan, but the City has long realized its importance in the
    strategic planning of the community.
    Clearly, the Economic Development Element is closely related to other
    elements in the General Plan. The Land Use Element provides the
    preferred balance and location of land use designations vital to the
    economic revitalization of the City. The Circulation Element ensures the
    proper transportation infrastructure to meet future needs while
    the Conservation and Open Space, Public Services and Facilities,
    Housing and Community Design Elements all work together to improve
    quality future development—reinforcing Highland as a great place to live,
    work and play.
    Visions for a Balanced Community
    From its beginnings as an incorporated City in 1987, Highland has been
    “the little city that could.” Many doubted its viability as a separate local
    government, but, in a short time, the City has become one of the most
    fiscally responsible and stable in the region. It has grown rapidly and met
    numerous challenges, but it must continue to plan for the future.
    The following goal statements represent a consensus of issues vital to
    Highland’s desire to remain a fiscally solvent, financially stable
    community:
         •    Revitalized, consolidated and balanced retail development that
              provides more shopping opportunities for local residents and
              strengthens the City’s fiscal health;
         •    A new Town Center that provides convenient shopping,
              employment, recreational and housing opportunities for residents
              in this key focal point;
         •    An expanded, contemporary industrial base that takes advantage
              of regional transportation corridors and airport development;
         •    Quality in-fill housing along major corridors that provides a
              stimulus for local resident-serving retail development; and
         •    Continued high levels of local government services and facilities,
              solidifying Highland’s reputation for quality local government.
9-2                                          March 2006 | City of Highland General Plan

                                                                            9. ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT ELEMENT
THE CITY BUDGET: Understanding Where the Money
Comes from and Where It Goes
Highland is a dynamic and rapidly growing community that is
simultaneously adding new development and revitalizing older areas.
To finance these changes, the City uses many of the same tools and
programs used by other jurisdictions. Its success will hinge on its forward
thinking and careful planning to capture positive change.
Fiscal Health: Public Revenues and Expenditures
Cities throughout California play the difficult balancing act of providing
services for their residents and collecting enough revenue to stay fiscally
healthy. Highland has the reputation of providing unusually high quality              Top Revenue Sources
services in relation to its revenues and adopting budgets within its means.           • Intergovernmental Revenues
However, as it continues to grow, demand for public services and                      • Property Tax
infrastructure will continue to grow. Although property tax revenues will             • Gas Tax Transfers
increase, the uncertainties of intergovernmental revenues mean that the               • Motor Vehicle License Fees
City must continue to take a conservative fiscal approach. It must also               Top Expenditures
promote efficiency in the use of revenue-producing properties.                        • Capital Improvements
                                                                                      • Streets, Development
Economic Development Planning                                                         •
                                                                                      •
                                                                                        Sheriff
                                                                                        Fire and Paramedic
One way to visualize the complexities of municipal economic and fiscal
planning is through a simplified model. There are three major
components that determine a City’s fiscal cycle: urban development and
economic planning, revenue sources and expenditures, which are
determined annually in the City budget.
An important lesson from this model is that a City’s land development
patterns have a major influence on its ability to collect revenue and
provide services. Commercial development brings in sales tax revenue
and is generally sought after by cities—a process called “fiscalization”
of land use. But a balanced community also has diverse housing
opportunities that bring in property tax revenues, accounting for almost
half of most cities general funds. By law, however, a portion of these
revenues is shared with school districts and the State. In addition,
housing development creates the need for more community services,
the most expensive typically being law enforcement and fire protection.
Development impact fees are another way that local jurisdictions can
offset the costs to provide community services and facilities. It must be
realized, however, that such fees are not appropriate for meeting ongoing
operational costs because they are “one time” revenues. The basis for
development impact fees is that new development results in impacts on
public infrastructure such as schools, roads and public safety facilities.
Impact fees provide a means of alternative to providing public
City of Highland General Plan                                                                                      9-3

                                                 HIGHLAND…A Great Place to Live
    improvements rather than letting the improvements lag behind or putting
    the burden upon existing taxpayers by increasing taxes. The purpose of
    these charges is to absorb public capital improvement costs proportionate
    to the developments that create the need for those improvements.
    The City of Highland has done an excellent job limiting its expenditures
    while still providing high quality community services. It does so in part,
    however, by limiting certain services such as recreation. Some revenues
    come from outside the City such as motor vehicle license fees and gas
    tax transfers, but these are hard to predict and may change depending
    on changing political realities. What a city can control is how well it
    positions itself to collect a steady stream of revenue to pay for the
    services it decides to provide. By carefully planning its land use
    designations and their location, and continuing to support solid
    educational and recreational opportunities, the City of Highland is
    striving to attract high quality development and its resulting revenues.
    A further key to the success of this strategy is to seek revenue-producing
    development that uses land efficiently and remain successful. Marginal
    or declining uses in due course become a community liability and not
    an asset.
    ECONOMIC AND FISCAL INDICATORS: Criteria for
    Economic Success
    Sound economic planning depends on making decisions based on the
    best possible information. As part of the General Plan process, a set of
    economic and fiscal indicators can be developed to serve as criteria to
    evaluate the City’s success in meeting its fiscal and economic goals. A
    program that utilizes these indicators is proposed as part of a strategic
    plan to gauge the effectiveness of the City’s economic planning and to
    make adjustments as necessary. The following indicators summarize
    recent trends and can be used on an ongoing basis.
    Employment and Demographic Trends
    Highland has traditionally been a solidly middle class community that
    is predominantly made up of parents with children under 18 years old.
    Its population is slightly younger (median age, 29.3) than the County
    average and, like its neighbors, is ethnically diverse. It is a modestly
    educated city with 16 percent of its adults having attained a bachelor’s
    degree or higher. Finally, it is experiencing and will continue to
    experience rapid residential growth with the buildout of East Highlands
    Ranch and the future development of the Seven Oaks area.
    In terms of future planning embodied in the General Plan, this
    demographic data has several implications. First, the City’s growing
    prosperity due to new homebuyers will create extra demand for city
9-4                                          March 2006 | City of Highland General Plan

                                                                              9. ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT ELEMENT
services and potential to support retail and industrial development. The
relatively young nature of its population will also create demand for
rental housing and first-time home purchases. Clearly, the growing
numbers of Highlanders should support the market for the new Town
Center as an entertainment, shopping and civic district.
Diversity of the Employment Base
A fiscally balanced city provides economic opportunities for a wide sector
of the population. Just as diversification of investments is a positive
strategy regarding personal finance, cities benefit by having a diversified
economic base.
Analyzing the various employment sectors in Highland over the last
decade points to some important opportunities. With its large residential
base, it is not surprising that retail sales and health care accounted for
almost 75% of the City’s job growth during the past decade. During this
period, manufacturing, construction, distribution and transport
employment stayed rather flat, but new building in eastern parts of the
City and growth near the San Bernardino International Airport point to
positive growth. Business and professional services also experienced
large growth and will continue to be a major target sector as the City
expands and upgrades its residential base.
Looking to the future, the City should position itself for increased
employment in several sectors. Retail trade employment will increase
as the City attracts quality commercial development at freeway
interchanges, at major intersections, and within the Town Center and the
Golden Triangle. Housing construction and manufacturing will increase
as the City entitles large planned communities in eastern Highland and
encourages industrial expansion near its southern boundaries adjacent to
the San Bernardino International Airport. The City will also need to
ensure that plans adopted by the Airport are compatible with the City’s
goals and protect its key economic assets. Although agriculture and
heavy construction along the Santa Ana River will decline, education,
distribution and transportation employment should experience growth.
Distribution uses require a cautionary note. They typically involve low
employment ratios and high truck traffic, thereby constituting inefficient
users of land. Highland needs to keep this kind of use in careful balance.
Taxable Retail and Non-Retail Sales
Highland’s taxable retail sales have been a difficulty for the City since its
inception. This is the case since the community was once part of the City
of San Bernardino’s sphere of influence and that municipality annexed
nearly all of the logical retail areas that would serve Highland before it
was incorporated. This is reflected in the City’s rank, in 2002, as the 39th
of the 48 inland communities in total retail sales and 47th in sales per
City of Highland General Plan                                                                              9-5

                                                                                                HIGHLAND…A Great Place to Live
                                                   capita. Its retail sales have grown an average of only 1.1 percent
                                                   over the last 10 years, and it has ranked near the bottom of cities in
                                                   the region.
                                                   Given the importance of retail sales tax to California municipalities,
                                                   taxable retail sales per capita (per person) is a good measurement of a
                                                   community’s ability to provide shopping opportunities to its population.
                                                   However, the City needs to be both realistic and proactive. Based on
                                                   total land available for retail, the limited market area and surrounding
                                                   competition, Highland will never lead the region in retail sales. However,
                                                   the City is moving to make the best use of its existing retail land through
                                                   more consolidated development, a centrally located Town Center, quality
     Commercial centers in Highland provide a      design standards and flexible land use designations. It has strong
   significant source of retail sales tax revenue.
                                                   recreation opportunities and considerable amounts of vacant land that
                                                   could be converted to tax-generating uses. By aggressively recruiting
                                                   high tax-generating businesses, combined with the City’s conservative
                                                   fiscal management, will improve Highland’s capture of retail dollars and
                                                   its fiscal health.
                                                   Residential and Nonresidential Building Activity
                                                   Healthy local economies often experience steady growth in residential
                                                   and nonresidential construction. Highland has benefited from having an
                                                   extensive amount of undeveloped residential land at a time when prices
                                                   in Southern California’s coastal counties, as well as in the Inland
                                                   Empire’s western markets, have reached extraordinarily high levels. In
                                                   addition, the City is well positioned in this regard because it will continue
                                                   to experience rapid growth in new residential construction to the east and
                                                   along major corridors, expanded industrial development in the south and
                                                   redevelopment of retail activity in central areas. The City can also count
                                                   on the availability of underutilized properties for intensification,
                                                   rehabilitation and redevelopment, generating additional revenue.
                                                   Home Prices and Rental Ranges
                                                   A mix of housing types and ranges of prices is necessary to house a
                                                   diverse labor force that supports new businesses and industries within the
                                                   City. Using this measure, the City of Highland offers an assortment of
                                                   living environments. It is well positioned to attract business development
                                                   because it offers housing for company president and shop worker alike.
                                                   As the Inland Empire proceeds on the next wave of its growth curve,
                                                   Highland’s new General Plan is poised to capture growth in the market
                                                   of first-time and move-up homebuyers. The City should also consider
                                                   expanding into the executive-level home market, filling a previously
                                                   untapped niche. By designating expanded areas for in-fill housing along
                                                   major corridors, encouraging in-fill and rehabilitation opportunities within
                                                   older neighborhoods, and anticipating a large amount of new residential
9-6                                                                                         March 2006 | City of Highland General Plan

                                                                            9. ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT ELEMENT
housing, the City can offer housing options for many households with a
range of incomes. This will also localize increased buying power to
capture more retail sales by new and improved commercial centers.
Office and Industrial Vacancy and Rental Rates
Highland’s General Plan also positions the City to capture increased
demand for industrial and business park development. Price pressure on
land in the Inland Empire west of I-15 is forcing industrial development
eastward, much of it along the I-10 and I-210 corridors. In addition,
lease and vacancy rates have favored these inland locations. Thus, the
Land Use Plan (Figure 2-2 of the Land Use Element) devotes more
acreage to office, business park and industrial uses.
Highland is a key participant in the industrial development of the East
San Bernardino Valley through its participation on the board of the San
Bernardino International Airport (SBIA), the agency responsible for the
management of the 1,500-acre airport at the former Norton AFB, and
the San Bernardino Association of Governments (SANBAG). The City
will continue to play an active role in Airport planning efforts to
encourage the positive economic benefits of the Airport and minimize
                                                                                      Refer to the Circulation Element for
any potential negative impacts on the economic vitality and quality of life           discussion and policies related to
in Highland. In addition, the City has helped finance the expansion of                truck routes.
5th Street from the SBIA to SR-30, a route that will be re-designated as
part of I-210 when the final six-mile portion of that system is completed
in 2006. The 5th Street link to this freeway will ultimately be the major
route by which trucks from SBIA will link to the interstate freeway system.
City of Highland General Plan                                                                                              9-7

                                                HIGHLAND…A Great Place to Live
    GOALS AND POLICIES
    Balanced Land Uses
    The City of Highland has maintained strong fiscal health by running a
    very efficient local government. As the City grows, however, it will need
    a larger tax base from which to provide services. It has traditionally been
    a bedroom community, but a greater diversity of land uses will not only
    serve its growing population, but also provide more consistent revenue
    for its public services. The General Plan addresses this reality by making
    important changes in the amount of land designated for different uses as
    well as establishing policies for quality design standards to ensure their
    success. By adopting a more balanced land use plan, which includes
    successful industrial, commercial and residential development, the City
    of Highland is proactively positioning itself to capture its share of the
    benefits of continued dynamic growth in the Inland Empire.
    Highland’s Land Use Plan makes key changes to the previous general
    plan:
         •   Consolidated commercial development along major corridors,
             especially Base Line;
         •   Additional industrial and business park designations near the
             San Bernardino International Airport;
         •   Introduction of a mixed-use designation for the Town Center;
         •   Designation of the “Golden Triangle” for planned commercial,
             office and residential development; and
         •   Proactive revitalization of the Highland Historic District for
             commercial and residential development by linking it to the
             new Town Center development.
    These general plan designations will help Highland capture more sales
    tax revenue by making commercial development more attractive and
    better situated. Increasing designations for business park and industrial
    development near the airport will capture regional demand, which is
    pushing businesses to the eastern portions of the San Bernardino Valley.
    A mixed-use designation for the Town Center, combined with increased
    housing opportunities along Base Line, in revitalized neighborhoods west
    of SR-30, and in the eastern portions of Highland can generate retail and
    development momentum for the area.
9-8                                         March 2006 | City of Highland General Plan

                                                                             9. ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT ELEMENT
GOAL 9.1
Maintain a balance of land uses that generates consistent and sufficient
revenue for public services now and in the future.
Policies
     1) Provide an appropriate mix of retail development in focused
          commercial centers along commercial corridors.
     2) Promote the expanded the Business Park and Industrial land use
          designations in the southern parts of the City to capture regional
          demand and growth potential from future airport development.
     3) Promote the emerging Highland Town Center as a mixed-use
          zone capable of capturing a wide range of public, commercial
          and residential development.
     4) Promote quality in-fill housing along corridors and on infill sites
          in adjacent neighborhoods to support retail development.
     5) Promote a mix of housing types and range of prices necessary to
          provide a diverse labor force.
     6) Establish and apply updated criteria and procedures for reviewing
          the fiscal effect and overall project quality of new development
          proposals, zone changes and revitalization efforts.
     7) Evaluate the effect of new retail and office development on the
          capture of local shopping dollars.
Revitalization and Redevelopment of Retail Development
Highland’s new General Plan envisions a much more focused approach
to retail development. Rather than continue the pattern of dispersed,
strip development, the new designations call for concentrated commercial
centers located at key intersections. Areas previously devoted to
marginal commercial development will transition to high quality, in-fill
housing, providing additional clients for the emerging centers. By
combining a range of tenants and selectively introducing mixed-use
development, these retail centers can develop complementary uses that
build their own commercial momentum.
The success of these revitalized and redeveloped retail centers depends
on many factors. Quality design criteria are provided by the Community
Design Element. A well-planned and carefully phased Town Center
preceded by infrastructure improvements, including corridor landscaping
and streetscape improvements, will serve as a magnet for developers,
business owners and clients. Although regional stores are well
City of Highland General Plan                                                                             9-9

                                                 HIGHLAND…A Great Place to Live
     represented in the Redlands/San Bernardino area, market studies
     indicate that the City is underserved by local-serving office and
     convenience retail, as well as some specialized retail. This provides
     support for the concept of a mixed-used, themed Town Center along
     Base Line and additional retail centers at selected intersections.
     Linking the Town Center to the Historic Village District just to the north
     will enhance its retail success. By designating Palm Avenue as “Office
     Professional” and incorporating streetscape improvements between the
     Town Center and the district, a visual and functional link is strengthened,
     encouraging pedestrian and commercial interest.
     GOAL 9.2
     Consolidate and revitalize commercial development that provides attractive
     and convenient shopping, service and professional uses, and entertainment
     opportunities for its residents.
     Policies
          1) Consolidate commercial development into selected intersections
             along Base Line.
          2) Develop implementation plans for a new Highland Town Center,
             which include:
             •    a phased development approach;
             •    a conceptual design plan and design guidelines to ensure
                  quality development; and
             •    a marketing and business assistance program.
          3) Target key retail sectors to maintain a strong, local share of sales
             tax revenue.
          4) Create physical and visual linkages between Highland’s historic
             district and the emerging Town Center.
          5) Promote additional commercial development around major
             freeway interchanges.
          6) Develop strategies to attract visitors who are traveling to and from
             mountain resort destinations.
          7) Study the desirability of establishing an Infill Development
             Incentive program for targeted sites along major corridors and in
             adjacent neighborhoods.
9-10                                       March 2006 | City of Highland General Plan

                                                                            9. ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT ELEMENT
     8) Inventory, map and disseminate information on vacant,
          underutilized properties and in existing commercial centers in
          redevelopment project areas to realtors and developers.
     9) Participate in San Bernardino International Airport planning
          efforts to enhance compatibility with Highland’s economic
          development objectives and quality of life.
Business Retention and Promotion
As part of the rapidly growing East San Bernardino Valley and being well
positioned near major freeways, the City of Highland will continue to
promote itself as a great place to live and do business. It has the highest
business retention rate in the Count. In addition to supporting private
sector activities such as the Chamber of Commerce, the City must take
on a proactive role in business promotion and economic strategic
planning. The City already participates on the Board of the San
Bernardino International Airport Authority and the San Bernardino
County Association of Governments (SANBAG) and can use that forum
to best leverage itself as opportunities arise. By emphasizing its
locational, cost and quality of life advantages and assets, the City can
work to attract high quality businesses and industries.
The City’s homepage provides a valuable link to economic development.
Under the motto “Come Home to Highland—A Great Place to Live, A
Great Place to Build”, the site provides timely information on available
land, leasable space, entitlement processing, fees and demographic
information.
GOAL 9.3
Continually monitor and enhance Highland’s business promotion and
economic development activities and programs.
Policies
     1) Establish, maintain, use and update a list of targeted industries
          and professional organizations for business promotion and
          location/relocation in Highland.
     2) Prepare focused market analyses of its best opportunities in both
          the retail and business/industrial sectors.
     3) Coordinate business promotion activities with the Chamber of
          Commerce.
     4) Continue to update economic development opportunities on the
          City’s homepage.
City of Highland General Plan                                                                           9-11

                                                  HIGHLAND…A Great Place to Live
         5) Continue and promote the City’s well-publicized, user-friendly
              and competitive permit assistance program.
         6) Establish partnerships with local real estate professionals to
              develop strategies for promoting and marketing opportunities
              within Highland.
         7) Undertake periodic market demand updates as part of the City’s
              economic development strategy.
     Promote and Maintain Fiscal Health
     Highland has attained the status of being one of the most fiscally prudent
     and debt-free cities in the region. As a contract city, Highland
     continuously maintains a low employee to resident ratio and has been
     able to provide quality services to its residents in a very efficient manner.
     Part of Highland’s success is due to its highly regarded budget
     prioritization process. By balancing projected revenues with demand for
     services, the City staff and City Council are able to effectively allocate
     money for community services and public projects.
     Similar to other cities in the southern California area, Highland has
     grown and is facing increased demand for public services and impacts
     on public infrastructure. In addition, the political and economic
     uncertainties of the State budget and its effects on local jurisdictions will
     have to be closely monitored to ensure that the City is ready to weather
     the impacts of a potential decrease in public revenues.
     GOAL 9.4
     Continue prudent fiscal management and balanced land use policies that
     increase public revenues commensurate with the growth of public
     infrastructure and services.
     Policies
         1) Maintain steady growth in key public revenue sources, such as
              property taxes and sales taxes, in order to provide high quality
              public services and capital facilities.
         2) Establish the desired level of service for public services such as
              fire, police, public works and community services, and prioritize
              these public service areas for the allocation of revenues for
              ongoing operations and maintenance costs.
         3) Evaluate the effectiveness and reliability of existing sources of
              funding that provide funds for public improvements needed to
9-12                                        March 2006 | City of Highland General Plan

                                                                           9. ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT ELEMENT
          support projected growth, such as redevelopment monies,
          development impact fees and grants.
     4) Maintain a Capital Improvement Program (CIP) that establishes
          required capital improvements projects, priorities and revenue
          sources for each capital project.
     5) Explore alternative funding sources in light of uncertain and
          changing State financial arrangements with cities, researching
          the applicability of new grants and funding sources to provide
          funding for CIP projects.
     6) Evaluate the feasibility of local financing approaches to provide
          future sources of funding for public services, such as: property
          based landscape and lighting districts, business improvement
          districts, special taxes and special assessments.
     7) Maintain retail competitiveness to provide a reliable tax base for
          increased public municipal revenues needed to support growth.
     8) Coordinate with the Chamber of Commerce and the business
          community to maintain a business attraction program that will
          provide a mix of good paying jobs and increased sales tax
          revenues
     9) Implement land use policies that address a balance of land uses
          to generate a mix of jobs, increase public revenues and promote
          fiscal stability.
Expanded Industrial Base
As land constraints increase in western portions of the County, demand
for industrial space in the eastern Inland Empire is expected to grow
beyond historical levels. For a number of reasons, Highland is in an
excellent position to capture its share and more. The new General Plan
expands the amount of industrial and business park uses along the
5th Street corridor. This area benefits from convenient access to SR-30
and I-10 and can build on the momentum created by the multi-phased
industrial development occurring immediately south adjacent to the San
Bernardino International Airport. Since access to this emerging industrial
park will pass along both 5th Street and Tippecanoe Avenue, the City will
benefit from increased access, visibility and development. Although
industrial uses are not a major land use within the City and provide no
point of sale revenue, they are an important opportunity for job creation
and revitalization in southern areas of Highland.
City of Highland General Plan                                                                          9-13
                                                  HIGHLAND…A Great Place to Live
     GOAL 9.5
     Develop one of the Inland Empire’s most sought after and successful
     industrial and business park districts along the 5 Street corridor.
                                                        th
     Policies
          1) Promote light industrial and business park uses along 5th Street.
          2) Continue proactive and cooperative planning efforts as a member
               of the Board of the San Bernardino International Airport.
          3) Develop and implement streetscape improvement plans for
               5th Street as a major gateway corridor to the airport area.
          4) Adopt design guidelines for the creation of a high quality business
               park environment including architectural standards, signage,
               landscaping and parking.
          5) Limit nonconforming development that might compromise the
               integrity of the area as an industrial/business park center.
     Education, Training and the Labor Force
     Cities can play an important supporting role in education and job
     training, and the City of Highland does just that. Although the City is not
     large enough to have its own job center, the City’s homepage provides a
     link to the City of San Bernardino’s Job Center as well as employment
     opportunities. Entitling an adequate range of high quality, affordable
     housing helps to match residents with a variety of local employment
     opportunities.
     Job training and economic development planning is particularly
     important in Highland since demographic trends point to a younger
     and ethnically diverse population. The City is justifiably proud of its
     outstanding schools, supporting them with infrastructure improvements
     and new and refurbished community facilities. In close proximity to
     Highland are several excellent colleges and universities as well as
     medical institutions, and the City can serve as an informational liason
     for its citizens.
9-14                                          March 2006 | City of Highland General Plan

                                                                          9. ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT ELEMENT
GOAL 9.6
Continue to play an active role in providing timely information about
employment opportunities and workforce education.
Policies
     1) Support career education programs in local schools such as the
          Regional Occupation Program, career academies, internships, job
          shadowing, Career Speaker Programs, Career Day and other
          programs.
     2) Tailor job training and placement programs to all economic
          segments of the community.
City of Highland General Plan                                                                         9-15
                                           HIGHLAND…A Great Place to Live
     This page intentionally left blank.
9-16                                   March 2006 | City of Highland General Plan

10. Community Design Elemen
This page intentionally left blank
Chapter 10. Community Design Element
INTRODUCTION
Strengthening Highland’s Image
H
          ighland is a great place to live, and the City is working to make it
          an even better place. Part of that appeal is based on community
          aesthetics—combining a beautiful physical setting with attractive
development. To guide this process, this Community Design Element
describes the goals, policies and actions designed to improve the image,
character and quality of life of the City.
Purpose and Function
Although not required by state law, the City believes that a strong
Community Design Element will become an important policy guide in              Monument signs with accompanying City logo
                                                                               are one way to strengthen community identity.
the design process. Goals and policies are not as rigid as development
standards, but they do form the basis for project review, redevelopment
and capital improvement programs. More importantly, the City hopes
that by clearly describing and illustrating its design policies, this element
will stimulate creative thinking and discussion about community design.
Community or urban design is the process that creates the visual identity
of the City and its communities. Building on the foundation of the Land
Use Element, the Community Design Element focuses more specifically
on the form and character of the built environment—groupings of
buildings, public spaces, neighborhoods, streetscapes and public
improvements. Therefore, it affects what we see and experience as
we move through our community and neighborhoods. At its best, the
Community Design Element should provide relevant, clear and creative
guidance to the City, private enterprise and the public as they work
together to create a community whose small-town character is enhanced
by high quality public and private development.
City of Highland General Plan                                                                                          10-1

                                                                                              HIGHLAND…A Great Place to Live
                                                Related Plans and Programs
                                                Community design influences and is influenced by other areas of City
                                                policy. Because the various elements of a General Plan are interrelated
                                                and consistent, the Community Design Element is reflected in the Land
                                                Use, Circulation, and Conservation and Open Space Elements. Land
                                                use designations shape urban form while the circulation system sets the
                                                stage from which the City is viewed. Conservation and open space
                                                planning provides an important contrast to urban development, often
                                                framing views and providing important edges and buffers. The
                                                Community Design Element supports Highland’s Development Code
                                                in several important ways. Whereas the Code regulates uses, size and
                                                impact of development, it does not have the legal authority or scope to
                                                regulate large-scale aesthetics nor the design flexibility to give customized
                                                design guidance to special areas of the City. The Community Design
                                                Element, on the other hand, establishes policy on community-wide
                                                design features such as gateways, arterials and signage, as well as
                                                crafting special policies for specific districts within the City.
                                                Elements of Community Design
                                                Since community or urban design exists at a scale larger than that of
                                                individual buildings, it is helpful to identify the elements that comprise it.
                                                Although there are many models or ways to describe a city’s design, a
                                                particularly useful one comes from the urban theorist and author Kevin
                                                Lynch (The Image of the City, 1960). Lynch’s powerful and widely used
                                                idea was to enhance a city’s visual image, or “legibility,” by improving
                                                the visibility and quality of its major parts. He identified the following
                                                five elements that form the basis for a city’s identity:
       Paths. Base Line is Highland's most
       important arterial, running the length   Paths. These are the circulation links of a city, vital to the way people
                      of the City west to east. perceive their city. Highland contains several important paths. Base
                                                Line is the major east/west arterial that runs the entire length of the City
                                                and gives motorists views of commercial areas, neighborhoods, the
                                                mountains and adjoining hillside development.
                                                Landmarks. Visually prominent buildings, special geographic features and
                                                important cultural centers can symbolize the special sense of place of a
                                                city and help to orient visitors and residents as they move about.
                                                Highland’s major landmarks are found in its dramatic geography at the
                                                base of the San Bernardino Mountains. Panoramic views of the
                                                mountains provide a scenic background for the entire city.
                                                Nodes. These are activity centers or concentrations of uses that provide
                                                vibrancy, convenience and variety for a city. Highland envisions its
         Landmarks. The San Bernardino
     Mountains are the City’s visual backdrop   centrally located Town Center as a more concentrated and dynamic
            and most prominent landmarks.       node, and this element also calls for greater consolidation of commercial
10-2                                                                                     March 2006 | City of Highland General Plan

                                                                              10. COMMUNITY DESIGN ELEMENT
uses along major corridors to enhance aesthetics and economic vitality of
the City. The new Jerry Lewis Community and Environmental Learning
Centers and the Central Park are also important activity centers, or
nodes, for the City.
Districts. Cities are often comprised of different areas that have their own
distinguishing visual and functional qualities. Whether they are historic
districts, business parks or downtowns, these special areas can add
variety and identity to the City. Highland contains several such
districts—a historic area, a proposed Town Center and future                 Nodes. Highland Village Plaza is the City’s
                                                                             largest shopping center.
industrial/business park zones, which can be enhanced through tailored
design guidance. The historic district and its connection to the Town
Center represent a potentially beneficial relationship between districts.
Edges. Boundaries or transition areas from one land use or district to
another are important features of a city. These boundaries can be
effective and attractive—using entry signs and landscaped buffers—or
divisive—as with unadorned walls or underutilized strips. Soft, greenbelt
boundaries are preferred in the City. The planning goal here is to clearly
define city boundaries, gateways or entryways, and to provide more links
and access between compatible land uses.                                     Districts. Highland’s historic district contains
                                                                             excellent examples of early 1900s architecture,
                                                                             from Craftsman Bungalows to Victorian-
Current Community Design Characteristics                                     inspired designs.
Highland is a city of great diversity, both in terms of land use and design
quality. It is, in many ways, a linear city with right-angle streets, low-
density development and broad vistas. The western part of the City
contains older, single-family neighborhoods while the eastern portion
contains planned developments with new subdivisions, landscaped
parkways and a great deal of open space. Bisecting the City from north
to south is State Route 30 (SR-30). Also bisecting the City from west to
east is Highland’s principal arterial—Base Line—containing City Hall,
commercial development and a mixture of single- and multiple-family           Edges. The edge between residential uses
residential uses.                                                             and Plunge Creek provides a visual break
                                                                              and opportunities for trail access.
This diversity of land use presents a great deal of opportunity. Large
vacant parcels along Base Line and in the industrial and commercial
areas to the south and west provide the potential for more focused, in-fill
development that will add vitality and a stronger sense of identity to the
City. Development within the eastern areas of Highland can strengthen
the City’s image and support its rural, natural character.
City of Highland General Plan                                                                                            10-3

                                                   HIGHLAND…A Great Place to Live
     GOALS AND POLICIES
     Goals Summary
     Every community is defined, among other things, by community design.
     Community design not only creates a visual identity for a community but
     also ensures a healthy quality of life for Highland’s residents. As the City
     of Highland embraces the future, there are seven major community
     design goals that stand out as important to enhancing Highland’s
     community identity:
          •   Strengthen sense of place;
          •   Enhance major arterials;
          •   Accommodate growth while maintaining a small town character;
          •   Build a vibrant Town Center;
          •   Improve design quality in residential neighborhoods;
          •   Design vibrant commercial centers; and
          •   Guide quality industrial and business park development.
     Community Design Map
     Figure 10.1 illustrates the main elements of Highland’s community design
     structure. The diagram updates and expands upon earlier City efforts to
     give greater definition to those features that enhance community identity.
     For example, the map shows the opportunities for strengthening the
     visual character of the City’s major arterials, placing city entry
     monumentation at key gateways and improving the connection between
     the historic district and the Town Center.
     Community Design Identity
     The City of Highland derives its identity from its unique physical setting,
     its agricultural past and its vision for the future. The dramatic relief of the
     San Bernardino Mountains borders the City on the north and east. The
     orange branches on its street signs and city logo reflect the City’s
     agricultural past. Embracing the future is seen in the City’s efforts to
     revitalize its arterials, build a vibrant Town Center and improve the
     quality of its future development.
     The role of the Community Design Element is to build on this context
     and strengthen the City’s physical image. A more attractive and unified
     appearance not only increases a sense of pride by residents, but also
     creates a positive climate for business and residential development.
10-4                                           March 2006 | City of Highland General Plan


                                           HIGHLAND…A Great Place to Live
     This page intentionally left blank.
10-6                                   March 2006 | City of Highland General Plan

                                                                            10. COMMUNITY DESIGN ELEMENT
GOAL 10.1
Create a unified and attractive community identity within the context of
diverse neighborhoods and land uses.
Policies
     1) Continue to designate primary and secondary entry points for
          gateway monumentation into the City.
     2) Incorporate the City logo in public spaces and public facilities.
     3) Identify, preserve and enhance view corridors of major
          landmarks, community facilities and natural open space in the
          planning and design of all public and private projects.
     4) Continue to identify opportunities to incorporate public art in
          conjunction with redevelopment and capital improvements
          projects.
                                                                            Aurantia Park incorporates references to the
     5) Pursue unifying streetscape elements for major corridors,           City's agricultural past and uses local river rock
          including coordinated streetlights, landscaping, public signage,  and native plant material in its landscape plan.
          street furniture and hardscaping.
     6) Ensure that the design of all public facilities fits well into its
          surroundings and incorporates symbolic references to the City
          of Highland.
Enhanced Arterial Corridors
With its long, straight roadways, Highland’s image is largely determined
by the quality of its streetscapes. The role of the City’s major arterials,
however, goes beyond that of appearance alone. Their successful
revitalization and the different yet complementary role that each one
plays in Highland’s future is the backbone of the City’s physical planning.
The three most prominent corridors are Base Line, the 3rd and 5th Street
corridors, and the 9th Street Pedestrian Promenade. Of lesser magnitude,
but very important as the connector of all east/west corridors, the Town
Center and Historic District, is Palm Avenue. The diagram below shows
the functional relationship between these important arterials.
Base Line. Enhancements to Base Line are crucial to the City’s visual and
economic revitalization. This major roadway passes through the Town
Center and contains most of the City’s commercial development.
However, its lack of unifying streetscape elements and large number of
vacant lots create an incoherent image and increase the perceived scale
of this already wide arterial. Consistent landscaping and street furniture,
along with consolidated development on vacant parcels will produce a
City of Highland General Plan                                                                                              10-7

                                                             HIGHLAND…A Great Place to Live
     more attractive, finished appearance to the corridor. Channeling more
     concentrated commercial development to key intersections and
     introducing high quality, mid-block residential development here will also
     meet housing needs and improve the economic vitality of retail
     development and the Town Center.
       Mid-block residential development along Base Line will incorporate richly detailed
       architecture and contribute to an attractive and pedestrian-friendly street environment. This
       can be accomplished through design guidelines that encourage residential developments
       with a neighborhood scale and appearance, orientation towards the street, recessed or alley
       loaded parking and landscaped parkways.
     3rd and 5th Streets. As major corridors into and through the industrial/
     business park districts and providing access to the San Bernardino
     International Airport, these arterials will receive more formal, skyway
     landscape treatment. In keeping with high traffic volumes, formal
     placement of trees, light standards, banners and signage will provide a
     distinctive, “international parkway” image.
     Victoria Avenue. Serving as the major entryway for passenger traffic to the
     San Bernardino International Airport, Victoria Avenue will be improved
     to reinforce the importance of this arterial as an entryway into the city
     and as a link to the airport.
10-8                                                    March 2006 | City of Highland General Plan

                                                                              10. COMMUNITY DESIGN ELEMENT
GOAL 10.2
Create attractive and visually unified major arterial corridors through
specialized streetscape and landscape improvement plans.
Policies
     1) Incorporate unifying and consistent streetscape elements—
          landscaped parkways and medians, regularly spaced trees, street
          lighting and street furniture—for the City’s major arterial
          corridors.
     2) Incorporate City-themed design features such as banners,
          gateway and monument signage, and specialized landscaping
          in appropriate areas and as a part of streetscape improvement
          plans.
Actions
     1) Develop plans for design enhancements at key intersections
          to include specialized paving, enlarged setbacks and accent
          landscaping and signage.
     2) Continue to underground utility lines along the City’s arterial
          corridors.
     3) Develop sign guidelines for major arterials.
     4) Develop a specialized streetscape plan for 3rd and 5th Streets
          featuring a formal street and landscape plan along with
          appropriate gateway and monument signage for the developing
          industrial/business park area.
                                                                             The contrasting photos above of Base Line
     5) Develop specialized streetscape plan for Victoria Avenue             show the impact of landscaping on the visual
          featuring formalized landscaping and signage that identifies the   image of a major arterial. In the photo on the
          entrance to Highland and the San Bernardino International          top, the parkway palms provide visual
                                                                             continuity while the median trees reduce the
          Airport.                                                           scale of the roadway.
     6) Methodically upgrade existing structures to improve aesthetics
          and compatibility with adjacent uses along corridors.
     7) Lower the height of street monument signs to street level.
     8) Choose median tree species that reflect the historic traditions of
          the City and are consistent with indigenous vegetation.
     9) The use of fire resistant plants and trees is encouraged, especially
          in areas near the foothills. If palms, or other similar trees, are
          used, space trees far enough apart to keep fire from traveling
City of Highland General Plan                                                                                            10-9

                                                  HIGHLAND…A Great Place to Live
                from one tree to another, an occurrence more likely during Santa
                Ana wind conditions.
      Town Center
      One of the goals of the City is to create a more discernable, vibrant and
      attractive place where residents can shop, eat, socialize, relax and run
      daily errands. Improving the commercial and aesthetic qualities of the
      Town Center would not only generate revenue, but also provide a
      centrally located focal point for the City. The Town Center’s location on
      Base Line and its accessibility from the adjoining freeway give this area a
      tremendous advantage.
                           The Town Center Vision
      This is the center of our community, geographically and functionally.
      We can shop here, have dinner, get a haircut, go to church, mail a
      package, conduct city business or have a cup of coffee with some friends.
      It is a comfortable place to be. In comparison to the rest of the City, it
      contains a greater mix of public, institutional and private uses than any
      other place. It is one of the more urbanized centers in our Highland
      Vision. There is a lot of activity here. We like visiting or driving through
      the Town Center because it is really attractive. Visitors comment about
      what a positive image it creates for our community. Even though it is a
      bit more intense than most of our City, there are fascinating public areas
      and open spaces where we can enjoy resting amid the hustle and bustle
      that occur here. We are impressed with the quality of development and
      image that it conveys of our community. Convenient access to the
      Freeway system brings some specialized businesses that even have a
      regional draw. Our residents and visitors have some great restaurants,
      entertainment venues and specialty shops catering to families. Base Line
      is no longer just a wide strip of asphalt extending from the Freeway. It
      has all the landscape and architectural interest of a boulevard. The
      unusually complete canopy of trees throughout the Town Center is a
      welcome shield on hot summer days. A special facet of this area is its
      connection along Palm Avenue to Old Town—an intentional link
      between the past and the future that lends a sense of continuity in our
      community. One of the most telling indicators of success with our Town
      Center is the fact that, from its inception, it has always enjoyed much
      higher than average property values. We attribute that to its strategic
      location, the unique combination of uses found there, the quality
      development and the proactive support by the City over the years.
      Our Town Center is very important to us. It symbolizes Highland.
      It welcomes you.
10-10                                         March 2006 | City of Highland General Plan

                                                                                               10. COMMUNITY DESIGN ELEMENT
Town Center Land Use Concept
            Mixed Use Core              The above land use concept is intended to provide the general land use focus for
                                        subareas within the Town Center Mixed-Use area. The land uses should not be viewed
            Medium Density Residential  as prescriptive, but rather as a guide. The General Plan designation for this entire area is
            Commercial Retail           Mixed Use and, as such, allows a great amount of flexibility in determining land use for
                                        individual parcels. The connections, however, indicated by arrows, are critical to making
            Office Professional         the Town Center work as a whole. Future development should incorporate these access
             Civic Center/Institutional points and connections or demonstrate how an alternative approach will provide
                                        connectivity to adjacent parcels and implement the Town Center Vision.
Highland’s Town Center will be a comfortable and convenient place
people will want to go back to again and again. Its attractive and
distinctive design will be a visual reminder that it is, indeed, a special
place. Traditionally, the low density, linear nature of the City has made
developing a Town Center more difficult, but new growth and the desire
to create a true community center has changed the dynamics. Its success
will depend on many factors, but experiences in other cities point the
way. Careful attention to design detail, the proper blend of retail uses,
and a strong public/private partnership to sustain the plan are key. Here
are the keys to creating a successful town center:
Variety—There’s lots to do.
     •     Appropriate retail mix
     •     Retail, office, recreational, civic uses
     •     Entertainment
Distinct Identity—You know you’re in a special place.
     •     Coordinated design theme—special lighting, paving, signage,
           landscaping
     •     Rich architectural detailing
     •     Special ambience
Pedestrian Amenities—It’s a comfortable place to be.
     •     Ample sitting areas, shade, wide sidewalks
     •     Window shopping, outdoor dining, relaxing
City of Highland General Plan                                                                                                        10-11

                                                                                                HIGHLAND…A Great Place to Live
                                                 Concentrated Uses—Bigger isn’t always better.
                                                     •    Six to ten acres for smaller towns
                                                     •    Different uses complement each other
                                                     •    Space well-defined by buildings
                                                 Convenient Access—Easy to get to and negotiate
                                                     •    Parking clearly marked and close by
                                                     •    People arrive by car, foot, bus, bike
                                                 GOAL 10.3
                                                 Create a Town Center that is visually distinctive and vibrant and combines
                                                 retail, residential, civic, cultural and recreational uses.
                                                 Policies
                                                     1) Heighten the sense of arrival to the Town Center through
                                                          differentiated edge treatment including entry signs, specialized
                                                          landscaping, street furniture and differentiated paving.
  Locating buildings close to the street with
 visible entrances and generous pedestrian           2) Encourage an appropriate mix of retail, office and civic uses to
                      amenities invites use.              ensure the economic viability of the area.
                                                     3) Encourage compactness. Successful town centers stimulate
                                                          energy and pedestrian activity by concentrating uses.
                                                     4) Provide convenient and consolidated parking where cars are
                                                          screened from view, wherever possible.
                                                     5) Provide comfortable pedestrian amenities—quality sitting areas,
                                                          wide paths and shade—along with specialized and engaging
                                                          design features, such as interesting fountains or public art, which
                                                          draw and maintain people’s attention.
                                                     6) Design plazas and people gathering places to be consistent with
   A mix of uses, attention to design detail and
    generous public space can create a positive           the policies described in “People Gathering Places” of this
                       Town Center ambience.              Element.
                                                     7) Incorporate references to the City’s history and regional setting
                                                          in the Town Center design.
                                                 Actions
                                                     1) Require future development within the Town Center to
                                                          demonstrate consistency with the Town Center Vision, General
                                                          Plan policies and, where applicable, the Mixed Use design
                                                          guidelines contained within the Development Code.
10-12                                                                                      March 2006 | City of Highland General Plan

                                                                                              10. COMMUNITY DESIGN ELEMENT
Mixed-Use Development
With added pressure for more housing, large amounts of vacant parcels
and efforts to revitalize major arterials, the introduction of properly
planned mixed use could bring great benefits to Highland. Whereas
mixed use is most often a vertical layering of different uses such as
ground floor retail and upper story office or residential, it can also involve
a horizontal array of uses, usually on larger parcels.
Opportunities for mixed-use development offer many advantages for
Highland. By combining different uses within one parcel, greater
efficiencies of space and planning can occur. Not only can it provide
needed housing opportunities, such development can revive aging areas,
generate additional tax revenue and relieve traffic congestion. The
success of the retail and office component of such development depends
on its visibility and access.
The convenience of mixed use also brings design challenges. A balanced
and complementary combination of housing, retail and commercial must
be determined, and this mix should be well integrated into existing
development. Where residential uses are involved, safe and comfortable
private space and convenient parking must be provided.
Vertical mixed use designs feature ground level retail and upper story office or residential.
City of Highland General Plan                                                                                         10-13
                                                                                             HIGHLAND…A Great Place to Live
                                                 GOAL 10.4
                                                 Encourage mixed and multi-use development that is attractively designed,
                                                 convenient, and contains the desired mix of retail, office and residential
                                                 uses.
                                                 Policies
                                                      1) Encourage design flexibility in mixed/multi-use development by
                                                          allowing both a vertical and/or horizontal mix of uses.
                                                      2) Locate mixed/multi-use development in areas of high visibility
                                                          and accessibility.
                                                      3) Segregate residential parking from commercial and office
                                                          parking.
                                                      4) Provide each residential use with its own private space (such as
                                                          balconies, patios, terraces or upper level private gardens and
                                                          plazas) along with larger communal spaces such as lobbies,
                                                          central gardens or courtyards, and convenient connections to
 Pedestrian-scaled signage, wide sidewalks, and
                                                          the street and retail uses.
            specialty stores can add vibrancy to
                             commercial centers.      5) Where a vertical mix of uses occurs, site retail or office uses on
                                                          the ground floor, with residential and/or office uses above. Also,
                                                          encourage architectural detailing that differentiates each use.
                                                      6) Locate commercial/retail uses near the sidewalk to provide high
                                                          visibility from the street.
                                                      7) Minimize the visual impact of surface parking by providing berms,
                                                          landscape buffering and/or locating parking lots to the rear or side
                                                          of buildings or below buildings.
                                                      8) In multi-use development, locate retail and commercial
                                                          development close to street for higher visibility and residential
                                                          uses behind for convenience and privacy.
                                                 Commercial Centers
                                                 A key element in the City’s efforts to improve its design quality is to
                                                 consolidate and strengthen its commercial centers. Rather than continue
                                                 the pattern of low-scale, strip commercial development, the General Plan
                                                 calls for concentrating development within prominent intersections where
                                                 the most potential exists.
                                                 Well-designed commercial centers that contain distinctive architecture,
                                                 clear access, pedestrian amenities and a convenient blend of retail uses
                                                 improve community aesthetics and provide a more solid economic base
10-14                                                                                   March 2006 | City of Highland General Plan

                                                                               10. COMMUNITY DESIGN ELEMENT
for the City. People’s choices about where to shop depend not only on
price considerations; attractiveness and convenience are also important
considerations. In addition, these retail centers should be developed on
large enough sites to allow for efficient circulation and a range of store
sizes, types and building footprints.
GOAL 10.5
Encourage the development of attractive, vibrant and convenient commercial
centers through careful application of design policies and development
standards.
Policies
     1) Design highly visible entrances to retail activity centers through
          accent landscaping and lighting, enhanced intersection features,
          monument signs and other design amenities.
     2) Design commercial centers with a unifying design theme, but add
          visual interest through rich architectural detailing, varied massing
          and rooflines, and accent lighting and landscaping.
     3) Locate buildings and building frontages close to the street and
          street corners with parking behind or to the side of the buildings.
          Where this is not possible or practical, ensure that street-facing
          parking is shielded through landscaping or berms.
     4) Provide ample landscaping for internal parking areas using
          landscaped bays and overstory shade trees.
     5) Clearly delineate pedestrian routes from parking areas to retail
          uses to allow easy and safe pedestrian movement.                     Sidewalks within parking areas provide safe
                                                                               access to retail uses.
     6) Encourage pedestrian-scale features such as shaded sitting areas,
          fountains, arcades, canopies and/or awnings, customized signage
          and strategically located secondary entrances.
     7) Provide people-gathering places and amenities such as mini-
          plazas, courtyards, benches, outdoor eating areas, specialized
          landscaping, accent lighting, public art, shade, trash receptacles
          and water fountains.
     8) Link newly developed retail activity centers, where practical, to
          surrounding residential or office uses through clear and safe
          pedestrian and bicycle connections.
     9) Encourage internal access between adjacent properties in order
          to minimize curb cuts along major thoroughfares.
City of Highland General Plan                                                                                           10-15

                                                                                                   HIGHLAND…A Great Place to Live
                                                           10) Provide walls when necessary for security and/or privacy from
                                                               adjoining residential uses. When walls are necessary, pedestrian
                                                               breaks should be provided for access to commercial uses.
                                                           11) Encourage creative wall design to avoid a blank appearance and
                                                               utilize landscape buffers as an alternative to walls to facilitate
                                                               pedestrian linkages to commercial areas.
                                                      Single-Family Residential Development
                                                      There is nothing as important to a city’s quality of life as the character
 Neighborhood Design Principles                       and safety of its residential neighborhoods. Attractive and safe
 Scale and Massing – New and remodeled                neighborhoods contain unifying elements such as compatible
 homes should be consistent and compatible with       architecture, clearly visible front entrances and continuous parkways and
 the surrounding neighborhood.
                                                      sidewalks. Therefore, neighborhood character is achieved through policy
 Front Yard Coverage – Maximizing landscaped
 yards while minimizing paved surfaces enhances       guidance by the City and efforts by design professionals, developers and
 neighborhood aesthetics.                             the public.
 Residential Entryways – Visible, front-facing
 entryways improve neighborhood appearance            The vast majority of residential developments in Highland are single
 and foster social interaction.
                                                      family, and its residential neighborhoods vary from new subdivisions to
 Architectural Detailing – Façades with rich
 detailing, varied rooflines, and consistent styles   smaller-lot older districts and in-fill development. The newer residential
 add to neighborhood character.                       developments in eastern Highland are characterized by a unified
 Rooflines – Rooflines that are compatible with       architectural theme and consistent streetscape elements. In these
 those of surrounding properties enhance
 neighborhood identity and consistency.               neighborhoods, neighborhood character is maintained through the East
 Sidewalks and Parkways – Landscaped                  Highlands Ranch Planned Unit Development standards and guidelines,
 parkways and continuous sidewalks are                City-sponsored capital improvements, neighborhood associations and
 important unifying elements.
                                                      property deed restrictions. Therefore, design policies for residential
 Garages, Driveways, and Parking – Minimizing
 the visual impact of garages, driveways, and         development are already in place. It is through these General Plan
 off-street parking adds to neighborhood              policies that positive change can be encouraged in the more established
 aesthetics.                                          neighborhoods in Highland.
 Walls and Fencing – Walls and fences that are
 low in profile, transparent, and compatible in style
 and materials provide privacy without harming
                                                      To improve the visual character of these older neighborhoods, flexible
 neighborhood character.                              guidelines on neighborhood compatibility are helpful along with more
 Materials, Colors and Textures – The                 consistent streetscape elements such as continuous sidewalks, street trees
 exterior treatments of houses should reflect a       and parkways. Architectural interest should be maintained through richly
 complementary mix of colors, tones and textures.
                                                      detailed façades and quality materials rather than imposing requirements
                                                      for a particular style or styles. Residential neighborhoods can also be
                                                      made safer through traffic-calming measures, consistent street lighting
                                                      and architecture that incorporate highly visible front entrances.
                                                      As homes are remodeled or rebuilt and new areas developed, the
                                                      following policies encourage neighborhood compatibility and attractive
                                                      streetscapes.
10-16                                                                                          March 2006 | City of Highland General Plan

                                                                            10. COMMUNITY DESIGN ELEMENT
GOAL 10.6
Maintain and enhance single-family neighborhoods with attractive
streetscapes, compatible architecture and a high quality of life.
Policies
     1) Incorporate landscaped parkways, consistently spaced street
          trees, continuous sidewalks and pedestrian-scale streetlights,
          wherever possible.
     2) Require new and infill development to be of compatible scale,
          materials and massing relative to existing development.
     3) Encourage a variety of architectural styles, massing, floor plans,  The understated entry features, wide street
          façade treatment and elevations to create visual interest along   entrance and thick tree canopy lend a rural,
                                                                            open character to this east Highland
          the street.                                                       neighborhood.
     4) Encourage street facing architecture by placing entries and
          porches at the front of the residence and connecting them to the
          sidewalk by a pathway.
     5) Encourage a blend of compatible architectural styles that contain
          rich façade detailing, varied rooflines and quality materials
          incorporated on all four sides of the residence.
     6) Site garages back from the street and minimize street frontage
          devoted to driveways and vehicular access.
                                                                            Landscaped parkways with mature street trees
                                                                            add beauty to residential streets, provide a
     7) Consider small lot developments with rear allies that position the  safer environment for residents, and are a
          garage and driveway to the back of the site to avoid garage-      strong, unifying visual element.
          dominated streetscapes.
     8) Maintain, improve and/or develop parkways with canopy street
          trees, providing shade, beauty and a unifying element to
          residential streets.
     9) Encourage maximum landscape coverage of the front yard area
          as defined by the front setback.
     10) Where desirable, encourage traffic-calming measures such as the
          actual or visual narrowing of streets through widened parkways,
          canopy trees and neck-down curbs at intersections.
     11) Design front-yard fencing that is low-scale, partially transparent
          and of compatible color, style and materials as the primary
          residence. Long and solid fences and walls are discouraged        Continuous sidewalks and landscaped
          unless placed along the side or rear yards.                       parkways are strong contributors to
                                                                            neighborhood quality.
City of Highland General Plan                                                                                          10-17

                                                                                                 HIGHLAND…A Great Place to Live
                                             12) In areas of small lot development, incorporate design features
                                                   that connect it with adjoining areas such as consistent setbacks,
                                                   building height and pedestrian connections.
                                             13) Establish design and development standards for entire single-
                                                   family developments from the start—remain consistent with
                                                   enforcing requirements and standards.
                                        Mid-Block Corridor Residential Development
                                        An important feature of the Land Use Element is the identification of
                                        areas for the introduction of mid-block residential development along
                                        Base Line. From a community design perspective, this in-fill strategy will
                                        solidify and strengthen the appearance of the corridor. This form of
                                        development has other benefits as well. The introduction of mid-block
                                        corridor residential development expands housing opportunities within
                                        the City and provides a growing market for the revitalized Town Center
                                        and commercial centers. Although Base Line is a high-volume arterial,
                                        mid-block residential development can be situated far enough from the
                                        road to ensure safety and livability, but also be oriented appropriately to
                                        enhance the visual character of the corridor.
      An important feature of the Land Use Element is the identification of areas for the introduction of mid-block residential development
      along arterial corridors. Since they are located along major corridors that oftentimes frame neighborhoods, these residential areas are
      intended to provide an alternative to strip commercial development and expand the City’s housing stock and variety.
10-18                                                                                      March 2006 | City of Highland General Plan

                                                                              10. COMMUNITY DESIGN ELEMENT
The varied lot sizes and vacant parcels along Base Line will pose a design
challenge to successful mid-block development. For this reason, having
flexible design standards is very important.
The Medium Density residential land use designation, which permits
corridor residential development, allows for up to 12 dwelling units per
acre and would permit attached units such as townhouses. Of primary
importance are the performance standards for corridor development that
address issues of buffering, connection to adjoining development,
circulation and aesthetics. In larger mid-block parcels, using the 12
dwelling unit per acre density standard as an average rather than an
acre-specific standard would allow more design flexibility by
concentrating units and freeing up land for additional private space,
semi-public space or recreational use.
GOAL 10.7
Improve the visual quality of Base Line with mid-block corridor residential
developments that are compatible with adjoining residential uses.
Policies
     1) Buffer mid-block residential development from arterials through
          minimum setback requirements, landscaped parkways and semi-
          transparent fencing.
     2) Design the street-facing façades of corridor development to
          include extensive architectural detailing, varied surface treatment
          and interesting rooflines to convey an attractive domestic
          character.
     3) Provide highly visible and well-lit connections to adjacent
          residential and commercial development.
     4) Encourage visual continuity along mid-block residential
          development through landscaped parkways, regularly spaced
          street trees and rhythmic variations of residential façades, styles
          and colors.
     5) Reduce the visual impact of parking through consolidated parking
          arrangements, shared driveway access, alley-accessed designs,
          landscape buffers and recessed, covered parking structures.
     6) Encourage visual breaks in appropriately scaled walls and fencing
          along the corridor to balance privacy needs with aesthetic
          impacts. Long continuous blank walls are highly discouraged.
City of Highland General Plan                                                                         10-19

                                                                                             HIGHLAND…A Great Place to Live
                                                     7) With multiple-family development, require that each unit have
                                                          garage parking and a reasonable amount of usable private space
                                                          including elevated decks, terraces, porches or rear yards.
                                                     8) On large project sites, encourage design flexibility by using
                                                          maximum dwelling units per acre as a parcel average to allow for
                                                          greater provision of on-site open space and project amenities.
                                                     9) Require lot consolidation for lots under same ownership,
                                                          wherever practical, to encourage more flexible design solutions
                                                          and viable parcel sizes.
                                                     10) Provide pedestrian access and connections to nearby retail,
                                                          transportation, recreation and educational centers, where
                                                          practical.
                                                     11) Require new and infill development to be of compatible scale,
                                                          materials and massing relative to existing development.
                                                 Industrial and Business Park Development
                                                 The City of Highland has an excellent opportunity to guide quality
                                                 development in its industrial and business park areas. These areas in the
                                                 southwestern parts of the City hold tremendous value for future growth
                                                 and investment. Conveniently located along the 5th Street Corridor,
                                                 which serves as the primary gateway to the San Bernardino International
                                                 Airport from SR-30, this industrial area is in a prime location for future
                                                 development.
                                                 The keys to attracting a stronger market for industrial and business park
                                                 development include effective marketing, quality design standards,
 This office building demonstrates well-detailed convenient access and lot consolidation. City standards that require
   elevations, ample landscaping and attractive
                           monument signage.     buffering and screening of industrial uses can be complemented by
                                                 policies aimed at creating a truly professional and attractive industrial
                                                 business park environment. These include incorporating entry
                                                 monumentation, coordinated signage, landscape plans and architectural
                                                 design guidelines. In addition, the City is encouraging the consolidation
                                                 of smaller industrial parcels into larger areas for more viable site design.
10-20                                                                                   March 2006 | City of Highland General Plan

                                                                            10. COMMUNITY DESIGN ELEMENT
GOAL 10.8
Ensure that industrial and business park development is professional and
attractive in appearance through coordinated site planning, signage and
architectural design guidelines.
Policies
     1) Strengthen the image of industrial and business park areas
          through entry monument signage, distinctive landscaping and
          complementary architectural design elements.
     2) Encourage contemporary, clean and distinctive industrial
          buildings with clearly visible entrances.
     3) Avoid long, blank building walls by incorporating vertical and/or
          horizontal façade articulation and modulation and varying use of
          color, materials and landscaping.
                                                                           Shared open spaces between buildings
     4) Promote the use of 5th Street as a gateway to San Bernardino       improve the quality of the exterior design of
          International Airport through improved signage, gateway          industrial buildings.
          monumentation and skyway landscaping.
     5) Capitalize on the access to industrial areas created by nearby
          State Route 30 through improved signage and gateway
          monumentation.
     6) Provide incentives for consolidating smaller industrial lots into
          larger parcels.
     7) Screen parking, storage and service areas from public view with
          landscaped walls, berms and appropriate landscaping treatments.
     8) Where practical, underground or screen utilities and utility
          equipment or locate and size them to be as inconspicuous as
          possible.
                                                                           Providing convenient retail uses within
                                                                           industrial areas can help reduce unnecessary
     9) Reduce the impact of industrial uses on adjacent neighborhoods     workday car trips.
          and commercial areas by buffering them with walls and
          landscaping and/or by locating service, delivery and loading
          areas as far as possible from adjacent uses and public streets.
     10) Encourage adjacent industrial buildings to create shared outdoor
          gathering places that are landscaped and provide relaxing
          environments for staff and employees.
     11) Locate restaurants and other convenience retail and service uses
          in close proximity to industrial uses to reduce unnecessary
          workday car trips by employees and business clients.
City of Highland General Plan                                                                                         10-21

                                                                                                 HIGHLAND…A Great Place to Live
                                                    Historic Preservation
                                                    Community design also includes historic preservation. Highland’s small
                                                    but important historic district lies just north of the proposed Town Center
                                                    and contains an interesting blend of early 1900s architecture, including
                                                    Craftsman Bungalows, Victorian-influenced designs, Gothic Revival and
                                                    early commercial styles. Covering 290 acres and with 99 contributing
                                                    buildings, the area is recognized in the National Register of Historic
                                                    Places, a designation that makes it eligible for federal funding for future
                                                    historic preservation and redevelopment projects. Preservation efforts for
                                                    East Highland Village, one of the City’s oldest neighborhoods, located
 This prominent Gothic Revival church is a key
                 landmark in the historic district.
                                                    within an area bordered by Church Street, Abbey Way and Greenspot
                                                    Road, are also being considered.
                                                    Creating a vibrant historic district supports the City’s efforts to capture its
                                                    “small town” feel and provides residents and visitors a view of early
                                                    Highland. Preservation efforts can include assisting property owners in
                                                    enhancing their historic homes, pursuing local historic district designation
                                                    and building a connection to the emerging Town Center. A design
                                                    guidelines manual for the historic district regulates new construction and
                                                    remodels in ways that improve the historic charm of the area.
                                                    Renovation and adaptive reuse of commercial properties along Palm
       This large turn-of-the-century home has      Avenue could also create a small and convenient commercial gathering
             classical and Craftsman influences.    place for residents and visitors.
                                                    GOAL 10.9
                                                    Support and strengthen public and private efforts to preserve historic
                                                    structures and neighborhoods.
                                                    Policies
                                                        1) Encourage restoration and preservation of existing historic
                                                             residences, buildings and neighborhoods that reflect the
                                                             architectural character and streetscape patterns of early Highland.
                                                        2) Assist eligible property owners to use federal and state incentives
                                                             for the restoration and maintenance of historic properties, such as
                                                             the State of California’s Mills Act, which allows for a reduction in
                                                             property taxes for qualified owners.
                                                        3) Develop a clear pedestrian and vehicular connection between the
                                                             City’s emerging Town Center and the existing Historic District.
                                                        4) Design and incorporate entry signs, informational plaques,
                                                             streetscape improvements and other edge and boundary
                                                             treatments at points of entry into the district and at other points
                                                             of interest.
10-22                                                                                        March 2006 | City of Highland General Plan

                                                                                10. COMMUNITY DESIGN ELEMENT
     5) Update the design guidelines pamphlet for rehabilitation,
          remodeling and new construction within the historic district.
     6) Review and enhance the City’s community outreach program for
          historic preservation through links on the City’s webpage,
          incentive programs for property owners, sponsorship of
          community events and other efforts.
     7) Link the City’s agricultural past to its current preservation efforts.
Actions
     1) Evaluate the desirability of adopting and applying a historic
          district overlay zone, which would include design review
          standards for rehabilitation, remodeling and new construction, to
          Highland’s historic area.
     2) Evaluate the desirability of adopting and applying design
          guidelines or special zoning to the small East Highland Village
          historic neighborhood.
     3) Develop a walking tour of the historic district, with informational
          placards along the way, to promote interest in the district.
     4) Study the feasibility and possible extent of adaptive reuse of
          residential and commercial buildings in the Historic Village
          District on a parcel-by-parcel basis.
     5) Develop design guidelines for the adaptive reuse of historic
          residential buildings for commercial uses and commercial
          buildings for residential uses.
People Gathering Places
The quality of life of any city is greatly enhanced by designing attractive
and functional public spaces. As the community of Highland continues
to grow and change, people gathering spaces, such as plazas and parks,
will become ever more necessary. As the emerging Town Center begins
to take shape, thoughtfully designed people gathering places will serve to
draw people into the area and support the mix of available uses.
Likewise, retail centers are well served to incorporate smaller people
gathering places into their designs. Paying attention to those important
                                                                               Movable seating, shade and convenience are
features that make public places successful and providing incentives for       important in warm climates.
developers who provide them can help ensure their long-term success.
People are attracted to comfortable and attractive places and are more
likely to continue to spend their time and money there. The design
policies that follow focus on the detailed quality necessary to make public
places successful and enduring.
City of Highland General Plan                                                                                         10-23

                                                                                              HIGHLAND…A Great Place to Live
                                                   GOAL 10.10
                                                   Guide the development of a variety of attractive, engaging and convenient
                                                   public spaces, including plazas, pedestrian areas and recreational open
                                                   space.
                                                   Policies
                                                       1) Design plazas with:
                                                           •   Ample seating space;
                                                           •   A central focal point or amenity of interest such as public art
                                                               or fountain;
                                                           •   Proximity to and visibility to and from the street;
                                                           •   Combinations of sun and shade;
                                                           •   All age groups in mind; and
                                                           •   Public space framed by surrounding buildings.
                                                       2) Locate plazas in areas of high visibility such as near streets or
                                                           along sidewalks or pedestrian paths.
Successful plazas are located close to the street,
 have plenty of seating and are spatially defined
                                                       3) In areas of heavy pedestrian use, provide wide sidewalks that
                       by surrounding buildings.           allow room for window shopping, pedestrian passage, outdoor
                                                           dining and landscape buffers.
                                                       4) Incorporate civic, regional or vernacular design elements such as
                                                           historical markers and educational exhibits, where appropriate.
                                                       5) Incorporate pedestrian scaled, distinctive lighting fixtures in
                                                           community facilities and other public places with occasional or
                                                           frequent evening use.
                                                       6) Design recreational amenities and parks with all age groups in
                                                           mind and incorporate architectural and landscape elements
                                                           consistent with City or regional design themes.
                                                       7) Incorporate small sitting areas and/or shaded courtyards close to
                                                           shopping areas but buffered from parking and traffic impacts.
                                                       8) Adopt standards for civic and mini-plazas containing seating, tree
                                                           and amenity requirements.
10-24                                                                                    March 2006 | City of Highland General Plan

                                                                             10. COMMUNITY DESIGN ELEMENT
Signage
Signs have a huge impact on the visual quality of streets, commercial
areas and the community as a whole. A well-coordinated sign program
can be both informative and attractive, providing variety and color to the
environment. Unfortunately, poorly regulated signs can contribute to a
cluttered and visually chaotic streetscape, as is the case along the Base
Line Corridor. Reasonable sign guidelines, which take into account the
scale and design characteristics of a particular site, not only help
businesses and residents, but also contribute to a positive community
image.
Promoting quality signage along Base Line and other corridors can go a       Effective monument signs reflect the
long way towards improving the visual image of these arterials. Since the    architecture around them and have consistent,
                                                                             easy-to-read lettering.
City is consolidating commercial development to key intersections, signs
in older commercial centers can be updated and coordinated.
As design policies are established, it is useful to consider signs at three
different scales and functions. Large-scale arterial signs along major
corridors are designed to attract and inform motorists. Smaller-scale
signs within the Town Center and commercial centers are designed at the
pedestrian scale. Finally, City signs and graphics are intended to identify
public areas and reinforce community design themes.
GOAL 10.11
Promote attractive, appropriately scaled and well-coordinated signs.
Policies
     1) Continue to develop and enhance the City’s graphics and sign
          program for street signs, parks, public facilities and other civic
          areas.
     2) For commercial centers along arterial corridors, encourage
          monument signs that are clearly visible, identify key uses and
          reflect the design theme of the development.
     3) Within commercial centers, use complementary, yet distinctive,
          sign styles.                                                       Along pedestrian routes, custom-designed,
                                                                             double-faced projecting signs are most
                                                                             effective.
     4) Within commercial centers, encourage high quality signage,
          including wall signs, raised letter signs, projecting double-faced
          signs and customized logos, which complement the architecture
          of the building or center of which it is a part.
City of Highland General Plan                                                                                        10-25

                                                                                             HIGHLAND…A Great Place to Live
                                                     5) Discourage signs that incorporate blinking or flashing elements,
                                                         pole structures, roof signs or the use of temporary lettering or
                                                         structures.
                                                     6) Encourage and develop smaller-scale, customized, pedestrian-
                                                         oriented signs within the Town Center.
                                                Action
                                                     1) Develop a sign guidelines manual with examples of appropriate
                                                         signs of various scales for arterials, commercial centers and the
                                                         Town Center. Maximum height limits would need to be defined.
  Green Building Practices
                                                Green Building and Planning Practices
  (A Partial Checklist)                         In this age of rising energy costs and limited available land, designers, the
  • Passive and active solar energy             development community, homeowners and cities are seeing increasing
  • Flow-through ventilation                    benefits in “green building” design and environmentally-responsible
  • Landscaping for shade                       development. This growing area includes design practices that conserve
  • Rainwater and runoff capture                resources, increase energy efficiency and reduce negative impacts on the
  • Drought-tolerant landscaping                natural environment. For example, buildings that reduce sun exposure
  • Energy-saving building materials            in the summer months and increase it in the winter save air conditioning
  • Site planning for energy efficiency         and heating costs. Designs that capture and channel storm runoff to
  • Comfortable outdoor spaces
                                                permeable surfaces reduce impacts on storm drains. Clearly, there are
  • Design that supports pedestrians, bicycle
     use and mass transit                       incentives for both builders and residents to follow environmentally
  • Lasting design                              sensitive design practices.
                                                The goals of green planning and building are particularly appropriate for
                                                Highland with its hot summers and cold winters and proximity to open
                                                space. Screening sun and wind exposure, capturing rainfall and other
                                                runoff and preserving natural open space add comfort and beauty. As
                                                the City grows and redevelops, there are tremendous opportunities to put
                                                these practices in place.
                                                GOAL 10.12
                                                Encourage development that is energy efficient and environmentally
                                                sustainable.
                                                Policies
                                                     1) Encourage landscaping practices that increase energy efficiency
                                                         and conserve natural resources such as:
 This active solar design can be complemented        2) Planting trees and incorporating landscaped berms to provide
with passive techniques such as roof overhangs,
   window placement, and building orientation.           shade and wind buffering
10-26                                                                                   March 2006 | City of Highland General Plan

                                                                             10. COMMUNITY DESIGN ELEMENT
     3) Using native and drought-tolerant landscaping (“xeriscaping”)
          and drip irrigation to conserve water resources.
     4) Encourage designs that channel runoff to permeable surfaces.
     5) Encourage transit-oriented, infill development to make efficient
          use of existing land.
     6) Encourage site planning and building orientation that maximizes
          solar and wind resources for cooling and heating.
     7) Encourage the use of ecologically sound building materials such
          as those made of recycled content and contain low amounts of
          volatile organic compounds (VOCs).
     8) During construction, require developers and builders to protect
          topsoil in order to reduce dust and runoff impacts.
                                                                             Aurantia Park uses native landscaping to save
                                                                             water and reflect the natural setting.
     9) Encourage local recycling and composting initiatives at the
          neighborhood level.
Actions
     1) Participate in the CEEP (Community Energy Efficiency Program)
          Certificate and Recognition Program.
     2) Adopt LEED (Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design)
          design standards for public buildings.
     3) Provide “green planning” site design incentives, such as density
          or height bonuses, reduced parking requirements, reduced
          processing fees and expedited plan checks.
     4) Continue to use water and energy conservation practices in all
          public buildings and on City property.
     5) Sponsor community outreach and educational programs that
          encourage local schools to study and participate in green building
          design practices.
Land Use Buffers and Transitions
The City’s Development Code requires measures to address compatibility
between adjacent uses for commercial and industrial zones. Buffers
between residential, commercial and industrial zones typically include
walls, fences, landscaped strips and setbacks. These measures need to
be supported by more detailed policies as portions of the City redevelop.
For example, redevelopment of mid-block areas along Base Line will
replace “strip” commercial uses with residential uses. These uses should
be connected to adjacent residential and commercial areas as well as
City of Highland General Plan                                                                                          10-27

                                                  HIGHLAND…A Great Place to Live
      buffered from traffic and noise impacts of the corridor. Similarly, other
      proximate uses will require some balance between buffering and
      transitioning.
      GOAL 10.13
      Appropriately buffer the boundaries between differing land uses and provide
      transitions where necessary.
      Policies
          1) Encourage the use of landscaped walls or fences that buffer
               residential areas from commercial uses to allow privacy and noise
               absorption.
          2) Reduce the visual impact of freestanding walls by varying their
               alignment, adding landscaping and/or berms, incorporating
               decorative surface detailing and choosing materials similar to
               adjacent residential uses.
          3) Locate service lanes, storage and noise-generating uses away
               from adjoining residential or commercial areas to buffer light
               industrial and business park areas.
          4) Link newly developed commercial centers, where practical, to
               adjoining residential uses.
          5) Encourage transitions that define boundaries but that also
               preserve a sense of openness and connectivity. For example,
               perimeter subdivision walls can contain occasional breaks to
               provide access to open space and adjoining areas.
          6) Reconsider subdivision design to reduce or eliminate perimeter
               block walls to allow more houses and structures to face the street.
          7) Encourage use of landscaped trellises and accent landscaping at
               development entries rather than walls or structures.
          8) Develop visual and functional transitions to the Town Center and
               Historic District through entry signs, specialized street lights,
               widened sidewalks and differentiated paving.
10-28                                        March 2006 | City of Highland General Plan

11. Airport Elemen
This page intentionally left blank
Chapter 11. Airport Element
INTRODUCTION
A
         irports dramatically influence how communities grow. From a
         physical standpoint, they create significant noise and safety
         impacts. From an economic development perspective, they can
have both positive and negative effects. Airports often stimulate adjacent
commercial development and services, from hotels, restaurants and
shipping and distribution facilities. The traffic and noise they generate,
however, can have negative impacts on existing uses. From an aesthetic
standpoint, airports can stimulate significant opportunities for urban
design improvements, including gateway development, entry features
and corridor enhancement.
In close proximity to two airports, the San Bernardino International
Airport (SBIA) and the Redlands Municipal Airport (RMA), Highland
must carefully address the safety issues posed by the facilities, the
planning and circulation issues involved, and the economic potential         Inside hangars at the San Bernardino
presented. The benefits for the City include better access for businesses    International Airport.
to people and goods, multimodal transportation opportunities, new
employment and increased visibility for the Highland community.
Air transportation also creates land use compatibility concerns identified
by State law including noise, safety, overflight concerns and airspace
protection. Continued population growth in the Inland Empire will most
likely require the expansion of existing aviation facilities or the addition
of new ones. As such, airport land use compatibility will continue to be
an important issue in Highland and, for this reason, has been given
greater attention in this update to the General Plan. Furthermore, any
expansion of SBIA, including a new terminal entrance will have an
impact on circulation and traffic in the City, as well as an impact on the
development of land uses along transportation corridors that lead to the
airport.
Purpose, Function and Related General Plan Elements
Due to the importance of airports to the present and future development
of Highland, it was decided that this optional Airport Element would be
included as part of the General Plan. Airport operations and facility
improvements have a significant role in the implementation of the
City of Highland General Plan                                                                                     11-1
                                                  HIGHLAND…A Great Place to Live
     General Plan because of safety, noise and other considerations that affect
     land use and circulation patterns in the City. Although this element
     provides more detailed background on airport planning and land use
     compatibility, other elements contain related specific goals and policies.
     For those goals and policies, please refer the following elements:
          •    Land Use Element
          •    Circulation Element
          •    Public Health and Safety Element
          •    Noise Element
     Related Plans, Regulations and Responsible Agencies
     The City has no direct authority over surrounding airports. As such, the
     plans created by airport authorities and other agencies, as well as federal
     and state regulation of aircraft activity, are important to land use
     planning in Highland. The State Aeronautics Act of the California Public
     Utilities Code establishes statewide requirements for the airport land use
     compatibility planning and requires nearly every county to create an
     Airport Land Use Commission (ALUC) or other alternative. San
     Bernardino County opted for an alternative to the ALUC and delegated
     responsibility to prepare an Airport Land Use Compatibility Plan to each
     airport proprietor. Other public agencies also provide policy guidance or
     promulgate standards that address regional transportation and safety
     issues related to airport land use compatibility planning. A brief
     description of these agencies, plans and regulations are provided below
     as a regulatory framework for this Element.
     Federal Aviation Administration
     The basic responsibilities of the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA),
     under the U.S. Department of Transportation, are the regulation of civil
     aviation to promote safety, airspace and air traffic management; and the
     regulation of commercial space transportation. The Code of Federal
     Regulations (CFR) contains standards for aircraft noise emission levels
     Community Noise Equivalent Level
     The California Airport Noise Regulations in accordance with the State
     Aeronautics Act of the California Code of Regulations delineates
     parameters for aircraft noise and land use compatibility. The California
     Airport Noise Regulations state that the level of noise acceptable for
     persons residing in the vicinity of an airport is established as a
     Community Noise Equivalent Level (CNEL) value of 65 decibels (dB).
     “Noise problem” airports, as declared by the County Board of
     Supervisors, shall not operate in a “noise impact area” unless a variance
     to the noise regulations is obtained.
11-2                                         March 2006 | City of Highland General Plan

                                                                                               11. AIRPORT ELEMENT
For designated noise problem airports, the noise impact area is the area
within the contour of the 65 dB CNEL value containing incompatible
land uses. Incompatible land uses include residences of all types; public
and private schools; hospitals and convalescent homes; and churches,
synagogues, temples and other places of worship. These uses may be           The CNEL metric used in California is equivalent
considered compatible if certain mitigation measures are taken, such as      to the Day-Night Average Sound Level (DNL)
airport acquisition of an avigation easement for aircraft noise and          metric used elsewhere in the U.S., but adds the
                                                                             evening weighting not included in DNL.
acoustical insulation that reduces the interior CNEL of habitable rooms
to 45 dB or less. The California Building Code (CBC) contains related
standards for allowable interior noise levels associated with exterior
airport noise sources.
Air Safety Zones
The California Airport Land Use (ALCU) Planning Handbook provides
planning guidance to ALUCs, airport proprietors, and counties and cities
with jurisdiction over airport area land uses. The purpose of the
Handbook is to support the State Aeronautics Act. The Handbook
allows jurisdictions flexibility in determining air safety zones that
represent areas of assumed accident potential.
Southern California Association of Governments:
Regional Transportation Plan
The Southern California Association of Governments (SCAG) is required
to develop, maintain and update a Regional Transportation Plan (RTP)
every three years for the six-county region of Los Angeles, Orange,
Ventura, Imperial, Riverside and San Bernardino. The RTP is a multi-
modal plan that provides a basic policy and program framework for
improving the balance between land uses and transportation systems
including aviation. The San Bernardino International Airport is one of
the airports evaluated in the RTP.
As part of the RTP, SCAG has proposed a Regional Aviation Plan that
relies on the available capacity at airfields in the Inland Empire and north
Los Angeles County to accommodate future air travel demand in those
areas of the SCAG region.
City of Highland General Plan                                                                                                11-3
                                                                                           HIGHLAND…A Great Place to Live
                                                San Bernardino Association of Governments:
                                                Comprehensive Transportation Plan
                                                The San Bernardino Association of Governments (SANBAG) is the
                                                council of governments and transportation planning agency for San
                                                Bernardino County. SANBAG is responsible for cooperative regional
                                                planning and represents the county’s interests on regional and sub-
                                                regional transportation matters. SANBAG is actively involved in the
                                                development of SCAG’s Regional Transportation Plan and provides
                                                input to SCAG through a variety of planning activities including the
                                                development of a countywide Comprehensive Transportation Plan. The
                                                Comprehensive Transportation Plan is an evaluation of transportation
                                                needs in San Bernardino County.
                                                San Bernardino International Airport Authority and
                                                Inland Valley Development Agency
                                                The San Bernardino International Airport Authority (SBIAA) and Inland
                                                Valley Development Agency (IVDA) are regional Joint Powers
                                                Authorities and serve as master developers for the San Bernardino
                                                International Airport and International Trade Center. Members of the
                                                IVDA Board include San Bernardino County and the cities of San
                                                Bernardino, Colton and Loma Linda. The SBIAA Board is comprised of
                                                members from San Bernardino County and the cities of San Bernardino,
      The San Bernardino International Airport  Colton, Loma Linda and Highland.
       Authority (SBIAA) and the Inland Valley
   Development Agency (IVDA) serve as master
 developers of the San Bernardino International City of Redlands Municipal Utilities Department and
                     Trade Center and Airport.
                                                Airport Advisory Board: Airport Master Plan
                                                The City of Redlands Municipal Utilities Department oversees the
                                                operation and administration of Redlands Municipal Airport and the
                                                Airport Master Plan. The Airport Advisory Board reviews and makes
                                                recommendations regarding the airport’s administration, management
                                                and operation. Although Highland is not on the Board, it is an area of
                                                “special compatibility concern.” This means that Redlands submits to it
                                                any airport-related master plans and land use compatibility plans prior
                                                to adoption.
                                                City of Redlands: Redlands Municipal Airport Land
                                                Use Compatibility Plan
                                                The Redlands Municipal Airport Land Use Compatibility Plan is a stand-
                                                alone document created by the City of Redlands for the purpose of
                                                establishing procedures and criteria by which the City can address,
                                                evaluate and review airport compatibility issues in the vicinity of the
                                                Redlands Municipal Airport. Another purpose of the Airport Land Use
                                                Compatibility Plan is to alert the City of Highland to the potential effects
                                                of air traffic from the Redlands Municipal Airport on land uses in
11-4                                                                                   March 2006 | City of Highland General Plan

                                                                                                 11. AIRPORT ELEMENT
southern Highland. Any proposals to develop the Redlands Municipal
Airport are reviewed for their compatibility with the policies of the Airport
Land Use Compatibility Plan.
Airport Operations at the San Bernardino
International Airport
The SBIA and International Trade Center is a 2,100-acre airport located
at the former Norton Air Force Base in the City of San Bernardino, just
south of the western portion of Highland. The SBIA is proposed to be a
public, full-service airport designed to serve the western United States,
with capacity to provide regional air traffic for domestic and international
service, both commercial and cargo, along with necessary support
facilities for major and smaller airlines. The SBIA contains multiple uses
including commercial and industrial properties and the 18-hole Palm
Meadows Golf Course.
Evolving air transportation services in the City of San Bernardino have       A cargo jet is loaded at the San Bernardino
                                                                              International Airport.
the potential to complement Highland’s economic growth and create
competitive advantages for its businesses. Highland is a key participant
in the industrial development of the East San Bernardino Valley through
its involvement on the board of the San Bernardino International Airport
Authority and SANBAG (San Bernardino Association of Governments).
Limited industrial land west of Interstate 15 (I-15) is forcing industrial
development to move eastward towards Highland. The anticipated
expansion of the industrial base in the region surrounding Highland and
the SBIA, combined with expansion of the SBIA, could result in positive
fiscal impacts, especially new employment opportunities for the
community.
Airport Operations at the Redlands Municipal Airport
Redlands Municipal Airport (RMA) is a 180-acre facility in the City of
Redlands located south of Highland near the Santa Ana Wash. RMA is
classified by the FAA as a General Aviation airport. The airport is
designed as a General Utility airport capable of accommodating small
general aviation aircrafts for personal and business purposes as well as
some air taxi type aircrafts. RMA has fixed base operators that provide a
variety of services including fuel, flight training, repair and maintenance,
hanger and tie-down rental, airplane rental and related services. The
airport is also the international headquarters for Mission Aviation
Fellowship, a private relief organization providing aviation, humanitarian
and technological support to nearly 600 groups worldwide. A portion of        Aerial view of the Redlands Municipal Airport.
eastern Highland is located in the RMA’s Airport Influence Area (AIA)
and Area of Special Compatibility Concern (see Figure 6-7 in the Public
Health & Safety Element).
City of Highland General Plan                                                                                             11-5

                                                                                               HIGHLAND…A Great Place to Live
                                                  Creating Airport Land Use Compatibility Policies
                                                  Combining all these impacts, regulations and agencies and groups can be
                                                  a daunting task. However, there is a widely accepted airport planning
                                                  process. Basically, the impacts and safety issues for any particular airport
                                                  are carefully studied and then mapped. Compatibility maps—whether
                                                  separate or composite—are related to local land use patterns. Although
                                                  ALUC (airport land use compatibility) policies have no authority over
                                                  airport operations, they do influence new development.
                                                  Because the City of Highland lies just north of the San Bernardino
                                                  International Airport and within its “Airport Influence Area” and within
  A view northeast of the City of Highland from   an “area of special compatibility concern” for the Redlands Municipal
       the control tower of the San Bernardino
                           International Airport. Airport, it has the responsibility to regulate and develop its land uses in
                                                  ways that protect the safety and quality of life of its citizens. At the same
                                                  time, the City is working to provide opportunities for economic
                                                  development. The following goals and policies, also delineated in other
                                                  elements of this general plan, address noise, safety and land use issues
                                                  related to its nearby airports.
11-6                                                                                       March 2006 | City of Highland General Plan

                                                                                              11. AIRPORT ELEMENT
GOALS AND POLICIES
Noise
Noise impacts on surrounding development are the most widespread
effects of airport operations. According to the California Airport Land    Airport Noise Contours
Use Planning Handbook, compatible land uses are those with the fewest      As of the writing of this General Plan, the Airport
people or those that generate significant noise levels themselves, such as Master Plan for SBIA was in the process of being
                                                                           prepared. As a consequence, the precise noise
transportation facilities and industrial uses. The number of people        contours were not available to include in this Plan.
exposed to airport noise should be minimized by limiting the               However, relative policies have been included in
                                                                           the General Plan. Upon adoption of the Airport
development of sensitive land uses—such as residences, hospitals,          Master Plan, the new noise contours will be
schools, and other community facilities—nearby airports. A primary         incorporated into Figure 11-1 of this Element.
concern is residential development in areas impacted by aircraft noise.
Federal and state laws have established well-defined regulations for
acceptable noise levels with the basic criterion set at a maximum
65 decibel (dB) Community Noise Equivalent Level (CNEL) value.
Overflight activities create another noise concern. An overflight is a
distinctly visible and audible passage of an aircraft, although not
necessarily one that is directly overhead. Overflights often extend past
the boundary of the CNEL contour, creating an annoyance or sensitivity
for those exposed. The SBIA and RMA have limited control of overflight
impacts but provide policy guidance for minimizing these impacts in their
master plans. The following goals and policies reinforce the type of
measures that can be taken to minimize overflight impacts.
GOAL 11.1
Reduce exposure of people to aircraft noise and overflights, and ensure
adequate public notification through buyer awareness measures.
Policies
     1) Limit the development of sensitive land uses located within the
          65 decibel (dB) Community Noise Equivalent Level (CNEL)
          contour.
     2) Require acoustical analysis and noise mitigation measures for
          sensitive land uses, especially residential uses, in areas
          significantly impacted by noise.
     3) Ensure compliance of new development with noise standards in
          the Code of Federal Regulations and California Airport Noise
          Regulations.
City of Highland General Plan                                                                                                11-7

                                               HIGHLAND…A Great Place to Live
        4) Ensure adherence to standards in the California Building Code
           (CBC) that govern acceptable interior noise levels associated with
           exterior airport noise sources.
        5) Participate in planning activities relative to the location and
           activity of airports and minimize negative impacts on economic
           development objectives and quality of life in the City.
     Actions
        1) Disseminate the latest information on noise mitigation through
           site planning review and construction techniques.
        2) Review and respond aggressively to any proposals involving new
           flight patterns, more intense operations over the City, or
           relocation or extension of runways that would create the potential
           for noise impacts on sensitive land uses within the City.
        3) Work with the San Bernardino International Airport Authority to
           encourage restrictions on hours of operation to minimize noise
           impacts.
11-8                                      March 2006 | City of Highland General Plan

                                                                               11. AIRPORT ELEMENT
Safety
Careful land planning is necessary for uses nearby airports to promote
the safety of residents and passengers alike. Safety issues include off-
airport aircraft accidents and airspace protection. Unlike aircraft noise,
safety concerns are more difficult to address because of the
unpredictability of accidents. There are no formal federal or state laws or
regulations that set safety criteria for airport area land uses for civilian
airports except within runway protection zones. The primary method,
therefore, is to participate in Airport planning efforts to ensure plans are
compatible with City economic development objectives and Highland’s
quality of life. Once Airport plans are established, the next step is to
reduce the severity of off-airport aircraft accidents in Highland by limiting
the intensity of use and the number of people in areas most susceptible
to potential aircraft accidents.
GOAL 11.2
Reduce the risk to people and property by limiting the type and intensity of
development in identified impact areas, ensuring adequate emergency
response facilities within or adjacent to airport uses, and requiring adequate
public notification of safety policies and procedures.
Policies
     1) Evaluate land use compatibility and safety issues in designated
          Airport Influence Areas (AIAs) by:
          •    Coordinated planning with regional planning authorities
          •    Compliance with applicable Airport Master Plans, Federal
               Aviation Administration (FAA) requirements and the
               California Airport Land Use Planning Handbook.
     2) Limit the type and intensity of development in designated Airport
          Influence Areas (AIAs).
     3) Avoid siting sensitive uses, especially residences, schools and
          hospitals, nearby airport runways or along approved flight paths.
     4) Encourage the development of open space areas in Highland
          adjacent to designated airport safety zones.
     5) Encourage notification requirements and establish a buyer
          awareness program for areas of Highland within established
          Areas of Special Compatibility Concern.
City of Highland General Plan                                                                  11-9

                                                                                                  HIGHLAND…A Great Place to Live
                                                         6) Work with the San Bernardino International Airport Authority to
                                                              ensure that Airport Plans enhance economic advantage, minimize
                                                              negative impacts to land values and protect Highland’s quality
                                                              of life.
                                                    Actions
                                                         1) Establish occupancy requirements (i.e., noise mitigation and
                                                              height restrictions) within established airport easement or
                                                              overflight areas as a condition of approval for new development.
                                                         2) Require letters of advisement incorporating information in
                                                              Conditions, Covenants and Restrictions (CCRs) or Real Estate
                                                              Disclosures, which report where projects occur within established
                                                              65 Community Noise Equivalent (CNEL) and an established
                                                              Airport Influence Area (AIA).
                                                    Land Use Opportunities and Future Planning
                                                    Highland’s proximity to the San Bernardino International Airport
  Airport Background                                provides both opportunities and constraints. The Airport’s future Master
  The Inland Valley Development Agency (IVDA)       Plan—a blueprint for its long term development—provides the context in
  and San Bernardino International Airport          which the City can best plan its future land uses.
  Authority (SBIAA) are regional Joint Powers
  Authorities formed in 1990 and 1992 respectively.
  They were formed after closure of Norton Air      For several reasons, Highland is well positioned to capture additional
  Force Base in 1994 and their goal is to redevelop regional demand for business park, industrial and retail development.
  the properties and replace the 10,000 jobs that
  were lost.
                                                    For one, a shortage of vacant land west of I-15 means that additional
                                                    demand will move eastward towards Highland. Secondly, additional
  The agencies serve as master developers of the
  2100 acres of the former military property now    demand generated by airport expansion can be channeled into the
  known as the San Bernardino International         southern areas of the City. Consequently, the City has designated most
  Airport and Trade Center which includes a full-   of its 5th Street Corridor area—strategically located between the airport
  service airport, commercial, and industrial
  properties.                                       and Interstate 210—as Business Park and Industrial uses.
  In addition to the 2100 acres of property, the
  IVDA redevelopment project area includes
  approximately 14,000 acres in a three-mile radius GOAL 11.3
  of surrounding property outside the base.
                                                    Promote the development of the 5 Street Corridor as an attractive
                                                                                         th
                                                    employment center and gateway to the San Bernardino International Airport.
                                                    Policies
                                                         1) Coordinate proactive airport planning efforts with the City of
                                                              San Bernardino and the San Bernardino International Airport
                                                              Authority.
                                                         2) Promote the 5th Street Corridor as a visually unified, business
                                                              friendly employment center.
11-10                                                                                         March 2006 | City of Highland General Plan

                                                                          11. AIRPORT ELEMENT
     3) Provide adequate transitions and/or buffers between existing
          residential neighborhoods and industrial and other incompatible
          land uses.
     4) Participate in Airport planning efforts to promote compatibility
          with the City’s General Plan.
     5) Ensure consistency with appropriate Airport Land Use
          Compatibility Plans, once adopted.
     6) Encourage flexible development standards that account for
          changes in market demand related to airport cargo, storage and
          distribution.
Actions
     1) Develop a comprehensive gateway boulevard streetscape
          improvement plan for 5th Street.
     2) Develop comprehensive design guidelines for the landscaping,
          architecture and streetscapes within the 5th Street Corridor.
City of Highland General Plan                                                            11-11

                                            HIGHLAND…A Great Place to Live
      This page intentionally left blank.
11-12                                   March 2006 | City of Highland General Plan

