CITY OF CALIMESA
   2014 GENERAL PLAN
     ADOPTED AUGUST 4, 2014

           CITY OF CALIMESA
                     2014 GENERAL PLAN
                                 ADOPTED AUGUST 4, 2014
                                              Prepared by the
                          City of Calimesa General Plan Advisory Committee
                                                     and
                                                             ®
                                             City of Calimesa
                                            908 Park Avenue
                                          Calimesa, CA 92320
                                               909.795.9801
                       This document is available for electronic download at
                                        http://cityofcalimesa.net
            The preparation of this General Plan was funded in whole or in part through
                           a grant awarded by the Strategic Growth Council
The statements and conclusions of this report are those of the City of Calimesa and not necessarily those of the
Strategic Growth Council or of the Department of Conservation, or its employees. The Strategic Growth Council
  and the Department make no warranties, expressed or implied, and assume no liability for the information
                                      contained in the succeeding text.


Chapter 1: Introduction
Chapter 2: Land Use
Chapter 3: Transportation and Mobility
Chapter 4: Infrastructure and Public Service
Chapter 5: Housing Element
Chapter 6: Resource Management
Chapter 7: Open Space, Parks, and Recreation
Chapter 8: Safety
Chapter 9: Noise
Chapter 10: Air Quality
Chapter 11: Sustainability
Appendix A: Housing Element Background Report - under separate cover
Chapter 1: Introduction
Chapter 2: Land Use
Chapter 3: Transportation and Mobility
Chapter 7: Open Space, Parks, and Recreation
Chapter 8: Safety
Chapter 2: Land Use
Chapter 3: Transportation and Mobility
Chapter 5: Housing Element
Chapter 9: Noise
Chapter 10: Air Quality
          CHAPTER 1: INTRODUCTION
INTRODUCTION
                                                        The Calimesa General Plan expresses our
                                                        community’s vision of its long-term physical
                                                        form and development. This General Plan is
                                                        comprehensive in scope and represents the
                                                        product of years of effort on the part of
                                                        residents and businesses in the community
                                                        working to maintain and improve Calimesa’s
                                                        quality of life and implement the community’s
                                                        shared vision for the future. General plans are
                                                        mandated by the State of California, which
                                                        requires that each city and county prepare and
                                                        adopt a comprehensive, long-term general plan
                                                        for its jurisdiction and any adjacent related
                      Calimesa City Hall                lands.
This Introduction includes a statement of Calimesa’s vision for the community. It also provides a brief
overview of the General Plan, the key ideas which are addressed in the City’s goals and policies, and
some of the ways this General Plan will be implemented.
  ROLE OF THE GENERAL PLAN
  This General Plan serves as a basis for decision-making. It helps the City Council, Planning
  Commission, and staff, who must balance competing community objectives, make decisions
  regarding proposed development and other crucial issues.
  The General Plan is the official policy framework guiding physical, social, and economic development
  in the city, as well as the City’s own operations and decisions. The General Plan is a long-range guide
  for attaining the City’s goals.
  USE OF THE GENERAL PLAN
  The General Plan is intended to be used by a broad range of persons, including:
    •   The City Council and Planning Commission in decision-making activities;
    •   City staff in developing plans, programs, and regulations;
    •   The development community in preparing development proposals; and
                        CALIMESA GENERAL PLAN AUGUST 2014                                      1-1

                                    CHAPTER 1: INTRODUCTION
    •   Residents and citizens seeking to understand the vision and future of Calimesa and the type of
        development which may occur.
This General Plan will be used as the basis for standards for the development of public and private
projects.
CALIMESA COMMUNITY VISION
The City of Calimesa is dedicated to remaining a community that honors its beautiful natural setting
through open space preservation, wildlife corridors, and extensive trail systems, as well as enriching
the quality of life in Calimesa through sensitive planning that creates increased business activity, local
jobs, new parks, and schools.
This Calimesa Community Vision reflects the desires of the community and is supported by input from
the community through the various public participation efforts conducted during the General Plan
update process. In adopting this General Plan, the City of Calimesa is making a clear and definitive
statement about the future envisioned for the community.
  GUIDING PRINCIPLES
  The City of Calimesa recognizes and acknowledges the ability of planning to protect the quality of life
  of residents, promote the success of the local economy, influence the appearance of the community,
  and allow Calimesa to respond to changing economic circumstances, and the extent to which the city
  can help in statewide and national efforts to reduce energy consumption and greenhouse gas
  emissions. Thus, the Calimesa General Plan embodies several guiding principles.
  These guiding principles became the foundation for the formation of the General Plan’s goals and
  policies in implementing the Calimesa Community Vision.
    •   Be proactive, working to identify important issues and continually seek out the best practices
        of other cities and communities, and implement them in a way that is meaningful to Calimesa.
    •   Support Calimesa’s transition from a small rural city to a more populous community that
        welcomes the new residents who will live in neighborhoods in master-planned areas, while
        retaining the city’s sense of community and rural identity.
    •   Recognize the benefits of diversity in all aspects of the city—its people, its housing, its
        economy—while retaining the rural atmosphere of Calimesa.
    •   Ensure the long-term viability of Calimesa, both from an economic standpoint and from the
        perspective of the built environment, including infrastructure systems and resources such as
        land, water, and air that are critical to a healthy city.
       1-2                                     CALIMESA GENERAL PLAN AUGUST 2014

          CHAPTER 1: INTRODUCTION
  The goals and policies included in this General Plan reflect a commitment by the City of Calimesa to
  implement these guiding principles and the Calimesa Community Vision.
COMMUNITY PARTICIPATION
Community participation played an important role in preparing this General Plan and will play a role in
its implementation. Because the General Plan needs to reflect community goals and aspirations,
citizens and stakeholders were involved from the onset with issue identification and goal formulation.
General Plan Advisory Committee. The General Plan Advisory Committee (GPAC) was a group
established for the purpose of providing input and guidance on the update of the General Plan. The
GPAC has been an integral part of the General Plan update process by conducting community outreach,
providing insight and direction on the issues facing Calimesa, and assisting the City in defining the
direction of the General Plan planning effort. The GPAC continued to meet throughout the General Plan
update process, providing direction on goals and reviewing proposed policies.
General Plan Update Survey. The General Plan Update Survey was developed by the GPAC and
conducted during April 2004. The survey was mailed to 4,535 residents of the city (approximately 60
percent of the population), and 611 surveys were returned. The results of this survey were used to
develop the Calimesa Community Vision and informed the goals and policies included in this General
Plan.
In 2013, a second survey asking many of the same questions as the original 2004 survey was made
available to the public. The 2013 survey was intended to confirm that the 2004 community attitudes,
preferences, etc., that were used by the GPAC to create a draft of this General Plan were still valid. The
results of the 2013 survey were used to fine-tune the final General Plan’s goals and policies.
Mobile Community Workshop. Citizen groups and individuals participated in the preparation of the
General Plan through the General Plan Update Surveys, noted above, and a mobile community
workshop, held over a two-week period. The workshop provided multiple opportunities for the citizenry
of Calimesa to engage in the General Plan update process.
        Calimesa Street Fair, April 13, 2013. Planning and community engagement staff were on hand
        during the street fair to distribute educational materials about the General Plan, engage
        community members in activities that asked residents about the vision for Calimesa, help
        answer questions about the General Plan update process, and record community feedback. In
        addition, staff sought specific feedback to help inform the update to the Housing Element.
        Community input from this event was presented to the City Council and considered in the
        preparation of the General Plan.
                       CALIMESA GENERAL PLAN AUGUST 2014                                       1-3

                                    CHAPTER 1: INTRODUCTION
        Calimesa Senior Center, April 15, 2013. Time was dedicated at regularly scheduled committee
        and Council meetings to give attendees the opportunity to participate and provide feedback on
        the vision, goals, and policies of the draft General Plan. Staff provided an overview presentation
        of the General Plan and answered questions. A hard-copy version of the online survey was
        distributed to meeting attendees to solicit feedback. Results from the survey were evaluated
        and incorporated, as appropriate, into the final General Plan.
Website and Media Outreach. The City developed a dedicated web page to provide information about
the General Plan update and to outline opportunities for community participation. Comments on the
General Plan update were also accepted through the website, along with the online survey.
Press releases were also provided to local media outlets to promote the General Plan update process
and invite community participation.
Housing Element Stakeholder Workshop. Residents, businesses, property owners, and other
interested individuals were invited to attend a workshop on April 12, 2013, to discuss the City’s
Housing Element update. The workshop was held to seek stakeholder perspectives on housing needs
and how to improve local housing programs.
Public Scoping Meeting. A scoping meeting was held on February 26, 2013, to collect community
input to guide the drafting of the General Plan Environmental Impact Report (EIR). At the meeting,
participants were asked to provide feedback on specific environmental impacts of the project,
alternatives, mitigation opportunities, and additional environmental issues for consideration.
Public Review Period. In addition to the community workshop, the General Plan was circulated for a
public review and comment period starting on April 22, 2013 and ending on December 12, 2013.
Comments received during this review period were evaluated and incorporated, as appropriate, into the
final General Plan.
ORGANIZATION AND USE OF THE GENERAL PLAN
  THE PLANNING AREA
  This General Plan for the City of Calimesa addresses all of the land within the city limits, an area
  referred to as the Planning Area. The Planning Area encompasses 9,533 acres, or roughly 14.9
  square miles, and is shown in Figure 1-1.
  Also shown in Figure 1-1 is Calimesa’s Sphere of Influence, which is an area beyond the city limits
  that is envisioned to ultimately be annexed to the city. The Sphere of Influence is not addressed in
  this General Plan, which applies to the city limits only.
       1-4                                   CALIMESA GENERAL PLAN AUGUST 2014

         CHAPTER 1: INTRODUCTION
FIGURE 1-1: PLANNING AREA
  Information on existing land uses in the Planning Area as of 2013 is included in Chapter 2, Land Use.
                     CALIMESA GENERAL PLAN AUGUST 2014                                       1-5
                                          CHAPTER 1: INTRODUCTION
   ORGANIZATION OF THE GENERAL PLAN
   This General Plan contains the following chapters, 1 including several maps and tables throughout the
   document that help to express and describe the vision, goals, or key components of the General Plan.
   Chapter 1: Introduction. Provides an overview of the intent and organization of the General Plan and
   identifies the Calimesa Community Vision.
   Chapter 2 through Chapter 11: General Plan Topics. This General Plan addresses all the state-
   required elements, including Land Use, Circulation, Housing, Conservation, Open Space, Noise, and
   Safety, plus four additional topics as follows:
     •   Chapter 2: Land Use. Ensures a balance of land uses through allocation of lands for housing,
         commercial, industrial, and community uses.
     •   Chapter 3: Transportation and Mobility. Addresses transportation and travel-related issues for
         residents, including motorized and non-motorized options.
     •   Chapter 4: Infrastructure and Public Services. Addresses infrastructure needs, including timing
         of improvements to accommodate the planned land uses identified in the Land Use Chapter.
     •   Chapter 5: Housing. Addresses housing needs for all economic groups in the community.
     •   Chapter 6: Resource Management. Provides ways of helping balance the City’s actions regarding
         land use, circulation, and other issues with their potential effects on resources including water,
         agriculture, and biological resources.
     •   Chapter 7: Open Space, Parks, and Recreation. Creates standards for parks and open space and
         supports existing and new park facilities in the community.
     •   Chapter 8: Safety. Ensures the City is equipped to maintain public safety and handle potential
         natural disasters.
     •   Chapter 9: Noise. Establishes standards for noise in the community and ways of addressing
         noise sources.
     •   Chapter 10: Air Quality. Identifies ways to balance the land use and transportation needs of the
         community with their effect on air quality.
     •   Chapter 11: Sustainability. Provides a framework to make responsible choices to protect the
         viability of the community.
1 Note to the Reader: General Plan chapters are often referred to as “elements.” This General Plan uses the more common term,
“chapters.” The two terms are interchangeable.
        1-6                                          CALIMESA GENERAL PLAN AUGUST 2014

        CHAPTER 1: INTRODUCTION
Together, these chapters provide the City’s goals, policies, and actions on a broad range of issues
related to the future of Calimesa. Each of these chapters of the General Plan is organized as follows:
Introduction. This section briefly explains what the chapter is intended to do and the reason for the
particular chapter.
Background. Includes brief background information to establish the context for goals and policies
contained in the chapter. This background material is neither a comprehensive statement of existing
conditions nor a repository of adopted information.
Related Plans and Programs. This section highlights significant plans, programs, and regulations that
are related to a particular chapter and explains the relationship of each to the City’s General Plan.
Key Issues. This section summarizes the primary issues identified during the General Plan update
process.
Goals, Policies, and Actions. The goals, policies, and actions included in each chapter provide the
blueprint for achieving the Calimesa Community Vision and will help guide future decisions.
      Goal: Goals are “generally end-state.” They are the long-range targets as to what the City wants
      to accomplish regarding a particular issue.
      Policy: A policy is a specific medium- or short-range statement of principle to guide decision-
      making so there is continuing progress toward the attainment of stated goals.
      Action: Actions are activities undertaken to implement a specific policy or group of policies.
      Some of these actions may occur in the short term; others will require more time and resources
      and may not be completed for some time.
The General Plan is also supported by the associated EIR. The EIR is intended to be used in
conjunction with this General Plan and to serve as a companion to this policy document.
The General Plan EIR assesses the potential implications of the policies in this General Plan in terms
of physical environmental impacts. State law requires that the EIR be certified prior to adoption of the
General Plan and be used to provide specific findings that are part of the City Council’s approval
action(s). In the years following General Plan adoption, the assumptions, analyses, conclusions, and
recommended mitigation measures inherent in the EIR will be useful in assessing implementation
actions and projects.
                     CALIMESA GENERAL PLAN AUGUST 2014                                       1-7

                                   CHAPTER 1: INTRODUCTION
USE AND INTERPRETATION OF THIS GENERAL PLAN
The General Plan is intended to be used by:
  •   The City Council and Planning Commission in decision-making;
  •   City staff in developing programs and projects;
  •   The development community in preparing development proposals; and
  •   Residents and citizens interested in the future of Calimesa.
When using this General Plan, the following basic rules should be kept in mind:
  •   Only those statements specifically listed as “Goal” are to be interpreted as stating the City’s
      goals.
  •   Only those statements specifically listed as “Policy” are statements of City policy. Narrative
      descriptions and discussions not preceded by a Policy designation are provided for information
      and background only and to assist decision-makers with the interpretation of policies.
  •   This General Plan’s focus is on identifying issues important to Calimesa, and the goals and
      policies the City will follow to address them. For this reason, this General Plan does not contain
      the type of extensive and detailed background information contained in some general plans.
      This information, while helpful, can change over time, making the General Plan out of date; for
      this reason, this General Plan points the reader in the direction of resources that are more up to
      date and accurate.
AMENDMENTS TO THIS GENERAL PLAN
Recognizing the need for the General Plan to remain up to date and reflective of local issues and
policies, state law allows the City to amend the General Plan to ensure that it is consistent with the
conditions, values, expectations, and needs of the community. The state’s General Plan Guidelines
note:
      The General Plan is a dynamic document because it is based on community values and
      an understanding of existing and projected conditions and needs, all of which
      continually change. Local governments should plan for change by establishing formal
      procedures for regularly monitoring, reviewing, and amending the General Plan.
     1-8                                    CALIMESA GENERAL PLAN AUGUST 2014

        CHAPTER 1: INTRODUCTION
Periodic revision of the Housing Chapter is required by state law, but there is no required regular
update for any other portion of the General Plan.
Amendments to this General Plan may be initiated by the City, property owners, developers, and
residents.
IMPLEMENTING THIS GENERAL PLAN
While this General Plan seeks to guide Calimesa’s growth and decision-making, it is not intended to
answer every question that will be faced by the City over the lifetime of the Plan. This General Plan is
not a step-by-step guidebook for its own implementation; instead, it will rely on the diligence,
ingenuity, and hard work of Calimesa’s elected officials, residents, and staff to find ways to apply its
policies to situations which could be unpredictable and new.
  ZONING CODE
  The City of Calimesa Zoning Code is a key implementation tool for the General Plan. Many of the
  goals, policies, and actions in this General Plan are achieved through zoning, which regulates
  public and private development. The City currently uses a single General Plan Land Use Map/Zoning
  Map; therefore, the City’s zoning districts and their boundaries are identical to the General Plan’s
  land use designations. (Note: This General Plan envisions a two-map system, with separate but
  consistent General Plan and Zoning maps.)
  While the Zoning Code tends to be the most useful implementation tool, other documents are also
  used, including the Municipal Code, specific plans for existing and future planning areas, City
  ordinances, and citywide programs.
  Other related plans and ordinances must also be consistent with the goals and policies in this
  General Plan, including all capital improvements and public works projects.
                     CALIMESA GENERAL PLAN AUGUST 2014                                       1-9

      CHAPTER 1: INTRODUCTION
     This page intentionally left blank.
1-10          CALIMESA GENERAL PLAN AUGUST 2014
                   CHAPTER 2: LAND USE
INTRODUCTION
The Land Use Chapter is what people typically think of when they think of the “plan” for the city. This
chapter establishes the pattern of activity for the community and provides the central framework for
the General Plan by serving as a compass to guide planners, the development community, the general
public, and decision-makers on the desired pattern of development in Calimesa.
The Land Use Chapter defines areas of the city for housing, business, industry, open space, recreation,
education, and other public services and describes future land use activity. Text, maps, and diagrams
establish the blueprint for future land uses within the city and describe how these uses are integrated
with the other General Plan chapters and policies.
BACKGROUND
                                                                Calimesa began as a small rural town with mostly
                                                                single-family    homes    and    ranches.   With
                                                                completion of US Route 99 (now Interstate 10),
                                                                businesses opened in the community and
                                                                Calimesa began to create a separate identity
                                                                from the larger neighboring town of Yucaipa.
                                                                Residents of the community came together and
                                                                applied for their own post office, which was
                                                                opened in 1929 and was located at Calimesa
                                                                Boulevard and Avenue K. At the same time, the
                                                                residents initiated a name contest. Calimesa was
                                                                chosen from 107 names submitted and is said to
                                                                come from “Cali,” meaning California, and “mesa”
 The Trails End Trading Post was a landmark in Calimesa’s early from the Spanish word meaning table or
 days.
                                                                tablelands.
In 1947, the Calimesa Improvement Association was formed. The purpose of the association was the
development and improvement of Calimesa and the community. In 1962, the Calimesa Improvement
Association became the Calimesa Chamber of Commerce.
The community incorporated in 1990 as the City of Calimesa.
                          CALIMESA GENERAL PLAN AUGUST 2014                                            2-1

                                        CHAPTER 2: LAND USE
HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT
                                                                 The population at the time of
Calimesa developed primarily as a low-density residential        incorporation, according to the 1990
community that has fostered a friendly, small-town               Census, was 6,659. Growth over the next
atmosphere enjoyed by Calimesa residents since its
                                                                 20 years was slow: the 2010 Census
beginnings.
                                                                 showed a population of 7,879, an
Many of the existing residential lots are sized to               average growth rate of just 61 persons
accommodate horses and other animals. As a result, many
                                                                 each year.
residents of Calimesa maintain an equestrian lifestyle and
keep other small animals, which is an aspect of the
community that is integral to its identity. However, much of the population growth in recent years
has been accommodated in newer developments, including those subdivisions around the Calimesa
Golf and Country Club, located in the eastern portion of the city.
Calimesa is characterized by foothills in the city’s eastern area, with a mesa area extending through
the central and western portions of the city, gradually sloping south and west toward San Timoteo
Creek. Although Calimesa has a variety of topography, the majority of urban development has
occurred on land with slopes of less than 15 percent.
The proximity of Calimesa to the surrounding hillsides, canyons, nearby state parks, and San
Bernardino National Forest has encouraged a history of preserving land for varied recreation
activities, including walking, biking, and equestrian activities, as well as providing connectivity for
wildlife migrations.
FUTURE DEVELOPMENT
A majority of the future growth expected to occur over the next 22 years will likely be accommodated
in the adopted specific plan areas.
As new development occurs, the City’s focus will be on retaining those qualities of life associated
with a small community while recognizing the need for growth to fulfill the City’s goals for economic
opportunity and adequate support services in the community, as summarized in the Calimesa
Community Vision:
      The City of Calimesa is dedicated to remaining a community that honors its beautiful
      natural setting through open space preservation, wildlife corridors, and extensive trail
      systems, as well as enriching the quality of life for Calimesa through sensitive planning
      that creates increased business activity, local jobs, new parks, and schools.
     2-2                                  CALIMESA GENERAL PLAN AUGUST 2014

                 CHAPTER 2: LAND USE
The General Plan addresses this challenge and begins to chart a path to the future for Calimesa on
both a local and regional level.
EXISTING LAND USES
The Planning Area examined in this General Plan encompasses approximately 9,533 acres, or 14.9
square miles.
Existing (2013) land uses in the Planning Area are summarized in the table below. This marks the
starting point for the future growth of Calimesa.
           TABLE LU-A:               EXISTING PLANNING AREA LAND USES (2013)
                                  Land Use                                        Acreage       Percentage
    Agricultural                                                                             16         0.2%
    Commercial                                                                              435         4.6%
    Manufactured/Mobile Home                                                                 50         0.5%
    Multi-Family Residential                                                                100         1.0%
    Open Space                                                                              108         1.1%
    Residential                                                                              45         0.5%
    Roads                                                                                   503         5.3%
    Single-Family Residential                                                              1209       12.7%
    Vacant                                                                                 7067       74.1%
    Total                                                                                  9533      100.0%
  The US Census (2010) reported the following population and housing information for Calimesa:
  Total Population: 7,879
  Total Housing Units: 3,687
  Occupied Housing Units: 89.9% (3,314)
  Vacant Housing Units: 10.1% (373)
                         CALIMESA GENERAL PLAN AUGUST 2014                                             2-3
                                         CHAPTER 2: LAND USE
RELATED PLANS AND PROGRAMS
The Land Use Chapter relates to several other plans and programs, including the following:
   •   City of Calimesa Zoning Code. The Zoning Code establishes zoning districts that implement
       this General Plan’s land use designations. The Zoning Code also establishes development
       standards for each zoning district; these standards help create the physical form of the
       community (e.g., building setbacks, heights).
       The Zoning Code also contains the Hillside Ordinance and the Oak Tree Preservation Ordinance,
       which were adopted to restrict development on significant hillsides and ridges and address the
       protection of oak trees.
   •   Downtown Business District Code. The intent of the Downtown Business District is to
       encourage the creation of a pedestrian-friendly downtown area along Calimesa Boulevard. The
       Downtown Business District Code includes attractive storefronts, gathering areas, pedestrian
       and vehicular links, and other features aimed at encouraging retail and mixed-use development
       in a downtown setting.
   •   Calimesa Creek Master Plan, July 2012. The intent of this Master Plan is to promote public
       access to and pedestrian use along Calimesa Creek, to protect and enhance the scenic character
       of the downtown, and to improve development potential within the overlay zone. The Master
       Plan provides conceptual analyses of the creek drainage system and explores measures for
       creek stabilization and flood control while preserving the natural look of the creek to function
       as a recreational amenity for the community. Shared parking strategies for properties along the
       creek are also included in the plan.
   •   Adopted Specific Plans. There are three adopted specific plans in the City of Calimesa (see
       Figure LU-1). They are:
           −   Summerwind Ranch, January 2005. 2,590.1 acres approved for the development of up to
               3,841 dwelling units, as well as commercial, business park, open space, recreation, and
               public facility uses.
           −   Mesa Verde Estates, February 2007. 1,493 acres approved for the development of up to
               3,850 dwelling units, as well as mixed-use, open space, recreation, and public facility
               uses.
           −   Heritage Oaks Equestrian Community Specific Plan, May 2007. 54 acres approved for the
               development of 45 single-family homes.
   •   Western Riverside County Multiple Species Habitat Conservation Plan. The Western
       Riverside County Multiple Species Habitat Conservation Plan (MSHCP) is a comprehensive, multi-
       jurisdictional habitat conservation plan focusing on conservation of species and their associated
      2-4                                   CALIMESA GENERAL PLAN AUGUST 2014

                 CHAPTER 2: LAND USE
       habitats in western Riverside County. The overall goal of this plan is to maintain biological and
       ecological diversity within a rapidly urbanizing region. The MSHCP allows jurisdictions within its
       approximately 1.26-million-acre plan area boundary, including Calimesa, to better control local
       land use decisions and maintain a strong economic climate in the region while addressing the
       requirements of the state and federal Endangered Species Acts. Detailed, up-to-date information
       on the MSHCP is available at http://www.rctlma.org/epd/wrmshcp.aspx.
    •  City of Calimesa Redevelopment             Plans. The   City  of Calimesa    has  three existing
       redevelopment plans:
           −   Redevelopment Plan Area No. 5, July 1999. Prior to the incorporation of Calimesa, the
               Riverside County Redevelopment Agency established a redevelopment project area,
               referred to as Area 5, encompassing approximately 172 acres to provide for the
               elimination of blight conditions. Subsequent to Calimesa’s incorporation, the City
               Council activated the Calimesa Redevelopment Agency in 1992. Pursuant to a
               Jurisdictional Transfer Agreement executed on June 13, 2000, the Riverside County
               Redevelopment Agency transferred jurisdiction of Area 5 retroactively as of July 1, 1999.
           −   Redevelopment Plan Area No. 1, December 1993. This plan was the first initiated and
               adopted by the Calimesa Redevelopment Agency. The plan was adopted on December
               30, 1993, and consists of about 762 acres located in four subareas.
           −   Redevelopment Plan Area No. 2, May 2011. This plan was pursued in response to the
               failure of residential subdivisions in the city after the collapse of the residential real
               estate market in 2007. Area 2 contains a portion of the former Summerwind Ranch
               project by SunCal, the Mastercraft Project, and a portion of JP Ranch, in addition to the
               existing developed subdivisions known as Rancho Calimesa Mobile Home Park and The
               Plantation by the Lake. The plan was adopted on May 2, 2011, and consists of about
               1,143 acres.
       Note: As of February 1, 2012, all redevelopment agencies in California were dissolved per
       legislation enacted in 2011. Each redevelopment agency has what is known as a successor
       agency to finish redevelopment activities in progress. The existing redevelopment plans in
       Calimesa will remain in place and continue to guide the successor agency in meeting obligations
       in place prior to the dissolution of redevelopment agencies.
KEY ISSUES
This Land Use Chapter addresses issues identified during the preparation of the City’s General Plan
through discussions with the General Plan Advisory Committee and City staff, and feedback received
during the various public meetings. The goals, policies, and actions included in this chapter have been
prepared in consideration of these issues, which include the need to:
                       CALIMESA GENERAL PLAN AUGUST 2014                                      2-5

                                           CHAPTER 2: LAND USE
    •   Establish Calimesa as a distinct community with an identity that preserves a rural atmosphere.
    •   Improve accessibility to commercial and other services, including entertainment and health-care
        facilities.
    •   Provide for increased employment opportunities in the community.
LAND USE ELEMENT GOALS
GOAL LU-1:             Preserve and enhance the small-town atmosphere of Calimesa.
GOAL LU-2:             A logical and efficient pattern of development that reduces infrastructure
                       costs and maintains the character of Calimesa.
GOAL LU-3:             An arrangement of land uses that achieves maximum compatibility between
                       land uses and especially with existing neighborhoods.
GOAL LU-4:             Commercial and industrial development that serves the needs of Calimesa
                       and the surrounding area, provides local job opportunities, and creates a
                       greater job/housing balance.
LAND USE ELEMENT POLICIES
Policies are provided in this chapter for the following topics:
    •   Calimesa General Plan Land Use Map – Page 2-6
    •   Maintaining Calimesa’s Character – Page 2-28
    •   Location and Timing of Land Uses – Page 2-29
    •   Economic Development – Page 2-30
    •   Calimesa Downtown Business Corridor – Page 2-30
    •   Service Commercial Improvement Area – Page 2-32
    •   Southern Calimesa Boulevard Corridor Area – Page 2-34
    •   Design – Page 2-36
Note to the Reader: The policies and action items designated with (MM) provide mitigation for impacts
identified through the Environmental Impact Report analysis prepared for this General Plan.
       2-6                                   CALIMESA GENERAL PLAN AUGUST 2014

               CHAPTER 2: LAND USE
 CALIMESA GENERAL PLAN LAND USE MAP
POLICY LU-1:          Figure LU-1, Land Use Map, depicts the land use policy of the City of
                      Calimesa. The Land Use Map is an illustration of the City’s land use policy
                      for all of the lands in the city.
                      ACTION ITEM LU-1.1: Review those areas susceptible to flooding for boundary
                      changes on an annual basis.
Note to the Reader: Refer to Figure SAF-5, Flood Zones, for areas susceptible to flooding.
POLICY LU-2:          The Land Use Map’s designations are intended to generally follow parcel
                      lines. Some parcels may be covered by more than one land use designation.
                      In some cases, interpretation may be needed to determine the exact
                      boundaries of a land use classification where parcel lines are unclear, have
                      been moved, or have been deleted. The exact boundaries of a land use
                      designation may be adjusted at the City’s discretion to reflect conditions on
                      the ground, ownership boundaries, or other conditions. Minor changes of
                      this type shall not be considered an amendment to this General Plan.
POLICY LU-3:          Zoning in the city limits shall be consistent with the General Plan Land Use
                      Map. Where multiple zoning districts may be compatible, the City shall apply
                      the most compatible district that best achieves the goals and policies of this
                      General Plan. (MM)
POLICY LU-4:          The following shall apply to the use and interpretation of the Land Use Map:
                      •   The official Land Use Map shall be the printed, signed copy on file in the
                          office of the City Clerk, including any adopted amendments.
                      •   Electronic files used to create the map are not the official map.
                      •   The official Land Use Map shall be printed for viewing and interpretation
                          at a scale of 1 inch = 1,000 feet.
POLICY LU-5:          Questions regarding the location of land use designations shall be resolved
                      by the City using the official Land Use Map or a printed copy at the scale
                      specified above.
POLICY LU-6:          Although Calimesa has operated under a “one-map” system with a single
                      General Plan Land Use Map and Zoning Map, the City intends to create a
                      traditional “two-map” system in which the General Plan Land Use Map’s
                      CALIMESA GENERAL PLAN AUGUST 2014                                     2-7

                                        CHAPTER 2: LAND USE
                     designations are implemented by a separate Zoning Map. This will
                     ultimately provide for the use of more specific zoning designations that fall
                     within the General Plan’s land use categories and will eliminate the need for
                     a concurrent General Plan amendment with every change of zone.
                     ACTION ITEM LU-6.1: Adopt a separate Zoning Map that implements and is
                     consistent with the Land Use Map of this General Plan. (MM)
                     ACTION ITEM LU-6.2: Create residential and other zoning categories that provide
                     more specificity than the land use categories of this General Plan and apply them
                     to parcels as part of future changes of zone. (MM)
POLICY LU-7:         The following are the City’s land use designations. All references to acreage
                     or acres, unless otherwise specified, are to gross acreage.
Note to the Reader: Some of these categories may not appear on the Land Use Map but are available
for use where appropriate.
      2-8                                  CALIMESA GENERAL PLAN AUGUST 2014

                          CHAPTER 2: LAND USE
FIGURE LU-1: LAND USE MAP
                            CALIMESA GENERAL PLAN AUGUST 2014 2-9
            CHAPTER 2: LAND USE
     This page intentionally left blank
2-10         CALIMESA GENERAL PLAN AUGUST 2014
                CHAPTER 2: LAND USE
               TABLE LU-B:           GENERAL PLAN LAND USE CATEGORIES
                    Building
                    Intensity
                      Range
                  (du/acre or
  Land Use            FAR)1,2                        General Plan Land Use Categories
 Designation
                       and
                   Population
                     Density
                (persons/acre)3
Residential Land Use Categories
See also the Open Space Residential and Open Space land use categories, included in the Resource
Lands designations. Both of these categories allow residential uses.
Residential     0 to 1 du/5        Residential Estate is characterized by single-family detached homes
Estate          acres              and by buildings and structures related to agriculture, farm use,
(RE)                               animal keeping, and equestrian uses. Minimum lot sizes of 5 gross
                                   acres are required.
                0 to 3
                persons/5 acres    The following apply to land with the RE land use designation:
                                   • This designation helps preserve the rural character of Calimesa
                                      by permitting existing Residential Estate uses to continue and
                                      expand.
                                   • Homes and buildings constructed within this designation may
                                      have a variety of styles and construction, but are primarily of a
                                      residential nature.
                                   • Homes constructed in this category are likely to be served by
                                      streets that may not have curbs, gutters, sidewalks, or
                                      streetlights. The lots may be served by septic systems and well
                                      water, if standards for provision and service, as required by the
                                      Yucaipa Valley Water District (YVWD), the Santa Ana Regional
                                      Water Quality Control Board, and/or the City, are met.
                                   • Equestrian/pedestrian trails are likely to be found.
                                   • Precise determination of any development shall be on the basis
                                      of a detailed slope analysis and biological, archeological, and
                                      paleontological assessment prior to approval of any
                                      development.
Residential     0.2 to 2           Residential Rural is characterized by single-family detached homes
Rural           du/acre            on 0.5-acre and 1-acre lots.
(RR)                               The following apply to land with the RR land use designation:
                1 to 5             • This designation provides for light agricultural uses, in
                persons/acre          conjunction with single-family residential units. It also permits
                      CALIMESA GENERAL PLAN AUGUST 2014                                        2-11

                                   CHAPTER 2: LAND USE
                 Building
                 Intensity
                   Range
               (du/acre or
  Land Use         FAR)1,2                     General Plan Land Use Categories
 Designation
                    and
                Population
                  Density
             (persons/acre)3
                                residential subdivisions with equestrian uses.
                             • The intent of this category is to preserve the country
                                atmosphere, while providing a transition from Residential Estate
                                into Residential Low areas.
                             • Lots in this area are likely to be served by both public and private
                                streets, some with curb, gutter, sidewalks, and streetlights. Some
                                lots in this category may be served by septic systems and well
                                water, if the standards required by the YVWD, the Santa Ana
                                Regional Water Quality Control Board, and/or the City are met.
                             • Precise determination of any development shall be on the basis
                                of a detailed slope analysis and biological, archeological, and
                                paleontological assessment prior to approval of any
                                development.
                             • Some lots in the Rural Residential designation may be limited to
                                a maximum density of one dwelling unit per 2 acres, when they
                                have steep slopes or other constraints which would pose hazards
                                to development.
Residential  2.1 to 4        Residential Low is characterized by single-family detached homes on
Low          du/acre         not less than 7,200-square-foot lots to 0.5-acre lots.
(RL)                         The following apply to land with the RL land use designation:
             5 to 10         • Residential developments in this category are intended to reflect
             persons/acre       a more urban residential character.
                             • Housing types will include single-family detached homes on
                                streets with curbs, gutters, sidewalks, and streetlights.
                             • Lots are expected to be served by a domestic water and sewer
                                system.
Residential  4.1 to 7        Residential Low Medium is characterized by single-family residential
Low Medium   du/acre         development on lots ranging from 6,000 to 10,000 square feet in
(RLM)                        size.
             10 to 17        The following apply to land with the RLM land use designation:
             persons/acre    • Development in this category will consist of single-family
                                detached homes typical of urban residential subdivisions.
      2-12                            CALIMESA GENERAL PLAN AUGUST 2014

              CHAPTER 2: LAND USE
                  Building
                  Intensity
                    Range
                (du/acre or
  Land Use          FAR)1,2                        General Plan Land Use Categories
 Designation
                     and
                 Population
                   Density
              (persons/acre)3
                                 • Public facilities, services, and infrastructure shall be available,
                                    including water and sewer services, storm drainage, streets,
                                    sidewalks, and streetlights.
Residential   7.1 to 14         Residential Medium is characterized by residential homes either on
Medium        du/acre           small lots or in an attached configuration, including townhomes,
(RM)                            condominiums, or apartments.
              17 to 34          The following apply to land with the RM land use designation:
              persons/acre       • Development in this category will consist of single-family
                                    detached and attached single-family and multi-family homes.
                                 • Public facilities, services, and infrastructure shall be available,
                                    including water and sewer services, storm drainage, streets,
                                    sidewalks, and streetlights.
Residential   14.1 to 20        Residential High is the high-density category. It will allow dwelling
High          du/acre           unit densities that will provide housing opportunities for high-
(RH)                            density multiple-family living and for people of low and moderate
                                incomes.
              34 to 48
              persons/acre      The following apply to land with the RH land use designation:
                                 • This designation allows a wide range of living accommodations
                                    ranging from small-lot detached housing to apartments.
                                 • Building intensity at the lower end of the density range would be
                                    appropriate near the Residential Low areas.
                                 • Building intensity at the higher end of the range is more
                                    appropriate adjacent to commercial areas and major transit
                                    routes.
                                 • Developments within this category are expected to be served by
                                    the public water and sewer system.
Commercial and Office Land Use Categories
Commercial    Up to 0.25 FAR    Commercial Neighborhood allows for small-scale commercial uses
Neighborhood                    (within a 1- to 2-mile service radius) that provide goods and services
(CN)                            for the needs of residents in the immediate area. Examples of
                                Commercial Neighborhood uses include grocery stores,
                                supermarkets, convenience stores, drugstores, and retail service
                    CALIMESA GENERAL PLAN AUGUST 2014                                         2-13

                                    CHAPTER 2: LAND USE
                 Building
                Intensity
                  Range
               (du/acre or
  Land Use        FAR)1,2                      General Plan Land Use Categories
 Designation
                   and
               Population
                 Density
             (persons/acre)3
                             businesses such as cleaners, office supplies, card shops, offices,
                             clothing stores, and restaurants.
                             This land use category should be located along arterial roads or at
                             major intersections.
                             Areas with this designation should be 5 to 10 acres in size.
Commercial   Up to 0.50 FAR  Commercial Community provides for large-scale commercial activities
Community                    serving the city or the subregion. Examples of Commercial Community
(CC)                         uses include junior department stores, discount or warehouse stores,
                             furniture/appliance outlets, home improvement centers,
                             entertainment centers, and community centers.
                             Development in this category generally occurs on sites 15 to 30
                             acres in size located at key intersections of major arterial roads or
                             at major off-ramps from Interstate 10.
                             Commercial Community developments should be accessible to
                             automobiles and pedestrians, as well as to public transit.
Commercial   Up to 0.75 FAR  Commercial Regional allows for the development of commercial
Regional                     uses that will cater to a wide market, including a full range of retail
(CR)                         shops and services within a shopping center environment. Typically,
                             a population of at least 150,000 persons within 5 to 50 miles of the
                             site is necessary to support the variety of businesses found in a
                             regional center development.
                             The Commercial Regional designation should be located near major
                             thoroughfares and along Interstate 10 to permit maximum potential
                             for the dispersal of traffic and sufficient opportunities for ingress
                             and egress.
                             The CR designation should be applied to contiguous areas of 40 or
                             more acres of land that would provide at least 425,000 square feet
                             of building area.
Office       Up to 0.50 FAR  Office Professional provides for activities such as business and
Professional                 service offices, cultural and community facilities, financial
(OP)                         institutions, legal and medical services, restaurants, and other
                             similar uses which together represent major concentrations of
                             community and employment activities. Some limited retail and
      2-14                            CALIMESA GENERAL PLAN AUGUST 2014
              CHAPTER 2: LAND USE
                   Building
                  Intensity
                    Range
                 (du/acre or
  Land Use          FAR)1,2                       General Plan Land Use Categories
 Designation
                     and
                 Population
                   Density
               (persons/acre)3
                                commercial service uses are permitted.
                                The Office Professional designation should be located on arterial
                                roadways for convenient automobile access and public transit
                                service.
Mixed Use Land Use Categories
Residential    Up to 20         The Residential Mixed Use category is characterized by
Mixed Use      du/acre          predominantly residential development at medium to high densities.
(RMU)4                          It allows for commercial or office uses to be co-located on the same
                                property either vertically or horizontally. It does not preclude solely
               Up to 48
                                residential development within the category, but rather encourages
               persons/acre
                                a mixing of uses.
                                The following apply in the RMU category:
               Up to 0.50 FAR
                                 • Development shall take place pursuant to a master plan or
                                    comprehensive plan that includes development standards
                                    tailored to the specific mix of uses proposed.
                                 • Residential density shall not exceed 20 du/acre.
Commercial     Up to 20         The Commercial Mixed Use category encourages the integration of
Mixed Use      du/acre          retail and service commercial uses with office and/or residential
(CMU) 4                         uses. This land use category may also include hospitals and other
                                public/quasi-public uses.
               Up to 48
               persons/acre     The following apply in the CMU category:
                                 • Development shall take place pursuant to a master plan or
                                    comprehensive plan that includes development standards
               Up to 0.50 FAR
                                    tailored to the specific mix of uses proposed.
                                 • Commercial use shall be the predominant use on the ground
                                    floor.
                                 • Parking for different uses may be combined or separated,
                                    depending on the characteristics of the project.
Office Mixed   Up to 20         The Office Mixed Use category encourages the integration of
Use            du/acre          commercial and/or residential use in conjunction with office use of
(OMU) 4                         a site. The OMU category may also include hospitals and other
                                public/quasi-public uses.
                    CALIMESA GENERAL PLAN AUGUST 2014                                        2-15

                                        CHAPTER 2: LAND USE
                     Building
                     Intensity
                       Range
                   (du/acre or
   Land Use            FAR)1,2                      General Plan Land Use Categories
 Designation
                        and
                    Population
                      Density
                 (persons/acre)3
                 Up to 48        The following apply in the OMU category:
                 persons/acre     • Development shall take place pursuant to a master plan or
                                     comprehensive plan that includes development standards
                 Up to 0.50 FAR      tailored to the specific mix of uses proposed.
                                  • Office uses shall be the predominant use, although others may
                                     be included in a vertical or horizontal configuration. (For
                                     example, a site may be developed with an office building in
                                     which the ground floor is occupied by retail and restaurant uses.)
Industrial Land Use Designations
Business Park    Up to 0.50 FAR  Business Park provides for activities such as business/professional
(BP)                             offices, light manufacturing, storage, warehousing/distribution,
                                 wholesaling, small-scale warehouse retail, service commercial
                                 services, and public uses. Developments in this category, except for
                                 warehousing, are generally within a campus-like setting.
                                 Retail and commercial service uses shall not be greater than 25
                                 percent of the gross floor area.
                                 The Business Park designation should be located on arterial
                                 roadways and freeway routes, providing automobile and public
                                 transit access.
Light            Up to 0.50 FAR  Light Industrial will accommodate industrial activities such as low-
Industrial                       intensity packing, manufacturing, assembly of nonhazardous
(LI)                             products and materials, and limited retail sales and services related
                                 to or supportive of manufacturing activity and employees.
Resource Land Use Designations
Open Space       0 to 1 du/10    Open Space Residential preserves open space while allowing for
Residential      acres           limited detached single-family development on parcels of 10 acres
(OSR)                            or greater. Public lands, flood control channels, groundwater
                                 percolation basins, agricultural uses, and recreational facilities such
                 0 to 3
                                 as parks, trails, riding schools, stables and facilities, wildlife
                 persons/10
                                 preserves, archery ranges, golf courses, driving ranges, country
                 acres
                                 clubs, and similar uses are permitted in this category.
                                 The following apply to development in the OSR land use category:
      2-16                                 CALIMESA GENERAL PLAN AUGUST 2014

             CHAPTER 2: LAND USE
                 Building
                 Intensity
                   Range
               (du/acre or
  Land Use         FAR)1,2                       General Plan Land Use Categories
 Designation
                    and
                Population
                  Density
             (persons/acre)3
                                • Strict controls on grading for roads and building pads are
                                   required to protect the visual and environmental resources in
                                   these areas.
                                • Future developments within this area shall be in accordance with
                                   the Calimesa Hillside Development Guidelines, development
                                   standards, and good engineering and land planning practices.
                                • The character of land in the Open Space Residential category is
                                   intended to remain undisturbed, while permitting limited single-
                                   family detached residential development.
Open Space   0 to 1 du/20      Open Space identifies areas within the Planning Area that have been
(OS)         acres             planned to remain in a natural condition due to environmental and
                               geologic constraints, steep slopes, visual resources and significant
                               ridgelines, archeological and paleontological sensitivity, ecological
             0 to 3
                               quality and sensitive biological habitats, and public open space
             persons/20
                               and/or recreational need. The OS category includes rock knolls and
             acres
                               outcroppings, and mountainous landforms which have slopes in
                               excess of 15 percent. The extremely rocky subsoil conditions of
                               these areas cannot sustain typical grading for development without
                               massive disruption of existing contours. Strict controls on grading
                               for roads and building pads are required to protect visual and
                               environmental resources in these areas. Land uses such as flood
                               control channels, groundwater percolation basins, agricultural uses
                               and recreational facilities such as parks, trails, riding schools,
                               stables and facilities, wildlife reserves, archery ranges, golf courses,
                               driving ranges, country clubs, and similar uses are allowed in this
                               category.
                               The following apply to development in the OS land use category:
                                • Precise determination of any development shall be on the basis
                                   of a detailed slope analysis and biological, archeological, and
                                   paleontological assessment prior to approval of any
                                   development.
                                • The character of Open Space areas is intended to reflect the
                                   natural environment, which provides the city its rural
                                   atmosphere.
                   CALIMESA GENERAL PLAN AUGUST 2014                                        2-17

                                       CHAPTER 2: LAND USE
                    Building
                   Intensity
                     Range
                  (du/acre or
  Land Use           FAR)1,2                      General Plan Land Use Categories
 Designation
                      and
                  Population
                    Density
                (persons/acre)3
                                 • The operation of recreation businesses, such as golf courses,
                                    equestrian facilities, private recreation parks, and the like, is
                                    permitted subject to appropriate zoning regulations, such as a
                                    conditional use permit.
                                 • Consideration of new or expanded recreation facilities should
                                    include consideration of whether the use would be consistent
                                    with the open space preservation goals of the OS land use
                                    category.
Public/Quasi    Up to 0.50 FAR  The Public/Quasi Public designation will accommodate uses such as
Public                          Calimesa City Hall, the post office, the fire station, institutional uses
(PQP)                           (private schools, churches), libraries, and other similar development.
Other Categories and Overlays
Specific Plan   N/A             A Specific Plan Area is a land use category that allows for
(SPA)                           designation of areas of the city which are currently under the
                                requirements of a specific plan, such as Oak Valley, and designation
                                of other areas in the city where the flexibility of a specific plan will
                                aid in the development or redevelopment of the area.
                                The following apply to all SPA areas:
                                 • Specific plans are best utilized when prepared for land that is
                                    environmentally constrained, has unique land use concerns, or
                                    requires the flexibility of a specific plan to design a development
                                    which is mutually beneficial to the City and the property owner.
                                 • Specific plans are required to be consistent with all elements of
                                    the General Plan.
                                 • Each specific plan area shall be designated with SPA-#.
                                 • Intensities and densities of development shall be determined on
                                    a case-by-case basis.
      2-18                               CALIMESA GENERAL PLAN AUGUST 2014

              CHAPTER 2: LAND USE
                  Building
                 Intensity
                   Range
                (du/acre or
   Land Use        FAR)1,2                       General Plan Land Use Categories
 Designation
                    and
                Population
                  Density
              (persons/acre)3
Park Overlay  N/A              A Park Overlay designation has been provided in areas which should
(P)                            be developed with a park or recreation facility.
                               The following apply to the P Overlay:
                               • This designation does not call for the entire site/parcel to be
                                  dedicated as a park. Rather, a portion shall be reserved for a
                                  park facility when the parcel is developed.
                               • The actual size and location of the park shall be determined
                                  during project planning and development review.
Hillside      N/A              Development within these areas shall be subject to the Hillside
Overlay                        Development Ordinance of the City and the following standards:
(H)                            • Field surveys and investigations must be made to identify
                                  significant natural resources that may be present on site.
                                  Developments should be designed to preserve these resources to
                                  the maximum extent feasible. Development should also be
                                  sensitive to significant natural resources located in nearby areas.
                               • Geologic studies shall be conducted in areas where landslide,
                                  erosion, liquefaction, or other geologic and seismic hazards may
                                  be present. Development shall be limited in areas with geologic
                                  and seismic hazards that cannot be eliminated by construction
                                  methods.
                               • Developments shall be designed to reduce hazards associated
                                  with wildfire and brush fires through the provision of setbacks,
                                  access roadways, fire-resistant construction, etc. Brush control
                                  programs for fire prevention should be sensitive to natural
                                  vegetation and special-status animals.
                               • Responsible and trustee agencies and local environmental
                                  groups should be consulted to ensure the environmental review
                                  is thorough, prior to development approval.
                               • Off-road vehicle use, which may destroy existing resources, shall
                                  be limited on the hillsides.
Earthquake    N/A              The Earthquake Fault Overlay applies to earthquake hazard zones
Fault Overlay                  along the Banning and Cherry Valley faults, as well as to areas
(E)                            within 150 feet of other local faults and photo lineaments in
                   CALIMESA GENERAL PLAN AUGUST 2014                                      2-19

                                                     CHAPTER 2: LAND USE
                           Building
                          Intensity
                            Range
                         (du/acre or
   Land Use                 FAR)1,2                                General Plan Land Use Categories
 Designation
                              and
                         Population
                           Density
                      (persons/acre)3
                                              Calimesa.
                                              The following apply in the Earthquake Fault Overlay:
                                              • Proposed residential projects, critical facilities (fire and police
                                                  stations, hospitals, emergency centers and shelters), schools,
                                                  and other uses with dependent populations shall be required to
                                                  submit a geologic report that evaluates the potential for surface
                                                  rupture and other seismic hazards on site.
                                              • Development shall be allowed only when the geologic report
                                                  shows that no surface rupture or extreme seismic hazard exists,
                                                  as approved by the county and state geologists.
                                              • If an active fault is determined on site, setbacks and other
                                                  seismic design considerations shall be required based on the
                                                  recommendations of the geologic report.
Notes:
1 FAR = Floor Area Ratio, which is the measurement of the amount of nonresidential building square footage in relation to the
size of the lot. Du/ac = dwelling units per acre.
2 The building intensity range noted is exclusive; that is, the range noted provides a minimum and maximum building intensity.
3 The population density range noted was calculated using 2.36 persons per household multiplied by the stated dwelling
units/acre for each land use designation. Any resulting fraction thereof was rounded up to the nearest whole number.
Note: Pursuant to state law, each land use designation that provides for residential development (other than caretakers
dwellings) is assigned a population density standard for the purposes of projection and infrastructure planning. These population
density standards are relevant only for planning purposes and shall not be interpreted as constituting legal limitations on the
number of persons who may reside at any particular location or parcel. Further, this information is not intended to limit or
regulate the amount of development. Source for persons per household: US Census Bureau, 2010.
4 Density standards have been provided for residential and nonresidential uses as this land use designation allows for both
categories of use. FAR shall apply only to that portion of a building used for nonresidential purposes. Du/ac and persons/acre
shall apply only to that portion of a building used for residential purposes.
POLICY LU-8:                 The Land Use Map does not constitute a guarantee that any particular
                             property can be developed as shown on the map. A variety of constraints,
                             including regulatory requirements, General Plan policies, and other factors,
                             will affect a site’s development potential. The actual intensity of
                             development approved for a site or project may be less than the potential
                             maximum due to physical constraints and other requirements, and will be
                             determined through the project approval process.
        2-20                                            CALIMESA GENERAL PLAN AUGUST 2014

                CHAPTER 2: LAND USE
POLICY LU-9:           Calculations of the potential intensity of development on any site shall be
                       based on gross acreage. A variety of constraints may affect a site’s
                       development potential, including land required for right-of-way for collector
                       and arterial streets shown on the Circulation Map; public parks (as defined
                       in the Open Space, Parks, and Recreation Chapter); public facilities such as
                       schools, fire stations, and police facilities; floodways or floodplains;
                       protected biological habitats; and other unique constraints applicable to the
                       property as determined by the City.
POLICY LU-10:          Where a density range is specified for residential development,
                       developments shall provide at least the minimum density. Maximum density
                       may be exceeded pursuant to an applicable density bonus provision. (MM)
Note to the Reader: Please see the Housing Chapter of this General Plan for information on density
bonus provisions that may be applied.
POLICY LU-11:          Table LU-C shows the zoning districts that are compatible with the land use
                       categories shown on the General Plan Land Use Map. All zoning decisions
                       must be consistent with Table LU-B. (MM)
                        TABLE LU-C:          LIST OF ZONING DISTRICTS
             COMPATIBLE WITH GENERAL PLAN LAND USE CATEGORIES
                Land Use Designation                      Compatible Zoning Districts
                Residential Estate (RE)                    Residential Estate (R-E) Zone
                 Residential Rural (RR)                    Rural Residential (R-R) Zone
                  Residential Low (RL)                      Residential Low (R-L) Zone
            Residential Low Medium (RLM)              Residential Low/Medium (R-L-M) Zone
               Residential Medium (RM)                      Residential Medium (R-M)
                 Residential High (RH)                     Residential High (R-H) Zone
           Commercial Neighborhood (CN)               Neighborhood Commercial (C-N) Zone
             Commercial Community (CC)                 Community Commercial (C-C) Zone
              Commercial Regional (CR)                   Regional Commercial (C-R) Zone
               Office Professional (OP)                   Office Professional (O-P) Zone
             Residential Mixed Use (RMU)                          To be created
                      CALIMESA GENERAL PLAN AUGUST 2014                                   2-21

                                        CHAPTER 2: LAND USE
               Land Use Designation                       Compatible Zoning Districts
           Commercial Mixed Use (CMU)                              To be created
               Office Mixed Use (OMU)                              To be created
                  Business Park (BP)                          Business Park (B-P) Zone
                 Light Industrial (LI)                       Light Industrial (L-I) Zone
           Open Space Residential (OSR)                     Planned Residential District
                   Open Space (OS)                               Open Space District
              Public/Quasi Public (PQP)            Public/Quasi Public District/Special District
                  Specific Plan (SPA)                               Specific Plan
                   Park Overlay (P)                         May be applied to any zone
                 Hillside Overlay (H)                      Hillside Development District
            Earthquake Fault Overlay (E)                    May be applied to any zone
 MAINTAINING CALIMESA’S CHARACTER
POLICY LU-12:         Preserve the desired small-town characteristics of Calimesa through the
                      selection and placement of land uses. (MM)
                      ACTION ITEM LU-12.1:          Coordinate with adjacent cities and communities
                      on land use planning for the preservation of the small-town character of the area.
                      (MM)
POLICY LU-13:         Preserve the natural character and visual quality of Calimesa’s hillsides
                      through sensitive site design and grading. (MM)
POLICY LU-14:         Protect existing stable residential           neighborhoods       by encouraging
                      maintenance and upkeep. (MM)
POLICY LU-15:         Commercial and industrial developments shall be designed to reflect the
                      small-town atmosphere of Calimesa, using building materials such as
                      exposed heavy timbers, weathered wood, and new and used bricks and
                      stone, while maintaining good planning and design principles. (MM)
                      ACTION ITEM LU-15.1:          Commercial or industrial developments on lots
                      greater than 5 acres in size shall be required to prepare plans that include, but
     2-22                                 CALIMESA GENERAL PLAN AUGUST 2014

                 CHAPTER 2: LAND USE
                        are not limited to, the location of buildings, landscaping, parking, driveways,
                        signage, architectural character, and development phasing. (MM)
POLICY LU-16:           Discourage land use conflicts and incompatibilities by providing buffers to
                        include, but not be limited to, landscaping, setbacks, walls/fencing, site
                        design, architectural features, density/intensity/operation reduction, or
                        shielding of lighting between incompatible land uses and new development.
                        (MM)
POLICY LU-17:           Encourage and facilitate the transition of nonconforming land uses to
                        conforming land uses. (MM)
                        ACTION ITEM LU-17.1:           Establish regulations that control the size, height,
                        scale, and mass of infill residential development in order to enhance the choices
                        of existing property owners to renovate, rebuild, and sell their homes or remain
                        as is. (MM)
 LOCATION AND TIMING OF LAND USES
POLICY LU-18:           New development should be contiguous or close to existing development
                        and in locations where infrastructure, public facilities, and services are
                        available when needed.
POLICY LU-19:           Locate commercial and industrial development in areas where street rights-
                        of-way and capacity are available, as well as sufficient infrastructure and
                        public services.
Note to the Reader: Please see the Infrastructure and Public Services Chapter of this General Plan for
additional policies related to the coordination of infrastructure and services with development.
POLICY LU-20:           Locate land uses to          achieve   maximum     compatibility    with   existing
                        neighborhoods. (MM)
POLICY LU-21:           Proposed zone changes and general plan amendments shall respect the
                        logical extension of land uses. (MM)
POLICY LU-22:           Locate high-density residential developments in areas served by existing
                        and/or planned transit routes, infrastructure, and commercial development.
                       CALIMESA GENERAL PLAN AUGUST 2014                                        2-23
                                         CHAPTER 2: LAND USE
  ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
POLICY LU-23:         Encourage the development of commercial and industrial centers to expand
                      the employment and fiscal base of Calimesa.
POLICY LU-24:         Encourage existing and new employers in Calimesa to hire local residents
                      when seeking to fill employment positions.
Note to the Reader: Please refer to the Sustainability Chapter of this General Plan for additional policies
related to LU-23.
  CALIMESA DOWNTOWN BUSINESS CORRIDOR
POLICY LU-25:         The area shown in Figure LU-2 is designated as the Calimesa Downtown
                      Business Corridor.
      2-24                                  CALIMESA GENERAL PLAN AUGUST 2014
           CHAPTER 2: LAND USE
FIGURE LU-2: CALIMESA DOWNTOWN BUSINESS CORRIDOR POLICIES
             CALIMESA GENERAL PLAN AUGUST 2014          2-25
                               CHAPTER 2: LAND USE
POLICY LU-26: Calimesa Boulevard is envisioned as a commercial district offering a variety
              of businesses and serving a local and regional customer base.
POLICY LU-27: The west side of Calimesa Boulevard between Avenue L and Myrtlewood
              Drive shall accommodate regional shopping oriented to Interstate 10.
POLICY LU-28: The light industrial uses that exist within the corridor and provide jobs for
              Calimesa residents will be retained and provide areas for expansion.
POLICY LU-29: Improve existing development and encourage new development that will
              result in a downtown area that reflects a small-town shopping district.
POLICY LU-30: Existing businesses shall be supported by providing investment in public
              infrastructure and attracting additional businesses and people to the
              corridor.
POLICY LU-31: The image of the Calimesa Downtown Business Corridor shall be enhanced
              and a traditional downtown environment will be created, especially east of
              Calimesa Boulevard between Avenue L and Myrtlewood Drive.
 SERVICE COMMERCIAL IMPROVEMENT AREA
POLICY LU-32: The area west of Interstate 10, shown in Figure LU-3, is designated as the
              Service Commercial Improvement Area.
POLICY LU-33: Provide development of uses west of Interstate 10 that will create job
              opportunities and complement the Calimesa Downtown Business Corridor.
POLICY LU-34: In the Service Commercial Improvement Area, the City will encourage
              designs that transition from and complement any existing residential uses.
     2-26                         CALIMESA GENERAL PLAN AUGUST 2014
           CHAPTER 2: LAND USE
FIGURE LU-3: SERVICE COMMERCIAL IMPROVEMENT AREA POLICIES
             CALIMESA GENERAL PLAN AUGUST 2014          2-27
                               CHAPTER 2: LAND USE
 SOUTHERN CALIMESA BOULEVARD CORRIDOR AREA
POLICY LU-35: The area along Calimesa Boulevard, shown in Figure LU-4, is designated as
              the Southern Calimesa Boulevard Corridor Area.
FIGURE LU-4:  SOUTHERN CALIMESA BOULEVARD CORRIDOR AREA
POLICIES
     2-28                        CALIMESA GENERAL PLAN AUGUST 2014
              CHAPTER 2: LAND USE
POLICY LU-36:   Create development in the Southern Calimesa Boulevard Corridor Area that
                will provide an effective use of the area to capture business from the
                regional market.
POLICY LU-37:   Encourage design in the Southern Calimesa Boulevard Corridor Area that
                will be compatible with and complement the existing residential uses in this
                area. (MM)
POLICY LU-38:   Land uses in the Southern Calimesa Boulevard Corridor Area should
                strengthen and complement the Calimesa Downtown Business Corridor to
                the north and the planned commercial area to the west.
 DESIGN
POLICY LU-39:   To the extent possible, hillside areas should be preserved and protected.
                (MM)
                ACTION ITEM LU-39.1:         Review all development in areas having a slope of
                25 percent or greater for compliance with the Calimesa Hillside Ordinance. (MM)
POLICY LU-40:   Stepped or multilevel foundations are encouraged for use in hillside
                development to reduce grading and maintain the rural appearance of the
                hillside areas. (MM)
POLICY LU-41:   In hillside areas and areas affected by natural hazards (earthquakes,
                earthquake faults, major drainage flows, and landslides), the City
                encourages the use of development standards specific to the project to
                protect hillsides and protect life and property. (MM)
                ACTION ITEM LU-41.1:         Consider the use of a Residential Planned
                Development Zone to encourage creative site designs that would preserve
                significant natural resources and protect slopes and improve safety in areas
                affected by earthquakes, earthquake faults, major drainage flows, and landslides.
                (MM)
                CALIMESA GENERAL PLAN AUGUST 2014                                     2-29
                               CHAPTER 2: LAND USE
POLICY LU-42: On a site having a slope of 25 percent or greater, minimum lot sizes may be
              reduced below those otherwise required by a Residential Plan Development
              or other method to:
              •   Preserve steep slope areas;
              •   Avoid known faults and landslides;
              •   Preserve significant biological and drainage areas; and
              •   Add open space to existing contiguous open space lands. (MM)
     2-30                          CALIMESA GENERAL PLAN AUGUST 2014

 CHAPTER 3: TRANSPORTATION AND
                                        MOBILITY
INTRODUCTION
                                                               Safe and efficient mobility of people and goods
                                                               is essential to a community’s success and to the
                                                               quality of life of its residents. While the primary
                                                               mode of transportation for most people remains
                                                               the automobile, streets can be designed to
                                                               include options to the automobile, improving
                                                               travel and circulation as well as reducing noise
                                                               and air pollution. This “multimodal” approach
                                                               (many modes of travel) ensures that all types of
                                                               transportation are considered and that the City
                                                               can meet the circulation needs of development
                                                               accordingly.
 The signal at Myrtlewood Drive and Calimesa Boulevard is part In addition to planning for different modes of
 of the City’s overall system of traffic controls.
                                                               transportation, the physical design of streets
should provide safety for all users, including bicyclists, pedestrians, transit vehicles, truckers, and
motorists. This approach reflects a complete view of the street and an understanding that streets often
have different primary users, depending on the adjacent land use.
This Transportation and Mobility Chapter establishes goals, policies, and actions designed to guide the
entire circulation system, which includes the roadway network, transit facilities and services, bicycle,
equestrian, and pedestrian facilities, and truck routes. This chapter also addresses transportation
management strategies to complement the functionality of the transportation and mobility network.
The text and maps are a basis for the development of the city’s network.
BACKGROUND
The City commissioned a traffic study to examine existing transportation conditions in the city. The
final report of Existing Conditions and Traffic Impact Analysis was completed in September 2008 by
Trastech Engineers, Inc. This report looks at the potential impacts of existing and future development
on the city’s intersections and roadways. Because Calimesa is largely undeveloped within its
incorporated boundaries and Sphere of Influence, most of the city’s roadways are found in the central
area. The report focused on the existing roadway network found in this area, including smaller local
streets. Report findings have been incorporated into this Transportation and Mobility Chapter.
                             CALIMESA GENERAL PLAN AUGUST 2014                                          3-1

                               CHAPTER 3: TRANSPORTATION AND
                                                                 MOBILITY
While the report focused on the existing roadway network in
                                                                                                     Traffic Terms
Calimesa, the local transportation network connects to other parts
of Riverside and San Bernardino counties and extends well beyond
Calimesa’s borders. Recreational travel and freight movement
through the city require a flexible roadway system capable of
meeting a wide range of needs.
Not only must the transportation system accommodate the traffic
that is generated by homes and businesses in the community, it
also must accommodate regional traffic that passes through                                  The following are a few terms
Calimesa. 1                                                                                 commonly used when
                                                                                            discussing traffic issues:
   LEVEL OF SERVICE                                                                         • Volume refers to the
                                                                                                number of cars on a
   Future increases in traffic in Calimesa may not necessarily be as                            roadway, usually mea-
                                                                                                sured either on an aver-
   a result of growth in the city alone. Regional traffic, and growth                           age day or during a peak
   in other communities, will place more vehicles on Calimesa’s                                 hour.
   roadways.
                                                                                            • Peak hour refers to the
                                                                                                times of day at which
   The capacity of a transportation system is referred to as the level                          traffic is heaviest—usually
   of service (LOS) and is generally defined as a ratio of traffic                              the morning or evening
   volume to roadway capacity. While it is customary to refer to LOS                            “rush hour.” Most
                                                                                                roadways are analyzed
   using an alphabetic reference (A–F), the inevitable comparison to
                                                                                                and then built to carry the
   school grades is not accurate. From a purely transportation                                  traffic load projected for
   standpoint, a roadway with an LOS D is a roadway used to its                                 the peak hours.
   design capacity.                                                                         • Capacity refers to the
                                                                                                maximum number of
   This General Plan sets a standard of LOS C for roadways, but                                 vehicles that can be
   allows flexibility in the standard to accommodate different                                  carried by a roadway.
   transportation methods and existing development in some                                  • Level of service (LOS) is a
   areas. The LOS standard favors the automobile, which may                                     measure of how well a
   improve the quality of the drive but does not recognize other                                roadway is able to carry
                                                                                                traffic. LOS is often
   forms of transportation such as bus, rail, bicycle, and walking.
                                                                                                expressed as a ratio
   These alternatives are important because roadways cannot                                     between volume and
   readily be widened without removing existing businesses and                                  capacity. LOS is usually
   homes. There may also be instances where the existing LOS is                                 designated with a letter
                                                                                                grade A–F. LOS “A” is best;
   below the stated threshold, yet the community wants to proceed                               “F” is worst.
   with development.
1
  Note to the Reader: Regional traffic passing through Calimesa does so primarily on Interstate 10 (I-10), which is constructed
and operated by the California Department of Transportation (Caltrans). The City cooperates with Caltrans, but the City is not
responsible for improvements to the freeway.
        3-2                                          CALIMESA GENERAL PLAN AUGUST 2014

CHAPTER 3: TRANSPORTATION AND
                             MOBILITY
EXISTING TRANSPORTATION SYSTEM
 ROADWAY SYSTEM
 Much of Calimesa’s land area is undeveloped; therefore, most of the existing roadways are found in
 the older, more urban, central city area. The roadway system generally consists of local roads,
 residential and major collectors, and secondary arterials. Interstate 10 runs north–south through
 the city and is a major transportation route connecting the Los Angeles Basin to the Coachella
 Valley and the inland desert areas.
 NON-MOTORIZED TRANSPORTATION
 Non-motorized transportation planning includes provisions for bicycle paths, sidewalks, trails, etc.,
 as well as working to remove impediments to these features. A well-planned and well-built trail
 system can provide for an improved quality of life for residents by providing a recreational amenity
 and by providing a viable alternative to the automobile.
 Providing a safe user environment can encourage utilization of this system in commercial, office,
 and residential areas. Use of bike paths and trails in recreation and natural open space areas can be
 encouraged through proper signage and publicity.
   Pedestrian
   Pedestrian facilities include sidewalks, walkways, bridges, crosswalks, signals, illumination, and
   benches, among other amenities. Pedestrian facilities provide a vital link between other methods
   of travel and can make up a considerable portion of short-range trips made in the community.
   Where pedestrian facilities exist, people will be much more likely to make shorter trips by walking
   rather than by vehicle. Pedestrian facilities also provide a vital link for commuters who use other
   transportation facilities such as rail, bus, and park-and-ride lots.
   Bikeways
   Calimesa has bicycle lanes painted adjacent to existing roadways. There are no facilities in the
   community for bikes only; however, the City does maintain a series of multi-use trails, which
   accommodate bicycles as well as pedestrians.
                    CALIMESA GENERAL PLAN AUGUST 2014                                       3-3

                          CHAPTER 3: TRANSPORTATION AND
                                                        MOBILITY
     Multi-Use Trails
     The City of Calimesa maintains a connecting walking trail system, multipurpose trails, and
     equestrian trails. The City adopted the Calimesa Multi-Use Trail Manual in 2007, which included
     guidelines and standards for the development of trails in the city. These multi-use trails
     accommodate walking, biking, and equestrian use.
     Note to Reader: Please refer to the Open Space, Parks, and Recreation Chapter for additional
     information on trails in Calimesa.
   PUBLIC TRANSPORTATION SYSTEM
   Yucaipa Dial-A-Ride provides on-call transit services for the general public, including seniors and
   disabled individuals, in portions of the city. This service is provided on a space-available basis, with
   priority given to Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA)-certified individuals. As new roadways are
   constructed and existing roadways renovated, it will be important to ensure that the system is
   designed to accommodate future transit services.
   GOODS MOVEMENT/DESIGNATED TRUCK ROUTES
   The efficient movement of goods in and through the city is essential to continued economic
   success. Most of the city’s roadways have been designed to accommodate truck traffic and can
   handle heavy trucks. As the community develops, there may be areas where trucks should not
   travel regularly, which would allow for narrower roadways and a reduced number and size of sound
   walls. Over time, the City may adopt primary truck routes on roadways designed and maintained
   specifically for heavier vehicles.
FUTURE PLANNING EFFORTS
Roadway designations are based on the amount of vehicle traffic anticipated on each roadway
segment. Travel demand on the system includes trips to and from all existing and future land uses
within the city, as well as from land uses outside Calimesa. Wider roadways with more travel lanes are
expected to accommodate higher traffic volumes, while narrow roadways have less traffic.
Planning for future roadways and intersections is important, as the City needs to obtain the
necessary rights-of-way for roadway and intersection improvements during the development process.
It is also important to inform adjacent landowners of the needed roadway and expected traffic so that
they can make decisions about future land development.
      3-4                                   CALIMESA GENERAL PLAN AUGUST 2014

 CHAPTER 3: TRANSPORTATION AND
                               MOBILITY
RELATED PLANS AND PROGRAMS
The Transportation and Mobility Chapter relates to several other plans and programs, including the
following:
    •   Southern California Association of Governments 2012–2035 Regional Transportation
        Plan/Sustainable Communities Strategy (RTP/SCS), 2012. The RTP/SCS is a long-term plan
        for the Southern California region’s transportation network, which includes 6 counties and 191
        cities. The RTP provides a vision for transportation investments throughout the region. Using
        growth forecasts and economic trends that project over a 20-year period, the RTP considers the
        role of transportation in the broader context of economic, environmental, and quality-of-life
        goals for the future, identifying regional transportation strategies to address mobility needs.
        Within the RTP, the SCS demonstrates the region’s ability to attain and exceed greenhouse gas
        emissions reductions set forth by the California Air Resources Board.
    •   California Department of Transportation (Caltrans) Standards. Caltrans establishes
        minimum standards for several types of state transportation facilities, including roadways,
        trails, and bicycle paths. These standards are commonly referenced by the City for local
        projects in Calimesa; Caltrans is solely responsible for maintaining Interstate 10.
KEY ISSUES
The Transportation and Mobility Chapter addresses issues identified during the preparation of the
City’s General Plan through discussions with the General Plan Advisory Committee and City staff, and
feedback received during the various public meetings. The goals, policies, and actions included in this
chapter have been prepared in consideration of these issues, which include the need to:
    •   Plan for adequate capacity on the city’s roadway network without overbuilding the system.
    •   Improve accessibility of alternative transportation.
                       CALIMESA GENERAL PLAN AUGUST 2014                                     3-5

                           CHAPTER 3: TRANSPORTATION AND
                                                         MOBILITY
TRANSPORTATION AND MOBILITY GOALS
GOAL TM-1:             A transportation system that ensures the safe and efficient movement of
                       people and goods throughout the city.
GOAL TM-2:             Public transit services, trails, paths, and pedestrian amenities that promote
                       the mobility of Calimesa residents and provide a reasonable alternative to
                       the personal automobile.
GOAL TM-3:             Seek to establish an area-wide multi-use system of pedestrian, equestrian,
                       hiking, and bicycling trails, with linkages to parks and the trail systems of
                       adjacent jurisdictions.
GOAL TM-4:             Promote mobility for the disabled, in accordance with state and federal law.
TRANSPORTATION AND MOBILITY POLICIES
Policies are provided in this chapter in the following areas:
    •   General Circulation – Page 3-6
    •   Regional Mobility – Page 3-14
    •   Trip Reduction/Travel Demand Management – Page 3-15
    •   Multi-Use Trails – Page 3-15
Note to the Reader: The policies and action items designated with (MM) provide mitigation for impacts
identified through the Environmental Impact Report analysis prepared for this General Plan.
  GENERAL CIRCULATION
POLICY TM-1:           Provide for roadways in accordance with the Circulation Plan (Figure TM-1).
POLICY TM-2:           Roadway classifications shown on the Circulation Plan are defined in Table
                       TM-A, below.
       3-6                                   CALIMESA GENERAL PLAN AUGUST 2014

CHAPTER 3: TRANSPORTATION AND
                         MOBILITY
                      TABLE TM-A: ROADWAY CLASSIFICATIONS
        Roadway Classification           Number of      Right-of-Way   Curb-to-
                                            Lanes           Width     Curb Width
   Residential Collector                2             52 feet        40 feet
   These roadways would provide a
   40-foot curb-to-curb roadway
   within a 52-foot right-of-way.
   This functional classification is
   similar    to   a    local    street
   classification, although it would
   generally have less fronting land
   uses than a purely local street
   and would also function as a
   connection for a limited number
   of local trips to the arterial
   system.
   Collector                            2             52 feet        40 feet
   These streets would provide a
   40-foot curb-to-curb roadway
   within a 52-foot right-of-way.
   This is sufficient to provide one
   lane in each direction with
   parking.      Collector     streets
   function as feeder routes to
   carry traffic from the arterial
   system to the local system, but
   should carry only very minimal
   levels of non-local through
   traffic.
   Secondary Arterial                   2-4      plus 88 feet        72 feet
                                        center   turn
   These roadways would provide a
                                        lane
   72-foot curb-to-curb roadway
   within an 88-foot right-of-way.
   This is sufficient width to
   provide two through lanes in
   each direction (plus a center left
   turn lane) without parking, or
   one lane in each direction (plus
   a center left turn lane) with
   parking.     Secondary     arterials
   would function in a similar
                 CALIMESA GENERAL PLAN AUGUST 2014                              3-7
                     CHAPTER 3: TRANSPORTATION AND
                                                  MOBILITY
        Roadway Classification          Number of        Right-of-Way         Curb-to-
                                           Lanes             Width          Curb Width
   manner to major arterials except
   that secondary arterials carry
   less total traffic, less non-local
   through traffic, and a relatively
   greater proportion of local
   traffic. Secondary arterials are
   typically spaced at half-mile
   intervals      between      major
   arterials, or, where appropriate,
   depending on geographic and
   land use conditions.
   Major Arterial                      4-6       plus 92 feet              76 feet
                                       center    turn
   These roadways would provide a
                                       lane
   76-foot curb-to-curb roadway
   within a 92-foot right-of-way
   upon full buildout.       This is
   sufficient width to provide three
   lanes in each direction (plus a
   center left turn lane) without
   curbside parking, or two lanes in
   each direction (plus a center left
   turn lane) with curbside parking.
   Specific Plan Streets               Varies;    see Varies; see Specific Varies;    see
                                       Specific Plan  Plan for details.    Specific Plan
   These are defined as streets in
                                       for details.                        for details.
   an area to be covered in the
   future by a specific plan. The
   exact alignment, width and
   right-of-way of specific plan
   streets are not specified at this
   time, but will be determined
   based upon more detailed
   studies of proposed land use
   patterns and anticipated traffic
   volumes once the development
   plans are more fully described.
3-8                                   CALIMESA GENERAL PLAN AUGUST 2014
 CHAPTER 3: TRANSPORTATION AND
                     MOBILITY
POLICY TM-3: Strive to construct streets in accordance with the City's standard street
             classifications. (MM)
             ACTION ITEM TM-3.1:           Develop a process to encourage innovative street
             concepts that allow for flexibility in design as well as to preserve important
             resources located within or adjacent to the street right-of-way.
             ACTION ITEM TM-3.2:           Develop a process that encourages innovative
             pedestrian amenities, including parkways, meandering sidewalks, and enhanced
             paving. (MM)
             ACTION ITEM TM-3.3:           Ensure that all streets, including private streets, are
             constructed to a standard acceptable to the City. (MM)
             ACTION ITEM TM-3.4:           Require that new development with private
             roadways demonstrates a means of providing long-term maintenance acceptable
             to the City.
             ACTION ITEM TM-3.5:           Require the dedication        and   improvement      of
             roadways as part of the development process. (MM)
             CALIMESA GENERAL PLAN AUGUST 2014                                         3-9
                       CHAPTER 3: TRANSPORTATION AND MOBILITY
FIGURE TM-1: CIRCULATION MAP
     3-10                         CALIMESA GENERAL PLAN AUGUST 2014
 CHAPTER 3: TRANSPORTATION AND
                       MOBILITY
POLICY TM-4:  Maintain and rehabilitate roadways to preserve and improve the quality of
              city streets and thoroughfares that promote access and mobility between
              residential neighborhoods, employment centers, shopping, and health
              services. (MM)
              ACTION ITEM TM-4.1:            Following the principles of “complete streets,”
              maximize visibility and access for pedestrians and encourage the removal of
              barriers (walls, easements, and fences) for safe and convenient movement of
              pedestrians. Ensure that the entire travelway is included in the design from
              building façade to building façade. (MM)
              ACTION ITEM TM-4.2:            Pedestrian access shall be provided from
              developments to existing and future transit routes, park-and-ride lots, terminal
              facilities, etc. (MM)
              ACTION ITEM TM-4.3:            Ensure that City street standards provide for the
              installation of bus turnouts, benches, and shelters. (MM)
              ACTION ITEM TM-4.4:            Require that development comply with state and
              federal accessibility requirements for the disabled. (MM)
              ACTION ITEM TM-4.5:            Establish a truck route system that designates
              truck and commercial vehicle routes and provides adequately sized and designed
              roadways to meet the needs of trucks and commercial vehicles. (MM)
POLICY TM-5:  Design each roadway with sufficient width to accommodate projected traffic
              at acceptable service levels, based on the intensity or density of planned
              land uses. (MM)
POLICY TM-6:  Access points must be located a sufficient distance away from major
              intersections to allow for safe, efficient operation. (MM)
              ACTION ITEM TM-6.1:            Limit access points, parking, turn lanes, and
              intersections of streets and highways based on the road’s classification and
              function. (MM)
              ACTION ITEM TM-6.2:            Combined and/or reciprocal access onto arterials
              shall be required between adjacent properties, wherever possible, to reduce
              vehicular access points and increase roadway efficiency. (MM)
             CALIMESA GENERAL PLAN AUGUST 2014                                     3-11

                  CHAPTER 3: TRANSPORTATION AND
                                                MOBILITY
              ACTION ITEM TM-6.3:             Establish a program to construct and improve
              traffic signals at appropriate intersections. (MM)
POLICY TM-7:  Seek to maintain level of service C on all City-maintained roads. A peak-hour
              level of service of D, or lower, may be allowed on City-maintained road
              segments in commercial and employment areas or any combination of major
              highways, urban arterials, secondary highways, or freeway ramp
              intersections. (MM)
POLICY TM-8:  Alternative levels of service may be allowed on intersections in planned
              development or similar identified mixed-use areas that demonstrate links to
              transit, trails, and alternative transportation and comfortable walking
              distance to goods and services. (MM)
POLICY TM-9:  The City will include the public in all aspects of transportation planning and
              its development process.
 REGIONAL MOBILITY
POLICY TM-10: Support the development of the Short- and Long-Range Transit Plans. (MM)
              ACTION ITEM TM-10.1:            Participate in the development and implementation
              of transportation improvement programs such as the Transportation Uniform
              Mitigation Fee (TUMF) and other improvement-based fee programs that maximize
              the use of funding from local, state, and federal sources. (MM)
              ACTION ITEM TM-10.2:            Implement       freeway    ramp/arterial     roadway
              interchange improvements that promote the safe and efficient movement of
              vehicles, pedestrians, and cyclists. (MM)
              ACTION ITEM TM-10.3:            Coordinate      the    planning   for     Calimesa’s
              transportation needs with adjacent jurisdictions, the County of Riverside,
              Caltrans, and public transit providers. (MM)
              ACTION ITEM TM-10.4:            Encourage the establishment of fixed bus routes
              and extend the Dial-A-Ride service territory to outlying areas of the city. (MM)
     3-12                           CALIMESA GENERAL PLAN AUGUST 2014

 CHAPTER 3: TRANSPORTATION AND
                        MOBILITY
 TRIP REDUCTION/TRAVEL DEMAND MANAGEMENT
POLICY TM-11:  Reduce vehicle trips through design and changes in operations. (MM)
               ACTION ITEM TM-11.1:          Develop measures that will reduce the number of
               vehicle trips during peak travel periods. (MM)
               ACTION ITEM TM-11.2:          Coordinate with Caltrans, the Riverside County
               Transportation Commission (RCTC), the Western Riverside Council of
               Governments (WRCOG), transit agencies, and other responsible agencies to
               identify the need for additional park-and-ride facilities along major commuter
               travel corridors and at major activity centers. (MM)
               ACTION ITEM TM-11.3:          Provide    preferential parking  for carpools   and
               vanpools, where appropriate. (MM)
               ACTION ITEM TM-11.4:          Incorporate the potential for public transit service
               in the design of developments that are identified as major trip attractions (i.e.,
               retail and employment centers). (MM)
               ACTION ITEM TM-11.5:          Support      programs     developed    by    transit
               agencies/operators to provide paratransit service. (MM)
 MULTI-USE TRAILS
POLICY TM-12:  Provide for the development of multi-use equestrian, pedestrian, and hiking
               trails that provide a linkage with regional facilities. (MM)
               ACTION ITEM TM-12.1:          Establish an implementation program for funding
               of the multi-use trail system that provides for acquisition and maintenance of
               trails. (MM)
               ACTION ITEM TM-12.2:          Require the development and dedication of trails in
               conjunction with proposed development. (MM)
               ACTION ITEM TM-12.3:          Determine if trails, paths, and pedestrian access
               can be extended into existing development to provide for increased connectivity.
               (MM)
              CALIMESA GENERAL PLAN AUGUST 2014                                      3-13
                  CHAPTER 3: TRANSPORTATION AND
                                              MOBILITY
              ACTION ITEM TM-12.4:          Maximize use of existing and proposed easements,
              rights-of-way, floodways, and utility corridors as the principal trail and bikeway
              locations to encourage the utilization of trails/bikeways for commuting, as well
              as for recreational purposes. (MM)
POLICY TM-13: Ensure that schoolchildren have safe and adequate transportation routes
              available, such as pedestrian or bike paths, or local bus service. (MM)
     3-14                           CALIMESA GENERAL PLAN AUGUST 2014
         CHAPTER 4: INFRASTRUCTURE
                   AND PUBLIC SERVICES
INTRODUCTION
This chapter of the General Plan addresses a variety of systems—both physical and personal—that are
essential to modern life. These systems, generally called “infrastructure,” provide many of the basic
necessities upon which residents and businesses in
Calimesa rely:
     •   Water service
     •   Sewer service
     •   Solid waste disposal
     •   Storm drainage
     •   Utilities
     •   Public services (police and fire protection)
     •   Schools
A brief introduction to each of these topics is
provided below. 1
                                                                Road work on 7th Street is an example of the City's ongoing
   WATER SERVICE                                                efforts to provide high-quality public infrastructure.
   Calimesa is served by groundwater from the San Timoteo Subbasin of the Beaumont Groundwater
   Basin. Wells for domestic use are operated by the South Mesa Water Company, the Yucaipa Valley
   Water District, and the Beaumont Cherry Valley Water District.
   Water is also available from the State Water Project. The San Gorgonio Pass Water Agency is a
   regional water agency that imports State Project Water into the pass area, sells water to local water
   retailers, and helps protect local groundwater basins. The agency, created in 1961, is one of 29 State
   Water Contractors, each of whom has the right to purchase water from the State of California and sell
   that water within its service area on a wholesale or retail basis. The agency is a water wholesaler that
   does not sell water to the end-user.
1
  Note: Some of the background information in this chapter was derived from the Calimesa portion of the “Central Valleys, Pass
Area, and Southwestern MSR (Municipal Service Review)” prepared in 2006 for the Riverside County Local Agency Formation
Commission.
                          CALIMESA GENERAL PLAN AUGUST 2014                                                        4-1

                              CHAPTER 4: INFRASTRUCTURE
                                       AND PUBLIC SERVICES
Note to the Reader: Up-to-date information on the agencies that provide domestic water service in
Calimesa can be found at these locations:
South Mesa Water Company: www.southmesawater.com
Yucaipa Valley Water District: www.yvwd.dst.ca.us
Beaumont Cherry Valley Water District: www.bcvwd.org
SEWER SERVICE
The Yucaipa Valley Water District provides sewer service to Calimesa. The district provides sewer
service to approximately 10,000 service connections in the district’s service area, which also includes
the cities of Calimesa and Yucaipa and portions of unincorporated Riverside and San Bernardino
counties.
Sewage treatment is provided at the district’s Wochholz Regional Water Recycling Facility.
Note to the Reader: Up-to-date information on the Yucaipa Valley Water District is available on the
district’s website: www.yvwd.dst.ca.us
SOLID WASTE DISPOSAL
As of 2013, solid waste collection and disposal service in Calimesa is provided through a contract
with CR&R disposal. The solid waste that is collected in the city is hauled to the following landfills
that accept construction/demolition waste, dead animals, and mixed municipal refuse:
  •   Badlands Sanitary Landfill
  •   El Sobrante Landfill
  •   Lamb Canyon Sanitary Landfill
  •   Olinda Alpha Sanitary Landfill
  •   San Timoteo Sanitary Landfill
     4-2                                 CALIMESA GENERAL PLAN AUGUST 2014

      CHAPTER 4: INFRASTRUCTURE
                 AND PUBLIC SERVICES
STORM DRAINAGE
The Riverside County Flood Control and Water Conservation District (RCFCWCD) maintains the storm
drain system in Calimesa. The City has authority over other unimproved stream courses and storm
drain facilities.
                                                            Several natural drainage systems traverse the
                                                            City including Calimesa Creek, Garden Air
                                                            Wash, Brookside Creek, and Singleton Canyon
                                                            Wash. All of the washes essentially follow in an
                                                            east to west direction and drain to San Timoteo
                                                            Canyon Wash. The only wash that has been
                                                            improved is a portion of Calimesa Creek. Since
                                                            all of these washes, other than a portion of
                                                            Calimesa Creek, are natural and unlined, they
                                                            convey stormwater and recharge             water
                                                            simultaneously. These creeks and washes also
                                                            accommodate floodwaters and help manage
                                                            stormwater in heavy storm years.
The storm drainage system in Calimesa includes large creeks Many minor storm drain facilities are located on
and channels, and small facilities like this one.
                                                            private property and are maintained by the
property owners. These small systems are not directly controlled by either Riverside County or the
City of Calimesa.
Note to the Reader: Up-to-date information on the RCFCWCD is available on the district’s website:
http://www.floodcontrol.co.riverside.ca.us
UTILITIES
Gas, electricity, and telephone service (landline) are provided by the following:
  •    Gas: Southern California Gas Co. For more information: www.socalgas.com
  •    Electricity: Southern California Edison. For more information: www.sce.com
  •    Telephone: Verizon. For more information: www.verizon.com
                         CALIMESA GENERAL PLAN AUGUST 2014                                        4-3

                                       CHAPTER 4: INFRASTRUCTURE
                                                  AND PUBLIC SERVICES
PUBLIC SERVICES
Public services addressed in this chapter include police and fire protection services, which are
described briefly below.
  POLICE PROTECTION
                                                                   The     City   of   Calimesa    provides  law
                                                                   enforcement services through a service
                                                                   contract with the Riverside County Sheriff’s
                                                                   Department. The City has contracts with the
                                                                   Sheriff’s Department for specific levels of
                                                                   service (e.g., number of patrol hours, number
                                                                   of officers). The County Sheriff’s station
                                                                   providing services to the Calimesa area is
                                                                   located at 50290 Main Street in Cabazon. The
                                                                   Cabazon       Station    also    serves   the
                                                                   unincorporated pass area around Beaumont
                                                                   and Banning, and the unincorporated areas of
 Police protection in Calimesa is provided by the Riverside County Cabazon, Cherry Valley, Poppet Flats, San
 Sheriff, under contract to the City of Calimesa.                  Gorgonio, San Timoteo Canyon, Twin Pines,
                                                                   and Whitewater.
  FIRE PROTECTION
                                                                   The City provides fire protection services
                                                                   through a contract for services with the
                                                                   Riverside County Fire Department. The City
                                                                   has contracted with Riverside County for fire
                                                                   services since city incorporation in 1990. As
                                                                   of 2013, the city is served primarily by
                                                                   Station No. 21, which is located adjacent to
                                                                   City Hall. The immediate response area of
                                                                   this station extends from County Line Road to
                                                                   Cherry Valley Boulevard. Station No. 22
                                                                   provides support to Station No. 21 and
                                                                   responds to calls as necessary.
 County of Riverside Fire Station #21 provides fire protection for
 most of Calimesa.
     4-4                                           CALIMESA GENERAL PLAN AUGUST 2014

        CHAPTER 4: INFRASTRUCTURE
                   AND PUBLIC SERVICES
  SCHOOLS
  The City of Calimesa is served by two school districts:
     •    Yucaipa-Calimesa Joint Unified School District, serving the western portion of the city (including
          the Mesa Verde Specific Plan).
     •    Beaumont Unified School District, serving the eastern portion of the city (including the
          Summerwind Specific Plan).
There is currently (2013) only one public school in Calimesa, Mesa View Middle School (photo left),
which opened in late August 2009. Originally intended to be used as a second high school, Mesa View
                                                                  is currently planned to remain a middle school
                                                                  until growth necessitates a change.
                                                                  Calimesa Elementary School is located in
                                                                  Yucaipa, and high school students from Calimesa
                                                                  attend either Yucaipa High School or Beaumont
                                                                  High School.
                                                                  Calimesa's only currently operating elementary
                                                                  school—and only currently operating high
                                                                  school—is the private K-12 Mesa Grande
                                                                  Academy, which is owned by the Seventh-day
                                                                  Adventist Church.
Mesa View Middle School is, as of 2013, the only public school in
Calimesa.
REGULATED PROGRAMS, PLANS, AND REGULATIONS
  ENGINEERING/PUBLIC WORKS
  Many plans and programs enacted through federal, state, and local legislation relate directly to the
  management and operation of community services and infrastructure. These plans and programs are
  administered by various state, regional, and local agencies. Salient plans and regulations include:
  WATER QUALITY CONTROL PLANS
  The Water Quality Control Plan for the Santa Ana River Basin (Basin Plan) adopted by the Santa Ana
  Regional Water Quality Control Board (RWQCB) establishes water quality standards for the ground and
                           CALIMESA GENERAL PLAN AUGUST 2014                                            4-5

                                 CHAPTER 4: INFRASTRUCTURE
                                         AND PUBLIC SERVICES
surface waters of the region. The RWQCB is responsible for issuing National Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System (NPDES) waste discharge permits to protect the beneficial uses of the state's
waters. The City is a co-permittee with the RCFCWCD, the County of Riverside, and the incorporated
cities of Riverside County within the Santa Ana Region (Region 8) in the Area-Wide Urban Runoff
Management Program (Municipal NPDES Permit.) This permit regulates the discharge of pollutants in
urban runoff from the City's municipal separate storm sewer system by requiring the City to develop
programs and policies, including best management practices (BMPs) to achieve water quality
standards. The Riverside County Water Quality Management Plan (WQMP) for Urban Runoff was
developed in compliance with the Municipal NPDES Permit to address post-construction urban runoff
from new development. The WQMP provides guidelines for project-specific BMPs to minimize the
impact of urban runoff. Each project-specific WQMP is reviewed and approved by the appropriate co-
permitttee.
URBAN WATER MANAGEMENT PLANS
Water districts use a variety of planning processes to plan for the provision of water within their
service areas. Urban water management plans are typically used to estimate future demand for water
and required improvements to meet future need. Sources of water and other issues that affect the
provision of water within the service area are addressed in these plans. Pursuant to state law, each of
the two water districts serving the City of Calimesa and its service/planning area (Yucaipa Valley
Water District and South Mesa Water Company) prepare urban water management plans.
RIVERSIDE COUNTY FLOOD CONTROL AND WATER CONSERVATION
DISTRICT
The RCFCWCD is the regional flood management authority for the western part of Riverside County.
The City of Calimesa's drainage systems work in concert with the Riverside County Flood Control
District. All facilities are owned and maintained by the Riverside County Flood Control District.
NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE AND ELIMINATION SYSTEM
Calimesa is under the jurisdiction of the Santa Ana RWQCB, which implements the NPDES permit for
the Santa Ana River watershed area. The NPDES permit, a requirement under the Clean Water Act,
addresses pollution from urban runoff that affects the water quality of receiving waters (such as
streams and lakes). Requirements include incorporating BMPs to reduce runoff from construction and
current uses, reporting any violations to the RWQCB, and providing education regarding the potential
negative water quality impacts of urban runoff.
     4-6                                   CALIMESA GENERAL PLAN AUGUST 2014
      CHAPTER 4: INFRASTRUCTURE
                AND PUBLIC SERVICES
KEY ISSUES
  •   Maintain adequate levels of public infrastructure and services.
  •   Maintain levels of service for public safety protection, including police and fire services.
  •   Work with other agencies, including the school districts, that provide service to Calimesa
      residents, to help them implement their plans and provide adequate levels of service to the
      city’s residents and businesses.
INFRASTRUCTURE AND PUBLIC SERVICES GOALS
GOAL IPS-1:           Ensure that existing and future land uses have an adequate water supply
                      system.
GOAL IPS-2:           Ensure that existing and future land uses have a safe and efficient
                      wastewater collection, treatment, and disposal system.
GOAL IPS-3:           Ensure that adequate flood control facilities are provided prior to or
                      concurrent with development.
GOAL IPS-4:           Ensure adequate service from utility purveyors of natural gas, electricity,
                      and communication services.
GOAL IPS-5:           Plan and provide adequate infrastructure for all new development, including
                      but not limited to, integrated infrastructure planning, financing, and
                      implementation.
GOAL IPS-6:           Plan for the convenient location and adequate size of public facilities.
GOAL IPS-7:           Maintain a level of public safety service that will ensure the safety of
                      residents and businesses.
GOAL IPS-8:           Maintain a Capital Improvement Plan and impact fee program that will
                      provide the necessary services and facilities to meet the needs of the city.
                     CALIMESA GENERAL PLAN AUGUST 2014                                          4-7

                                 CHAPTER 4: INFRASTRUCTURE
                                           AND PUBLIC SERVICES
INFRASTRUCTURE AND PUBLIC SERVICES POLICIES
Policies are provided in this chapter in the following areas:
    •   Water Service – Page 4-8
    •   Sewer Service – Page 4-9
    •   Solid Waste Disposal – Page 4-9
    •   Storm Drainage – Page 4-10
    •   Utilities – Page 4-11
    •   Infrastructure – Page 4-11
    •   Public Services – Page 4-12
    •   Police Protection – Page 4-12
    •   Fire Protection – Page 4-13
    •   School Services – Page 4-14
Note to the Reader: The policies and action items designated with (MM) provide mitigation for impacts
identified through the Environmental Impact Report analysis prepared for this General Plan.
  WATER SERVICE
POLICY IPS-1:           The City will work with water providers and developers to ensure that water
                        supply and delivery systems are capable of meeting normal and emergency
                        needs. (MM)
                        ACTION ITEM IPS-1.1:          Continue to coordinate capital improvements with
                        the Yucaipa Valley Water District and the South Mesa Water Company. (MM)
                        ACTION ITEM IPS-1.2:          Require that new development is constructed with
                        adequate water facilities consisting of potable and nonpotable systems. (MM)
                        ACTION ITEM IPS-1.3:          Require that all water systems be capable of
                        meeting normal and emergency demands. (MM)
                        ACTION ITEM IPS-1.4:          Ensure that city facilities are designed and operated
                        in adherence with water conservation practices and programs. (MM)
       4-8                                   CALIMESA GENERAL PLAN AUGUST 2014

      CHAPTER 4: INFRASTRUCTURE
              AND PUBLIC SERVICES
 SEWER SERVICE
POLICY IPS-2:   Groundwater supplies should be protected from septic system
                contamination. The City will encourage existing development to connect to
                the public sewer system. (MM)
                ACTION ITEM IPS-2.1:           Coordinate with the Yucaipa Valley Water District to
                ensure that new development provides for the adequate collection, treatment,
                and disposal of wastewater and does not exceed wastewater treatment capacity.
                (MM)
                ACTION ITEM IPS-2.2:           All new residential development with a lot size of
                less than 1 acre shall be required to connect to the public sewer system. (MM)
                ACTION ITEM IPS-2.3:           Development on a lot size greater than 1 acre may
                be required to connect to the public sewer system. (MM)
                ACTION ITEM IPS-2.4:           Require    that    development      participate   in
                improvements to the Yucaipa Valley Water District sewage collection system and
                subregional treatment plant system through sewer connection fees, construction,
                and improvement of sewer system facilities. (MM)
 SOLID WASTE DISPOSAL
POLICY IPS-3:   Continue to meet the goals of the County Solid Waste Management Plan.
                (MM)
                ACTION ITEM IPS-3.1:           Coordinate with the local hauler to develop public
                information programs to promote greater community awareness and
                involvement in waste reduction and recycling. (MM)
                ACTION ITEM IPS-3.2:           Coordinate with the local hauler to meet current
                diversion requirements through source reduction, recycling, and composting.
                (MM)
                ACTION ITEM IPS-3.3:           Plan for and support citywide cleanup days. (MM)
                CALIMESA GENERAL PLAN AUGUST 2014                                        4-9
                                 CHAPTER 4: INFRASTRUCTURE
                                        AND PUBLIC SERVICES
  STORM DRAINAGE
POLICY IPS-4:         Require the designation, preservation, maintenance, and acquisition of land
                      and improvements necessary for flood control facilities, in accordance with
                      the City’s Master Flood Control and Drainage Plan. (MM)
                      ACTION ITEM IPS-4.1:         New development shall bear the appropriate cost of
                      constructing and maintaining new facilities and upgrades to existing drainage
                      facilities to accommodate the additional storm runoff caused by the
                      development. (MM)
                      ACTION ITEM IPS-4.2:         Adequate storm drain and flood control facilities
                      shall be operational prior to the issuance of certificates of occupancy for new
                      development. (MM)
                      ACTION ITEM IPS-4.3:         Require street crossings of significant drainage
                      courses to be designed for a 25-year frequency storm. (MM)
                      ACTION ITEM IPS-4.4:         Where possible, preserve drainage courses in their
                      natural condition to provide adequate safety and protection of residents and
                      property. (MM)
                      ACTION ITEM IPS-4.5:         Development within the 100-year floodplain, as
                      designated by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA), shall be
                      consistent with the requirements of FEMA. (MM)
Note to the Reader: Please refer to the Safety Chapter of this General Plan for additional policies
related to storm drainage and flooding.
      4-10                                 CALIMESA GENERAL PLAN AUGUST 2014

      CHAPTER 4: INFRASTRUCTURE
              AND PUBLIC SERVICES
 UTILITIES
POLICY IPS-5:   The City will work with service providers to ensure adequate, and
                aesthetically pleasing, utility structures.
                ACTION ITEM IPS-5.1:          All new development shall connect to natural gas if
                available.
                ACTION ITEM IPS-5.2:          All new utilities shall be underground.
                ACTION ITEM IPS-5.3:          Actively      encourage       and    support    the
                undergrounding of existing overhead utility lines.
                ACTION ITEM IPS-5.4:          Coordinate with all utility providers before paving
                or reconstructing streets in order to minimize the need to cut into the new
                street.
 INFRASTRUCTURE
POLICY IPS-6:   The City will coordinate the provision of all public utilities and services to
                ensure a consistent, complete, and efficient system of service to all
                residents.
                ACTION ITEM IPS-6.1:          New development projects shall provide for the
                extension of infrastructure to serve the development. (MM)
                ACTION ITEM IPS-6.2:          New development shall pay its “fair share” for the
                construction and maintenance of infrastructure by providing appropriate
                dedication, improvements, and/or assessment districts. (MM)
POLICY IPS-7:   The City will encourage other agencies and districts responsible for
                infrastructure in the city to involve Calimesa in the preparation of their
                capital improvement plans.
                CALIMESA GENERAL PLAN AUGUST 2014                                      4-11

                          CHAPTER 4: INFRASTRUCTURE
                                  AND PUBLIC SERVICES
 PUBLIC SERVICES
POLICY IPS-8:  The City will reserve future sites for public facilities through purchase,
               dedication, donation, negotiation, or a combination of these procedures.
               ACTION ITEM IPS-8.1:          Require development to pay public service impact
               fees commensurate with proposed development. (MM)
               ACTION ITEM IPS-8.2:          Identify a site for a main library that meets Library
               Commission standards within walking distance of residents and/or public
               transportation.
               ACTION ITEM IPS-8.3:          Prepare and adopt a library master plan that
               specifies site and building needs and size to meet citizen needs.
               ACTION ITEM IPS-8.4:          Explore joint use libraries with the area school
               districts.
 POLICE PROTECTION
POLICY IPS-9:  The City supports a level of police protection that will allow adequate levels
               of personnel and equipment to respond to routine incidents and to larger
               events. (MM)
POLICY IPS-10: Continue to support coordination with other law enforcement agencies in
               crime prevention efforts. (MM)
               ACTION ITEM IPS-10.1:         Review development proposals with the Sheriff’s
               Department to ensure that police services can adequately protect the increase in
               residents or businesses. (MM)
               ACTION ITEM IPS-10.2:         Support the Citizens on Patrol and Neighborhood
               Watch programs to encourage cooperation between citizens and police. (MM)
     4-12                            CALIMESA GENERAL PLAN AUGUST 2014

      CHAPTER 4: INFRASTRUCTURE
               AND PUBLIC SERVICES
 FIRE PROTECTION
POLICY IPS-11:   The City supports a level of fire protection that will allow adequate levels of
                 personnel and equipment to respond to routine incidents and to larger
                 events. (MM)
POLICY IPS-12:   Provide for the expansion and/or addition of protection facilities,
                 equipment, and personnel, as necessary to meet future demand. (MM)
                 ACTION ITEM IPS-12.1:           Encourage the Riverside County Fire Department in
                 cooperation with the local water companies to conduct annual fire flow tests,
                 especially in areas of high fire hazard. (MM)
                 ACTION ITEM IPS-12.2:           Coordinate    with   neighboring    and     regional
                 providers to ensure that Fire Department mutual aid response agreements are
                 adequate. (MM)
POLICY IPS-13:   The City supports and will encourage efforts to create a fire-safe built and
                 natural environment, consistent where appropriate with efforts to maintain
                 the natural habitat of Calimesa. (MM)
                 ACTION ITEM IPS-13.1:           Provide plans for all proposed development
                 projects to the Fire Department for review and comment during the approval
                 process. (MM)
                 ACTION ITEM IPS-13.2:           Encourage     residents    with   existing     wood
                 shingle/unrated roofing materials to upgrade to fire-resistant construction,
                 including fire-resistant eaves and awnings. (MM)
                 ACTION ITEM IPS-13.3:           Continue to enforce a Class A Roofing Ordinance
                 for residential development and for commercial buildings. (MM)
                 ACTION ITEM IPS-13.4:           Encourage     the    planting   of    fire-resistant
                 landscaping. (MM)
                 ACTION ITEM IPS-13.5:           Ensure that new or existing private access roads
                 meet City standards with regard to access for fire and emergency vehicles. (MM)
                 ACTION ITEM IPS-13.6:           Create (and update as necessary) a City Disaster
                 Response Plan for emergency response and recovery from natural and urban
                 disasters, especially from fires, flooding, and earthquakes. (MM)
                 CALIMESA GENERAL PLAN AUGUST 2014                                       4-13
                        CHAPTER 4: INFRASTRUCTURE
                                 AND PUBLIC SERVICES
POLICY IPS-14: Fire management plans shall be required for all new development in areas
               subject to wildfire. (MM)
 SCHOOL SERVICES
POLICY IPS-15: The City will coordinate with the school districts to inform them of
               proposed development projects and assist the districts in the planning and
               implementation of school capacity. (MM)
               ACTION ITEM IPS-15.1:         The City will continue to collect school fees as
               required by each school district, and will work with the school districts to ensure
               adequate opportunity for the school districts to expand their facilities as
               necessary to support future growth. (MM)
POLICY IPS-16: The City supports the concept of one school district for all Calimesa
               students. (MM)
     4-14                            CALIMESA GENERAL PLAN AUGUST 2014
                  CHAPTER 5: HOUSING
INTRODUCTION
                                                  Housing is one of the seven state-mandated topics
                                                  which must be addressed in the General Plan. It is the
                                                  only element that is statutorily required to be updated
                                                  and certified by the California Department of Housing
                                                  and Community Development (HCD). The planning
                                                  period for this Housing Chapter (Element) is October 15,
                                                  2013, to October 15, 2021.
                                                  State housing element law, enacted in 1969, recognizes
                                                  the vital role of local governments play in the supply
                                                  and affordability of housing. The law acknowledges that
                                                  in order for the private market to adequately address
                                                  housing needs and demand, local governments must
adopt land use plans and regulatory systems which provide opportunities for, and do not unduly
constrain, housing development. As a result, housing policy in California rests largely upon the
effective implementation of local general plans and, in particular, housing elements.
State law requires that each housing element include the following:
         •   A description of public participation in the update process;
         •   A review of accomplishments in achieving the goals, policies, and programs outlined in the
             previous Housing Element;
         •   An assessment of housing needs including affordability, the condition of the city’s housing
             stock, and special housing needs;
         •   An inventory of resources available for housing development and improvement, and a
             review of governmental, non-governmental, and infrastructure constraints to housing
             development; and
         •   Goals, policies, and programs to address housing needs and improve housing conditions for
             the current planning period.
Meeting the above listed requirements and achieving state certification is essential in maintaining
eligibility for state funding opportunities. In addition to achieving compliance with state law, this
Housing Chapter serves as an important opportunity to address identified needs and outline strategies
to improve the quality of living environments in Calimesa. Housing planning tools can encourage
housing options that meet the needs and preferences of a diverse population.
                        CALIMESA GENERAL PLAN AUGUST 2014                                       5-1

                                       CHAPTER 5: HOUSING
HOUSING NEEDS, OPPORTUNITIES, AND CONSTRAINTS
The Calimesa population has grown slowly over the past 20 years, at an average increase of 1
percent per year; however, the Southern California Association of Governments (SCAG) projects that
Calimesa will experience substantial growth in the coming years from a population of 7,879 in 2010
to 25,800 in 2035, a projected average annual increase of 15%.
Calimesa has a large senior population, with a median age that is well above the state and regional
median and a smaller average household size. The special housing needs of this population will
continue to be an important planning consideration.
Home prices in Calimesa are among the most affordable in Riverside County. The median home price
of $165,000 (as of 2012) is well below the median prices in neighboring communities and Riverside
County as a whole. Homes offered at market-rate prices are affordable to Calimesa households at a
wide range of income levels.
The City’s land use policies provide for a range of housing types in a range of densities, including
rural homes on lots of 10 or more acres and downtown infill multi-family development at up to 30
units per acre. City permits and procedures generally do not constrain housing development, and the
City completed Zoning Code updates in December 2013 to bring Calimesa into compliance with state
law relating to reasonable accommodations for persons with disabilities, emergency shelters, and
transitional and supportive housing facilities.
REGIONAL HOUSING NEEDS ALLOCATION
California law requires HCD to project statewide housing needs and allocate those needs to regional
planning organizations. For Calimesa, the regional agency is the Southern California Association of
Governments. SCAG allocates housing production goals to jurisdictions in the region based on their
projected share of the region’s growth, the state of the local housing market and vacancies, and the
jurisdiction’s housing replacement needs. Demonstrating the City’s ability to accommodate
residential development to meet the Regional Housing Needs Allocation (RHNA) is an objective of the
Housing Chapter update.
The projected housing needs in the RHNA are categorized by income levels (very low, low, moderate,
and above moderate income) established by the US Department of Housing and Urban Development
(HUD). According to the 2013 to 2021 RHNA, Calimesa will need to accommodate a total of 2,341
units, including 543 very low-income, 383 low-income, 433 moderate-income, and 982 above
moderate-income housing units.
     5-2                                  CALIMESA GENERAL PLAN AUGUST 2014

                CHAPTER 5: HOUSING
  As outlined in the Housing Resources and Opportunities section of the Housing Element Background
  Report, the City is able to accommodate the RHNA based on vacant land available for residential
  development. An inventory of vacant land showed realistic potential for 8,624 new units, 1,768 of
  which are located on higher-density parcels appropriate for housing that is affordable to lower-
  income households. The inventory includes infill sites in the downtown as well as planned
  development in the Summerwind Ranch and Mesa Verde Estates Specific Plan areas.
  HOUSING STRATEGY
  The goals, policies, and action items outline the City’s approach to meeting identified housing needs
  for the current planning period. Policies and action items were developed based on accomplishments
  from the 2006–2013 Housing Element, changes to state law, and input from the community. Each
  action item identifies a time frame and the department responsible for implementation, as well as a
  potential funding source.
  The slowed economy and housing market, coupled with the dissolution of the Redevelopment
  Agency, resulted in limited action item implementation during the 2006 to 2013 planning period.
  However, the City was successful in implementing the Housing Rehabilitation Program (when funding
  was available), maintaining cooperation with local and regional agencies, and pursuing grant funding
  opportunities. These action items will be continued for the 2013 to 2021 planning period.
GENERAL PLAN CONSISTENCY
The California Government Code requires internal consistency among the various chapters (or
“elements”) of a general plan. Section 65300.5 of the Government Code states that the general plan
and the parts thereof shall comprise an integrated and internally consistent and compatible statement
of policies.
The land use allocation contained in the Land Use Chapter of this General Plan is supportive of the
policies and actions set forth herein and will provide adequate sites to accommodate projected new
housing construction. Additionally, the Circulation Chapter establishes a transportation system that will
provide adequate access to employment centers, schools, shopping areas, and other destinations for
both existing and future residents, while other elements of this General Plan relate to environmental
quality, the preservation and conservation of natural resources, and public health and safety. As such,
the various policies and programs recommended throughout the General Plan were taken into account
during the preparation of this Housing Chapter.
In order to maintain internal consistency in the General Plan, the housing site inventory, residential
buildout projections, and programs contained in this chapter will be revised, as appropriate, in
response to any future amendments to the Land Use Chapter or other chapters of this General Plan.
                       CALIMESA GENERAL PLAN AUGUST 2014                                      5-3

                                        CHAPTER 5: HOUSING
HOUSING PROGRAM
  HOUSING MAINTENANCE AND PRESERVATION
GOAL H-1: Encourage the improvement, maintenance, and rehabilitation of the existing housing
stock.
POLICY H-1.1:      Support    and     provide   incentives  for   the  improvement,     maintenance,
                   conservation, and rehabilitation of existing residential units, particularly
                   those affordable to low- and moderate-income households.
                   Action H-1.1.1 The City will continue to enforce the energy conservation
                   requirements of the California Building Standards of the International Building
                   Code and Title 24 of the California Administrative Code. The City will also
                   commence enforcement of the new California Green Building Standards, which
                   become effective on January 1, 2011. Energy conservation features will be
                   incorporated into all housing units constructed between 2013 and 2021.
                   Aside from energy conservation through the design and construction of new
                   residences, the City will encourage energy conservation through the retrofit of
                   existing homes by continuing to allow energy efficiency improvements as an
                   eligible activity under its Housing Rehabilitation Program initiated in 2005. On a
                   more comprehensive scale, the City will continue to address energy conservation
                   and sustainability through its land use planning for the community. Two
                   measures of particular relevance are the continued adherence to the Calimesa
                   Vision, which is the framework that guides the community’s future growth and
                   development and is discussed under the Opportunities for Energy Conservation
                   section of the Housing Element Background Report, and in the Downtown Village
                   Commercial zone, which allows residential uses in a mixed-use configuration and
                   at densities of up to 30 dwelling units per acre.
                   Agency:          Building  and   Safety  Department,    Community     Development
                   Department
                   Time Frame: 2013–2021
                   Funding:         General Fund
      5-4                                 CALIMESA GENERAL PLAN AUGUST 2014

CHAPTER 5: HOUSING
  Action H-1.1.2 The City will seek out and encourage nonprofit organizations to
  sponsor affordable housing projects in the city. This may include agencies
  assisting lower-income households, senior citizens, disabled persons,
  developmentally disabled persons, and other persons with special housing
  needs. The City will direct interested agencies/sponsors to potential sites and
  collaborate with them on applications for state and federal funding. In addition
  to submitting its own applications for funding to HCD, the City will also support
  nonprofit housing developers in applying to HCD for the Community-Based
  Housing Development Organization (CHDO) set aside of HOME funds, which is
  20 percent of the annual statewide allocation of HOME funds. In providing such
  support, the City will give priority to nonprofit developers pursuing projects that
  include extremely low-income units.
  Agency:        Community Development Department
  Time Frame: 2013–2021
  Funding:       General Fund
  Action H-1.1.3 The City will continue to require that new housing development
  comply with state and federal standards for access for the disabled and enforce
  the provisions of the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA). This program will
  lead to the provision of access for persons with disabilities, including persons
  with developmental disabilities, to dwelling units constructed during the
  planning period.
  Agency:        Community      Development     Department,    Building  and   Safety
  Department
  Time Frame: 2013–2021
  Funding:       General Fund
  Action H-1.1.4 The City will continue to allow accessibility improvements for
  homes occupied by disabled persons as an eligible activity under its Housing
  Rehabilitation Program. The City will continue to offer such assistance as funds
  permit.
  Agency:        Community Development Department
  CALIMESA GENERAL PLAN AUGUST 2014                                       5-5

                                 CHAPTER 5: HOUSING
              Time Frame: 2013–2021
              Funding:       CDBG, HOME, CalHome
              Action H-1.1.5 In compliance with applicable federal and state laws, the City
              continues to implement its reasonable accommodation ordinance. This
              ordinance provides persons with disabilities with a procedure to request
              reasonable accommodation to housing under the Federal Fair Housing Act and
              the California Fair Employment and Housing Act in the application of the City’s
              zoning requirements and other land use regulations, policies, and procedures.
              Agency:        Community Development Department
              Time Frame: 2013–2021
              Funding:       General Fund
POLICY H-1.2: Encourage residential rehabilitation and continue to operate an owner-
              occupied rehabilitation program and consider the establishment of a rental
              rehabilitation program to preserve and conserve the city’s housing stock.
              Action H-1.2.1 Since 2005, the City has operated a Housing Rehabilitation
              Program using a combination of CDBG, HOME, and Redevelopment Agency LMI
              funds. This program provides financial assistance in the form of loans and/or
              grants for the rehabilitation of single-family homes that are occupied by lower-
              income homeowners. In addition to basic structural, plumbing, and electrical
              repairs, energy efficiency and accessibility improvements are eligible for
              financing through the program. The City received a HOME grant in 2013 and will
              use those funds to continue the single-family rehabilitation program. The City
              will also explore the possibility of offering rehabilitation assistance for rental
              units and will continue to apply for grant funding for the continued operation of
              the program in response to Notices of Funding Availability issued by HCD.
              Agency:        Community Development Department
              Time Frame: 2013–2021
              Funding:       CDBG funds, HOME funds, CalHome funds
     5-6                           CALIMESA GENERAL PLAN AUGUST 2014

              CHAPTER 5: HOUSING
POLICY H-1.3:   Encourage maintenance and rehabilitation to maintain the integrity of
                mobile home parks.
                Action H-1.3.1      Eight mobile home parks in Calimesa are subject to rent
                control under the City’s Mobile Home Rent Stabilization Ordinance. The City will
                continue to implement the ordinance and maintain the established Mobile Home
                Rent Stabilization Board to preserve these developments as affordable housing
                alternatives in the city and address the rent control problems and grievances of
                mobile home owners and tenants.
                Agency:         Mobile Home Rent Stabilization Board
                Time Frame: 2013–2021
                Funding:        General Fund
POLICY H-1.4:   Participate in state and federal housing programs designed to improve and
                increase the city’s housing stock.
                Action H-1.4.1 The City will continue proactive code enforcement of nuisances
                such as inoperable vehicles, unsightly condition of property, substandard units,
                and illegal garage conversions through the enforcement of its Administrative
                Citation Ordinance adopted in 2008. It will identify substandard dwelling units
                and encourage rehabilitation through the provision of technical support and
                incentives, such as streamlined permit processing, variances to development
                standards on a case-by-case basis (when legally justified), and waiver of fees or
                fines if rehabilitation is undertaken within short order, etc. Also, the City will
                actively work toward the rehabilitation of structures that do not meet current
                code requirements by more closely coordinating code enforcement and housing
                rehabilitation program activities as a means of enabling households who could
                not otherwise afford to do so to correct code violations.
                Agency:         Community Development Department
                Time Frame: The City was awarded a CDBG PTG grant to conduct a housing
                                condition survey during the summer of 2013.
                Funding:        General Fund, CDBG
                CALIMESA GENERAL PLAN AUGUST 2014                                      5-7

                                          CHAPTER 5: HOUSING
                       Action H-1.4.2 The City will provide relocation assistance to all persons
                       displaced by publicly assisted projects, including rehabilitation and code
                       enforcement projects that lead to the displacement of households.
                       Agency:         Community Development Department, City Manager’s Office
                       Time Frame: 2013–2021
                       Funding:        General Fund
  FAIR HOUSING
GOAL H-2: Promote housing access and equal opportunity for all persons regardless of race,
religion, sex, marital status, ancestry, national origin, color, or disability.
POLICY H-2.1:          Enforce fair housing laws and encourage the use of fair housing counsel and
                       referral services.
                       Action H-2.1.1 The City will continue to rely on the Fair Housing Council of
                       Riverside County to resolve resident complaints and tenant/landlord disputes.
                       The City will inform the public of the availability of this service through the City
                       newsletter and informational brochures/flyers that are placed at the front
                       counters in City Hall and the Senior Center, and City employees will be instructed
                       to refer relevant questions or complaints to the Fair Housing Council.
                       Agency:         Community Development Department, Community                 Services
                                       Department, Fair Housing Council of Riverside County
                       Time Frame: 2013–2021
                       Funding:        General Fund
       5-8                                   CALIMESA GENERAL PLAN AUGUST 2014

              CHAPTER 5: HOUSING
POLICY H-2.2:   Coordinate efforts with other agencies to serve extremely low-income
                households,     persons    with    disabilities, persons  with   developmental
                disabilities, the homeless, the elderly, single-parent households, and other
                residents with special housing needs.
                Action H-2.2.1 The City will continue to provide residents with information
                regarding the availability of the Section 8 Housing Choice Voucher Program that
                is administered by the Riverside County Housing Authority. This program can
                directly benefit overpaying households in the city by providing rental assistance
                payments.
                Agency:         Community Services      Department, Riverside  County Housing
                                Authority
                Time Frame: 2013–2021
                Funding:        General Fund, Section 8 Housing Choice Vouchers
                Action H-2.2.2 Continue to comply with state law regarding emergency
                shelters, transitional and supportive housing, community care facilities for 7 or
                more persons, and single-room occupancy units (SROs).
                Agency:         Community Development Department
                Time Frame: 2013–2021
                Funding:        General Fund
                CALIMESA GENERAL PLAN AUGUST 2014                                     5-9

                        CHAPTER 5: HOUSING
     Action H-2.2.3 The City will continue to permit emergency shelters in the
     Commercial Community (C-C) zone without a Conditional Use Permit or other
     discretionary action, and subject only to the development standards that apply to
     the other permitted uses in the C-C zone and the City’s specific standards for
     emergency shelters. There are sites (approximately 18 acres of vacant land)
     suitable for the establishment of an emergency shelter in the C-C zone, which
     are accessible to services and facilities, and existing buildings within the zone
     that are capable of being converted to use as an emergency shelter. The
     proximity to essential services is critical since there are no fixed transit routes in
     Calimesa.
     Agency:        Community Development Department
     Time Frame: 2013–2021
     Funding:       General Fund
     Action H-2.2.4 In keeping with state law and as required in the City Zoning
     Code (updated December 2013), transitional and supportive housing will be
     considered residential uses, subject only to those restrictions that apply to other
     residential uses of the same type in the same zone.
     Agency:        Community Development Department
     Time Frame: 2013–2021
     Funding:       General Fund
5-10                       CALIMESA GENERAL PLAN AUGUST 2014

              CHAPTER 5: HOUSING
                Action H-2.2.5 The City will continue to recognize and allow community care
                facilities for 7 or more persons as conditionally permitted uses in the RM
                (Residential Medium) and RH (Residential High) zones and allow single-room
                occupancy units (SROs) in the CC (Commercial Community) and CR (Commercial
                Regional) zones through a similar use determination (comparable to
                motels/hotels).
                Agency:         Community Development Department
                Time Frame: 2013–2021
                Funding:        General Fund
POLICY H-2.3:   Promote equal access and housing opportunities through the provision of
                consumer information, assistance and protection, and citizen involvement in
                the design and implementation of housing programs.
                Action H-2.3.1 The City will continue to use the City newsletter and brochures
                to advertise or inform residents of services and programs that are made
                available, including housing regulations, rehabilitation programs, nearby service
                agencies, crisis hotlines, energy conservation, availability of low- and moderate-
                income housing units, and other such services. The City’s Senior Center currently
                provides many of the information and referral services needed by residents.
                Agency:         Community Services Department
                Time Frame: 2013–2021
                Funding:        General Fund
                CALIMESA GENERAL PLAN AUGUST 2014                                       5-11

                                  CHAPTER 5: HOUSING
              Action H-2.3.2 The City will maintain a list of available service and referral
              agencies that serve low-income households, disabled, elderly, homeless, and
              other special needs groups. It will make the list available at City Hall, the Senior
              Center, the library, and other public places for easy access to interested persons.
              Agency:          Community Services Department
              Time Frame: 2013–2021
              Funding:         General Fund
POLICY H-2.4: Encourage citizen participation in the development and implementation of
              housing programs.
              Action H-2.4.1 The City will continue to encourage community participation in
              all City programming. The City will continue to encourage residents to attend
              City Council and Planning Commission meetings through publicity practices
              including posting information on scheduled public hearings at City Hall, the
              Senior Center, and the library at least 10 days prior to hearing dates, and
              advertising in the local newspaper and City newsletter. The City will continue to
              publish a City newsletter and community flyers to inform residents of ongoing
              activities and programs, including updates to the Housing Chapter. Continued
              publicity will allow the City to receive more input regarding programs and better
              tailor them to meet the needs of residents. Public hearings will be held prior to
              adoption of this updated element.
              Action H-2.4.2
              Agency:          Community Development Department
              Time Frame: 2013–2021
              Funding:        General Fund
     5-12                            CALIMESA GENERAL PLAN AUGUST 2014

              CHAPTER 5: HOUSING
  HOUSING PRODUCTION
GOAL H-3: The City will provide opportunities for the development of new housing units to meet
the housing needs of all economic segments of the population while preserving the natural
environment and unique existing character and physical attributes of the community.
POLICY H-3.1:       Encourage a variety of housing types and densities, each appropriately
                    located    with  reference to topography, traffic         circulation, community
                    facilities, and aesthetic considerations.
                    Action H-3.1.1 The City will continue to work with Riverside County on the
                    provision of adequate infrastructure and public services. The City will coordinate
                    County and City capital improvement projects, including setting priorities for
                    infrastructure and public facility projects through the City's Capital Improvement
                    Program. The City will coordinate with state and regional agencies and area
                    planning districts (e.g., Southern California Association of Governments, Western
                    Riverside Council of Governments, and Regional Conservation Authority) to
                    address planning and environmental issues. The City will continue to attend
                    monthly Joint Issue Meetings with these agencies at which issues of area-wide
                    concern or importance are discussed.
                    Agency:         Community Development Department, Engineering Department,
                                    City Manager’s Office
                    Time Frame: 2013–2021
                    Funding:        General Fund
POLICY H-3.2:       Encourage development of a variety of housing types affordable to
                    households at all economic levels, including townhouses, apartments,
                    single-family dwellings, and manufactured homes.
                    Action H-3.2.1 The City Council adopted an inclusionary zoning ordinance in
                    May 2011 that applies to new for-sale, single-family residential development on a
                    citywide basis. The ordinance applies to developments containing 10 or more
                    units and requires that 10 percent of the proposed dwelling units be affordable
                    to very low-income households and 5 percent of the proposed dwelling units be
                    affordable to low-income households. In 2012, the City Council suspended the
                   CALIMESA GENERAL PLAN AUGUST 2014                                         5-13

                        CHAPTER 5: HOUSING
     inclusionary program due to the slowed economy. The City Council will consider
     reinstating the inclusionary program in January 2017.
     Agency:        Community Development Department
     Time Frame: January 2017
     Funding:       General Fund
     Action H-3.2.2 The City will continue to allow second units on single-family
     lots developed with an existing residence and subject to a minimum lot size.
     This creates a potential for additional units on most lots in the R-1 zone and
     provides opportunities for affordable housing. The City ministerially permits
     second units on single-family zoned lots and requires that the primary residence
     on a lot containing a second unit be owner occupied.
     Agency:        Community Development Department
     Time Frame: 2013–2021
     Funding:       General Fund
     Action H-3.2.3 The City will encourage residential development in its mixed-
     use zones by allowing administrative processing of lot consolidation requests
     and providing incentives for the consolidation of lots, assisting interested
     developers with site identification and entitlement processing, offering fee
     waivers and deferrals for affordable housing projects, offering flexibility in the
     application of development standards for mixed-use projects that include
     affordable housing units, and providing financial assistance for mixed-use
     affordable housing projects to the extent possible.
     Agency:        Community Development Department
     Time Frame: 2013–2021
     Funding:       General Fund, CDBG/HOME funds
5-14                       CALIMESA GENERAL PLAN AUGUST 2014

              CHAPTER 5: HOUSING
POLICY H-3.3:   Promote first-time homebuyer assistance programs to enable lower-income
                households to purchase housing in the city.
                Action H-3.3.1 The City will consider establishing a down-payment assistance
                program for first-time homebuyers in order to encourage a continued high rate
                of homeownership. The homebuyer assistance program could be capitalized
                using state/federal grants and could provide silent second mortgages (in the
                form of deferred payment loans) to assist first-time homebuyers in making
                required down payments.
                Agency:         Community Development Department, City Manager's Office
                Time Frame: 2013–2021; implementation is dependent on availability of funds
                                and/or the release of future HOME NOFAs by HCD
                Funding:        HOME funds
POLICY H-3.4:   Encourage the development of housing to meet the City's responsibilities
                with regard to regional housing needs.
                Action H-3.4.1 The City will periodically update the housing sites inventory
                and work with property owners and/or local developers to develop identified
                infill properties with single or multiple-family housing consistent with their
                zoning. The City will direct developers seeking potential project sites in Calimesa
                to locations currently served by adequate infrastructure and assist them in
                making contact with the property owners, help to guide them through the
                development review process, and provide them with the information needed for
                feasibility analyses and due diligence. The City will also consider offering
                incentives to encourage the utilization of infill lots, such as an infill density
                bonus or a reduction/waiver of Streets and Traffic and Drainage Facilities Impact
                Fees for infill projects involving the consolidation and coordinated development
                of multiple lots.
                Agency:         Community Development Department
                Time Frame: 2013–2021
                Funding:        General Fund
                CALIMESA GENERAL PLAN AUGUST 2014                                       5-15

                        CHAPTER 5: HOUSING
     Action H-3.4.2 The City will continue to work with responsible agencies and
     purveyors of utilities and infrastructure (such as the Yucaipa Valley Water
     District, South Mesa Water Company, and Yucaipa Calimesa School District) in
     monitoring the availability and service levels of public utilities and infrastructure
     (roads, water, sewer, storm drainage, gas, power, etc.) and services (police, fire
     protection, schools, government services, etc.). The City will continue to
     cumulatively assess the potential impacts from new development and require, as
     part of the development review package, that all new development provide an
     assessment to ensure that adequate infrastructure is available to serve the
     development. Otherwise, improvements and upgrades will be undertaken as part
     of the development or through facility fees to be paid prior to the occupancy of
     the dwelling units. The City will prioritize the need for capital improvements and
     increase public service levels, when necessary. The City consulted local water
     and sewer purveyors during the preparation of this element and will send the
     adopted element to them for their use in prioritizing service to housing units
     affordable to lower-income households in accordance with Section 65589.7 of
     the California Government Code.
     Agency:         Community Development, Engineering, Public Works, and Fire
                     Departments
     Time Frame: 2013–2021
     Funding:        General Fund and Development Impact Fees
     Action H-3.4.3 The City will facilitate land divisions, lot line adjustments, and
     Specific Plans to improve the feasibility of housing development on large sites
     and create appropriately sized parcels for affordable multi-family residential
     development. The City will work with property owners and developers to identify
     opportunities and will provide technical assistance and incentives for proposed
     development projects that include affordable housing on these sites, such as:
             •   Expediting the approval process for land divisions;
             •   Requiring only ministerial review of lot line adjustments;
             •   Deferring processing fees for land division applications; and
             •   Offering flexibility in the application of development standards for
                 affordable housing projects.
     Agency: Community Development Department
5-16                       CALIMESA GENERAL PLAN AUGUST 2014

              CHAPTER 5: HOUSING
                     Timeframe: Ongoing, 2013–2014
                     Funding: General Fund
  HOUSING OPPORTUNITIES
GOAL H-4: Improve housing opportunities through private investment and, when appropriate,
through public assistance.
POLICY H-4.1:        Encourage a variety of public and private efforts to provide affordable
                     housing opportunities for lower-income households, elderly households,
                     overcrowded households, large households, persons with disabilities,
                     persons with developmental disabilities, and single-headed households.
                     Action H-4.1.1 The City will pursue state and federal funds for the
                     construction of senior citizen housing, with priority given to projects that include
                     units affordable to extremely low-income households. This may include funds
                     provided under Section 202, HOME, and/or other applicable programs.
                     Agency:        Community Development Department
                     Time Frame: 2013–2021; periodically depending on the release of notices of
                                    funding availability (NOFAs), developer interest, and availability of
                                    staff to prepare funding applications
                     Funding:       General Fund, CDBG Planning/Technical Assistance Grants
                     Action H-4.1.2 City staff will stay informed of state and federal housing
                     programs that can provide financial assistance for the preservation and
                     development of affordable housing and disseminate information on such
                     programs to residents and prospective housing developers/sponsors. The City
                     has successfully applied for CDBG and HOME funds through HCD that have been
                     used to conduct housing-related studies and capitalize a local Housing
                     Rehabilitation Program. Because of its limited financial resources, the City will
                     continue to pursue grant funding from state and federal agencies for affordable
                     housing projects/programs in the city, particularly those that address the needs
                     of extremely low-income households.
                     Agency:        Community Development Department, City Manager’s Office
                    CALIMESA GENERAL PLAN AUGUST 2014                                         5-17

                                CHAPTER 5: HOUSING
              Time Frame: 2013–2021; periodically, depending on release of Notices of
                             Funding Availability by funding agencies, developer interest, and
                             availability of staff to prepare funding applications
              Funding:       General Fund, CDBG/HOME funds, other state/federal funding
                             programs
POLICY H-4.2: Manufactured dwellings (mobile homes) on permanent foundations shall be
              permitted in all residentially zoned areas of the city.
              Action H-4.2.1 The City will continue to allow manufactured homes, including
              mobile homes, on permanent foundations in all residential zones.
              Agency:        Community Development Department
              Time Frame: 2013–2021
              Funding:       General Fund
POLICY H-4.3: Reduce the costs associated with the development of special needs housing
              projects (affordable family housing, senior citizen housing, etc.) through
              density bonuses, waiver of fees, reduced development standards, expedited
              processing, or other incentives.
              Action H-4.3.1 The City amended its density bonus ordinance in December
              2010 in order to make it fully compliant with current state law. The City will
              continue to provide incentives and density bonuses under the density bonus
              ordinance for senior and other projects providing lower-income housing units.
              These incentives may include reduced parking standards, relief from setback,
              building height, open space, density, lot coverage, and other development
              standards, approval of mixed-use zoning for a project, expedited review, and the
              waiver of processing fees, among other measures.
              Agency:        Community Development Department
              Time Frame: 2013–2021
              Funding:       General Fund
     5-18                          CALIMESA GENERAL PLAN AUGUST 2014

CHAPTER 5: HOUSING
  Action H-4.3.2 The City will continue to periodically review its permit
  processing fees to verify that the costs associated with the review process are
  consistent with the services rendered. This fee review process provides a basis
  for determining whether fees have become a constraint to housing production,
  and at the same time allow the City to appropriately recoup costs associated with
  the review and processing of individual developments. The City will also continue
  to consider the reduction or waiver of permit processing fees for affordable and
  other special needs housing projects.
  Agency:        Community Development, Building and Safety, Engineering, and
                 Finance Departments, City Manager’s Office
  Time Frame: Periodically review fees
  Funding:       General Fund
  CALIMESA GENERAL PLAN AUGUST 2014                                     5-19

                                         CHAPTER 5: HOUSING
QUANTIFIED OBJECTIVES
The City's quantified housing objectives by income category for the 2013 to 2021 planning period are
shown in Table 1, below. The table compares the RHNA by income category to city projections for the
number of units that will be constructed, rehabilitated, and preserved.
The new construction objective is an estimate of new units that may be constructed during the
planning period based on the availability of land and development constraints as described in the
Background Report. This includes infill residential development as well as new units planned in the
Summerwind Ranch and Mesa Verde Estates Specific Plan areas. New unit construction will be initiated
and funded by private developers.
The rehabilitation objective refers to the number of existing units expected to be rehabilitated or
improved through the City’s Housing Rehabilitation Program. The Program is subject to the availability
of financing.
The preservation and conservation objectives refer to the preservation of the existing affordable
housing stock throughout the planning period. As discussed in the Background Report, there are no
deed-restricted affordable units in Calimesa (typically those built using federal assistance programs,
state or local bonds, density bonuses or other programs), however, the city has taken action to
maintain the affordability of mobile home parks in Calimesa. The preservation and conservation
estimates in Table 1 are based on the continued affordability of mobile home units under the City’s
Mobile Home Rent Stabilization Ordinance.
      5-20                                  CALIMESA GENERAL PLAN AUGUST 2014

                     CHAPTER 5: HOUSING
                          TABLE 1: QUANTIFIED OBJECTIVES, 2013-2021
                         RHNA (1) (housing                                      City Projections
                          production goal
 Income Category
                         established by the              New                                   Preservation/           Total
                                                                        Rehabilitation
                          State and SCAG)         Construction (2)                           Conservation (3)
Extremely Low                    271                      292                   35                  36                  363
Very Low                         272                      292                   35                  157                 484
Low                              383                      292                   10                  336                 638
Moderate                         433                     1,565                   0                  278               1,843
Above Moderate                   982                     1,565                   0                   0                1,565
Total                           2,341                   4,006                   80                 807                4,893
 (1) Southern California Association of Governments, Regional Housing Needs Allocation, 2012
 (2) Estimates that 50% of the planned units in the Summerwind Ranch and Mesa Verde Specific Plan areas will be constructed
 during the planning period and an additional 20 units will be constructed per year on other sites in the city, based on
 development trends from the previous planning period. The affordability level is based on allowable density. Units developed at
 densities of 20 or more are assumed to be affordable to lower-income households. Units developed at low and medium densities
 are assumed to be affordable to moderate and above moderate households. Refer to Section 4. Housing Opportunities and
 Resources of the Background Report for additional related discussion.
 (3) Number of households residing in 8 mobile home parks in Calimesa that are subject to rent control under the City's Mobile
 Home Rent Stabilization Ordinance.
                            CALIMESA GENERAL PLAN AUGUST 2014                                                     5-21
          CHAPTER 5: HOUSING
     This page intentionally left blank.
5-22        CALIMESA GENERAL PLAN AUGUST 2014
                   CHAPTER 6: RESOURCE
                              MANAGEMENT
 INTRODUCTION
                                                           Resource management addresses the protection
                                                           of natural resources (such as water, soils and
                                                           agriculture, vegetative, energy, and cultural
                                                           resources).    These     resources    are     typically
                                                           nonrenewable or limited and need to be preserved
                                                           and managed in order to be available for future
                                                           generations. By conserving resources, we prevent
                                                           degradation of the environment through pollution
                                                           or loss of productive capacity within our
                                                           environment. Conservation plays a key role in the
                                                           management of the natural resources that help
                                                           define a city’s identity, contribute to its economy,
                                                           and improve its quality of life.
Protection of Calimesa’s natural resources is an important This chapter provides for the conservation,
component of this General Plan.
                                                           development, management, and use of natural
                                                           resources, including water, wildlife, scenic, and
 other natural resources. Text identifies goals and policies that are meant to balance the City’s actions
 regarding land use, circulation, and other issues with their potential effects on resource conservation.
 BACKGROUND
 Calimesa is dedicated to remaining a community that honors its beautiful natural setting through open
 space preservation, wildlife corridors, and multi-use trail systems and to enriching the quality of life
 through sensitive planning. The City of Calimesa has identified important local resources and
 necessary preservation programs to prevent their destruction and to ensure that conservation efforts
 are consistent and equitable.
   SIGNIFICANT LANDFORMS AND HILLSIDES
   Calimesa is located between the San Gorgonio Pass and Yucaipa Valley along Interstate 10, a major
   regional transportation route connecting the Los Angeles Basin to the Coachella Valley and the inland
   desert areas. The route provides uninterrupted views of the surrounding rolling terrain and valley
   floors, as well as of the prominent but more distant San Bernardino and San Jacinto mountains.
   Interstate 10 also provides views of Yucaipa, Calimesa, Banning, and Beaumont.
                           CALIMESA GENERAL PLAN AUGUST 2014                                          6-1

                                       CHAPTER 6: RESOURCE
                                                 MANAGEMENT
Calimesa is characterized by foothills in its eastern areas and nearly level topography in its north and
central areas, gently sloping toward San Timoteo Creek in the southwestern areas of the city.
Vegetation consists of chaparral on north-facing slopes, sage-scrub on south-facing slopes, oak and
riparian woodland along canyon bottoms, and annual grassland in much of the city’s remaining area.
The pattern of ridges in the Calimesa area divides the area into distinctive visual units and serves as
a backdrop to many on-site views, providing panoramic vistas of the San Bernardino and San Jacinto
mountain ranges. Five important viewshed areas help create the visual character of Calimesa:
  •   San Timoteo Canyon
  •   Central Valleys
  •   Northern Plain
  •   Northern Plateaus and Ravines
  •   Northern Valley
These are described below.
  SAN TIMOTEO CANYON
  This visual unit is located in the southwestern
  portion of the city. Characterized by a long,
  broad corridor bounded by steep ridges
  bordering San Timoteo Creek, the canyon is
  generally enclosed by western ridgelines,
  although a small series of valleys provide
  viewsheds toward Interstate 10 and the San
  Bernardino Mountains. The San Timoteo Creek
  area is characterized by open grassland and
  riparian vegetation along the creek.
                                                                         San Timoteo Canyon
     6-2                                   CALIMESA GENERAL PLAN AUGUST 2014

             CHAPTER 6: RESOURCE
                      MANAGEMENT
CENTRAL VALLEYS
This is the largest area, consisting of four east–
west-trending valleys, and is separated by
distinct ridges stretching from a rolling or
gently sloping plateau adjacent to the Black
Mountain area on the eastern boundary of the
city. It continues across the city past Interstate
10 and extends to the San Timoteo Canyon
area. The ridges are divided by intermittent
stream channels draining into the canyons.
Garden Air Wash, the major stream channel,
drains the eastern Black Mountain area and
flows west through the Calimesa Golf and
Country Club.
                                                                      Central Valleys
Vegetation in the central valleys consists of open grassland and riparian vegetation along the valley
bottoms and flatter eastern slopes, and chaparral and sage-scrub along the steeper slopes and small
ravines. Views from the valley floor are oriented toward the ridgetops to the east and west.
NORTHERN PLAIN
Located in the northwest and northeast areas
of Calimesa, this is a commercial corridor,
with single-family residential developments to
the east and specific plan developments that
allow development and preserve open space.
The northern plain provides views of western
Calimesa and Riverside County areas,
overlooking a series of ridges and ravines.
                                                                      Northern Plain
                   CALIMESA GENERAL PLAN AUGUST 2014                                      6-3

                                         CHAPTER 6: RESOURCE
                                                  MANAGEMENT
  NORTHERN PLATEAUS AND RAVINES
  This area, located at the northwestern city
  boundary, comprises higher plateaus and
  scattered scrub-covered ravines that slope to
  the west in a pastoral setting. Higher elevations
  allow for panoramic views of the Yucaipa and
  San Jacinto valleys, the San Bernardino and San
  Jacinto mountains, and the surrounding
  communities.
                                                                      Northern Plateaus and Ravines
  NORTHERN VALLEY
  This area, adjacent to the northern plateaus and
  ravines, connects to San Timoteo Canyon
  southwest of Calimesa. The northern valley is
  similar in topography and vegetative types to
  the central valley, but is more enclosed.
                                                                             Northern Valley
WATER SUPPLY AND QUALITY
Water is fundamental to life. It is also crucial to the health and well-being of Calimesa. Water must be
available in sufficient amounts for daily living, irrigation, firefighting, and industrial uses, and must
be of a high enough quality to allow its use by residents (for drinking and other domestic uses),
farmers (for crops and livestock), and industry (for industrial processes that use water).
     6-4                                    CALIMESA GENERAL PLAN AUGUST 2014
              CHAPTER 6: RESOURCE
                        MANAGEMENT
  WATER QUALITY
  Water quality is a measurement of total dissolved solids or other contaminants. The water quality of
  the upper Santa Ana region is a reflection of local topography, subsurface geology, land use, well
  pumping, and urbanization forces. Water quality is highest in mountain streams. Where the streams
  leave the base of the mountains, they are largely influenced by the original agricultural water
  management practices of the Calimesa area. These historical practices remain today in some areas,
  evidenced by streams diverted for domestic use, irrigation purposes, percolation, and the recharge of
  groundwater basins.
  The County of Riverside, including Calimesa, is located within the Santa Ana River Basin. The Regional
  Water Quality Control Board for the Santa Ana Region updated the Water Quality Control Plan for the
  Santa Ana River Basin in 2011. The Basin Plan defines water quality objectives and identifies
  strategies to achieving water quality standards.
  Note to the Reader: Additional information on the Water Quality Control Plan is available at
  http://www.waterboards.ca.gov/rwqcb8/.
  Note to the Reader: Refer to the Infrastructure and Public Services Chapter of this General Plan for
  more discussion of stormwater management and recharge.
  Note to the Reader: Goals, policies, and actions related to water service are found in the
  Infrastructure and Public Services Chapter of this General Plan.
BIOLOGICAL RESOURCES
On June 17, 2003, the Riverside County Board of Supervisors adopted the Western Riverside Multiple
Species Habitat Conservation Plan (MSHCP). The overall goal of the MSHCP is to enhance and maintain
biological diversity and ecosystem processes while allowing future economic growth.
The City of Calimesa is a participant in the MSHCP, which means that the City has adopted a
Development Mitigation Fee to assist in the funding and implementation of the MSHCP. As a result,
development in Calimesa follows the protocols for preservation and conservation of vegetation and
wildlife identified in the MSHCP, including the requirement to obtain a permit through the Riverside
County Environmental Programs Division.
                      CALIMESA GENERAL PLAN AUGUST 2014                                     6-5
                                         CHAPTER 6: RESOURCE
                                                 MANAGEMENT
CULTURAL RESOURCES
 CULTURAL AND HISTORICAL INFLUENCES
 The San Diego coastal region and the California deserts are two historically significant areas that
 helped shape Calimesa and the San Timoteo Canyon area. The San Gorgonio Pass served as a major
 transportation route and was subject to a variety of cultural influences.
   The Era of the Missions
   In the late 1500s, Spanish explorers entered California through San Diego and established
   missions in the area. The modern history of Calimesa and the San Timoteo Canyon area began in
   1769 with the establishment of the Spanish mission in Alta California. Captain Juan Bautista de
   Anza led a small party through San Timoteo Canyon in 1774. Colonists and missionaries
   continued to use this land route through the San Gorgonio Pass to the missions and their ranch
   lands during the Spanish occupation of California.
   During the subsequent Mexican period, the San Timoteo Canyon area was divided into several
   sizeable land grants. James (Santiago) Johnson owned two of these grants, including the San
   Timoteo Rancho and the tract between San Jacinto and San Gorgonio. Settlement and growth in
   the San Timoteo Canyon area occurred after Mexico ceded California to the United States in 1847.
   Modern Settlement Begins
   Exploration and surveys of the San Gorgonio Pass were first made in 1853 to determine the
   feasibility of developing a rail line, which would extend west through the area and continue to the
   Pacific Ocean. Freight, stage, and other mail lines crossed the San Gorgonio Pass utilizing
   Bradshaw Road between 1858 and the mid-1870s. There were frequent changes in operators of
   the stage lines because of the competition for contracts to carry the mail. The Stagecoach Trail
   extended south from Redlands into Cherry Valley following San Timoteo Canyon Road and
   Singleton Canyon, then descended into Cherry Valley using Orchard Street and Nancy Avenue. In
   1910, this route through Singleton Canyon was designated a stock trail, so that cattlemen could
   move their herds from Yucaipa Valley into Cherry Valley and Beaumont. It was eventually returned
   to private property and then was purchased through Riverside County habitat and open space
   preservation as permanent open space. Equestrians continue to refer to this trail as Stagecoach
   Road today.
   In 1862, the discovery of gold in La Paz, Arizona, spurred the development along Bradshaw Road
   in San Timoteo Canyon. The Southern Pacific Railroad completed its railroad line from Los
   Angeles through the San Gorgonio Pass in 1876. This led to the creation of agricultural and land
   development opportunities in the area and to the establishment of Riverside County in 1893.
    6-6                                     CALIMESA GENERAL PLAN AUGUST 2014
             CHAPTER 6: RESOURCE
                     MANAGEMENT
  Recent History
  In 1910, the Redlands-Yucaipa Land Company subdivided Yucaipa Valley. The major
  transportation thoroughfare at the time was Fifth Street in Redlands, which continues as Sand
  Canyon through the Crafton Hills and Yucaipa. In 1915 and 1916, the dirt highway extending
  from Beaumont to Yuma was overlain with concrete. Fifteen years later, the road was completed
  between Redlands and Beaumont through Calimesa, and residents participated in a “Road-Day-O”
  celebration. The route was later designated US Route 99 and is now Interstate 10. Following its
  completion, commercial activities in the area developed and Calimesa began to establish a
  separate identity from Yucaipa.
HISTORIC RESOURCES
The National Register of Historic Places does not include any historic structure in Calimesa.
The State Historic Resources Inventory has designated Haskell Ranch as a historic site. Haskell Ranch
(formerly known as San Timoteo Rancho) illustrates the architectural significance of a late nineteenth
and early twentieth century dairy ranch. Historic ranch structures on-site include a blacksmith shop,
residence, horse barn, bunkhouse, ranch house, milk house, old adobe, residence of owner James
Haskell, hay barn, and feed mixing shed. This property is included in the Summerwind Ranch Specific
Plan area.
Other historical structures include a stage station stop, which was part of a private residence at the
Singleton Road terminus. The home was destroyed by fire in 2006.
ARCHAEOLOGICAL RESOURCES
Records at the Eastern Information Center of the California Archaeological Inventory at the University
of California-Riverside and field surveys indicate that four archaeological sites have been identified in
the Calimesa area. All four of the sites are located in San Timoteo Canyon, two of which are located
along San Timoteo Creek. Each of the sites has experienced some disturbance.
PALEONTOLOGICAL RESOURCES
Paleontological investigations for the San Timoteo Badlands area, including Calimesa, were
conducted by Dames and Moore in 1987. Research revealed that the area contains sediments of the
Plio-Pleistocene ice age, referred to as the San Timoteo Formation. These sediments are overlain by
fine-grained sediments, as found on Haskell Ranch and Shutt Ranch, between Interstate 10 and San
Timoteo Canyon. The San Timoteo Formation and overlying sediments are known to have produced
abundant and diverse floral and faunal remains. Thus, the San Timoteo Badlands area and the
western portion of the city have a high potential to produce significant paleontological resources.
                   CALIMESA GENERAL PLAN AUGUST 2014                                       6-7

                                         CHAPTER 6: RESOURCE
                                                  MANAGEMENT
  AGRICULTURAL RESOURCES
  The California Department of Conservation maintains the Farmland Mapping and Monitoring Program
  (FMMP), which produces maps and statistical data used for analyzing impacts on California’s
  agricultural resources. Agricultural land is rated according to soil quality and irrigation status; the
  best quality land is called Prime Farmland. The 2010 FMMP map for Riverside County indicates that
  no Prime Farmland is located in the Calimesa Planning Area.
  The only agricultural lands of importance are grazing lands located primarily in the northwest portion
  of the Planning Area. The remaining land is classified as Urban and Built-Up Land or as Other, which
  includes low-density rural development, brush, and riparian lands.
  Updated information on the suitability of lands in Calimesa for various types of agriculture is
  available at http://maps.conservation.ca.gov/ciff/ciff.html.
RELATED PLANS AND PROGRAMS
The Resource Management Chapter relates to several other plans and programs, including the
following:
    •   Santa Ana River Basin Water Quality Control Plan, June 2011. The Basin Plan includes water
        quality goals and policies, descriptions of conditions, and a discussion of solutions as well as
        establishes water quality standards for the groundwater and surface water of the Santa Ana
        River Basin. The plan also contains an implementation plan describing the actions that are
        necessary to achieve and maintain water quality standards.
    •   Western Riverside County Multiple Species Habitat Conservation Plan, June 2003. The
        Western Riverside County Multiple Species Habitat Conservation Plan (MSHCP) is a
        comprehensive, multi-jurisdictional habitat conservation plan focusing on conservation of
        species and their associated habitats in western Riverside County. The overall goal of this plan
        is to maintain biological and ecological diversity within a rapidly urbanizing region. The MSHCP
        allows jurisdictions within its approximately 1.26-million-acre plan area boundary, including
        Calimesa, to better control local land use decisions and maintain a strong economic climate in
        the region while addressing the requirements of the state and federal Endangered Species Acts.
        For more information, please see http://www.rctlma.org/epd/wrmshcp.aspx.
    •   Williamson Act Contract Program. The Williamson Act is state legislation that allows
        landowners to enter into 10-year contracts to retain agricultural uses on the contracted land in
        exchange for reduced property tax incentives.
       6-8                                  CALIMESA GENERAL PLAN AUGUST 2014

                CHAPTER 6: RESOURCE
                         MANAGEMENT
KEY ISSUES
This Resource Management Chapter addresses issues identified during the preparation of the City’s
General Plan through discussions with the General Plan Advisory Committee and City staff, and
feedback received during the various public meetings. The goals, policies, and actions included in this
chapter have been prepared in consideration of these issues, which include the need to:
    •   Protect and preserve wildlife habitat areas.
    •   Ensure that scenic resources such as hillside and canyon vistas are protected.
    •   Conserve open space for passive recreational activities, including walking, biking, and
        equestrian use.
    •   Preserve important farmlands.
RESOURCE MANAGEMENT GOALS
GOAL RM-1:             Conserve and protect significant landforms and hillside areas.
GOAL RM-2:             Conserve water resources and improve water quality.
GOAL RM-3:             Conserve and protect native species and habitats.
GOAL RM-4:             Preserve the city's historical, cultural, archaeological, paleontological, and
                       architectural resources.
GOAL RM-5:             Protect prime       agricultural  lands   from    encroachment    from   urban
                       development.
RESOURCE MANAGEMENT POLICIES
Policies are provided in the following areas:
    •   Significant Landforms and Hillside Areas – Page 6-10
    •   Water Resources – Page 6-11
    •   Biological Resources – Page 6-12
    •   Cultural and Historic Resources – Page 6-13
    •   Agricultural Resources – Page 6-14
  Note to the Reader: Additional goals and policies related to water service are found in the
  Infrastructure and Public Services Chapter of this General Plan.
                       CALIMESA GENERAL PLAN AUGUST 2014                                    6-9

                                           CHAPTER 6: RESOURCE
                                                  MANAGEMENT
Note to the Reader: The policies and action items designated with (MM) provide mitigation for impacts
identified through the Environmental Impact Report analysis prepared for this General Plan.
  SIGNIFICANT LANDFORMS AND HILLSIDE AREAS
POLICY RM-1:           Development shall be prohibited in areas containing sensitive biological
                       resources and habitats, cultural resources, groundwater recharge areas, or
                       prominent ridgelines, unless adequate protection and/or mitigation is
                       provided. (MM)
POLICY RM-2:           Ensure hillside areas are preserved and protected by controlling
                       development in areas having a slope of 16 percent or greater. (MM)
                       ACTION ITEM RM-2.1:            Implement the Calimesa Hillside Ordinance. (MM)
POLICY RM-3:           Encourage varied slope ratios on design slopes to reduce the visual impact
                       of grading. Fill slopes should not have a grade steeper than 3:1. In no case
                       shall cut or fill slopes be steeper than 2:1. (MM)
POLICY RM-4:           Require the practice of proper soil management techniques to reduce
                       erosion, sedimentation, and other soil-related problems. (MM)
POLICY RM-5:           Require erosion control measures such as soil binders, revegetation, slope
                       covers, and other practices that reduce soil erosion due to wind and water.
                       (MM)
POLICY RM-6:           Stepped or multilevel foundations are encouraged in hillside development.
POLICY RM-7:           On a property or contiguous properties that are proposed for development
                       having a slope of 25 percent or greater, minimum lot sizes may be reduced
                       below those required by a Residential Plan Development or other method to:
                       •  Preserve steep slope areas;
                       •  Avoid known faults and landslides;
                       •  Preserve significant biological and drainage areas;
                       •  Add open space to existing contiguous open space lands. (MM)
POLICY RM-8:           Protect the city’s scenic and visual resources by limiting ridgeline
                       development and building heights. (MM)
      6-10                                   CALIMESA GENERAL PLAN AUGUST 2014

             CHAPTER 6: RESOURCE
                 MANAGEMENT
               ACTION ITEM RM-8.1:            Identify
               scenic corridors and create a zoning
               overlay to ensure compatible development
               in scenic corridors. (MM)
 WATER RESOURCES
POLICY RM-9:   Support water conservation efforts to
               ensure a reliable water supply through
               water efficiency, capture, and reuse.
               (MM)                                          Above: Bioswales are often used to trap
                                                             pollutants from roadways and parking lots.
POLICY RM-10:  Local drainage courses should be              “Low Impact Development” is an
               retained in their natural condition to the    approach to land development that uses
               extent feasible. (MM)                         various land planning and design
                                                             practices       and       technologies     to
                                                             simultaneously conserve and protect
               ACTION ITEM RM-10.1:           Cooperate      natural resource systems and reduce
               with     federal,    state,    and     county infrastructure costs.
               governments and other agencies on the         Low Impact Development focuses on
               maintenance and improvement of the            three key issues:
               quality and quantity of local and regional    •   Stormwater management
               groundwater and surface water resources.      •   Wastewater treatment
               (MM)                                          •   Circulation and site design
                                                             Examples of Low Impact Development
               ACTION ITEM RM-10.2:           Require        include:
               developments to implement measures
                                                             •   Reducing impervious surfaces to
               designed to conserve water resources,             decrease       runoff    and     aid    in
               including the use of low-flow irrigation          groundwater       recharge:     replacing
               systems and water-efficient plumbing              impervious pathways with pervious
                                                                 ones, reducing the size of driveways,
               fixtures. (MM)                                    and including on-site water filtration
                                                                 systems such as bioswales and
               ACTION ITEM RM-10.3:           Require the        infiltration trenches.
               use of drought-tolerant landscaping in new    •   Incorporating natural features into site
                                                                 design.
               developments       and      encourage     the
                                                             •   Designing        mixed-use,      walkable
               replacement of existing water-consumptive
                                                                 developments.
               landscaping. (MM)
               CALIMESA GENERAL PLAN AUGUST 2014                                          6-11

                                 CHAPTER 6: RESOURCE
                                          MANAGEMENT
              ACTION ITEM RM-10.4:            Require the use of nonpotable and reclaimed water
              for irrigation in parks, golf courses, and industrial uses, as well as for residential
              and other urban uses, whenever feasible and where legally permitted. (MM)
              ACTION ITEM RM-10.5:            Assist responsible public agencies in eliminating
              the discharge of toxic materials and untreated sewage into the Calimesa
              drainage and groundwater system. (MM)
              ACTION ITEM RM-10.6:            Require the use of Low Impact Development, best
              management practices, and the design of storm drainage systems to reduce
              surface water runoff from all new development. (MM)
 BIOLOGICAL RESOURCES
POLICY RM-11: The City will require the use of buffers, creative site planning, revegetation,
              and open space easements/dedications to conserve and protect important
              plant communities, including:
              •   Wildlife habitats;
              •   Riparian areas;
              •   Wetlands;
              •   Oak woodlands;
              •   Other significant tree stands;
              •   Rare or endangered plant/animal habitats. (MM)
POLICY RM-12: Protect vegetation communities and sensitive species that contribute to the
              region’s environmental resources in order to prevent future endangerment
              of plant and animal communities. (MM)
     6-12                           CALIMESA GENERAL PLAN AUGUST 2014

             CHAPTER 6: RESOURCE
                 MANAGEMENT
               ACTION ITEM RM-12.1:            Implement the Western Riverside County Multiple
               Species Habitat Conservation Plan. (MM)
               ACTION ITEM RM-12.2:            Implement all applicable habitat conservation plans
               within the City’s jurisdiction. (MM)
POLICY RM-13:  Native oak trees should be preserved whenever feasible. If preservation is
               not possible, trees should be replaced with oak trees of the same species at
               a ratio of 1:1. (MM)
               ACTION ITEM RM-13.1:            Implement    the  City’s  Oak    Tree  Preservation
               Ordinance. (MM)
POLICY RM-14:  Encourage the planting of native tree species and drought-tolerant
               vegetation. Allow new development to remove only the minimum natural
               vegetation and require the revegetation of graded areas with native plant
               species. (MM)
POLICY RM-15:  Work with state, federal, and local agencies on the preservation of sensitive
               vegetation and wildlife in the city. (MM)
 CULTURAL AND HISTORIC RESOURCES
POLICY RM-16:  Identify, protect, and preserve the historical and cultural resources of the
               city. (MM)
               ACTION ITEM RM-16.1:            Increase public awareness of Calimesa’s cultural
               heritage and resources through development of education programs. (MM)
               ACTION ITEM RM-16.2:            Require the preservation of identified cultural
               resources to the extent possible, through dedication, removal, transfer, reuse, or
               other means. (MM)
               ACTION ITEM RM-16.3:            Review all proposed development for the possibility
               of cultural/archaeological/paleontological sensitivity. When existing information
               indicates that a site proposed for development may contain paleontological
               resources, a report stating the extent and potential significance of the resources
               that may exist within the proposed development shall be prepared and include
               mitigation measures as appropriate. (MM)
               CALIMESA GENERAL PLAN AUGUST 2014                                       6-13

                                CHAPTER 6: RESOURCE
                                         MANAGEMENT
              ACTION ITEM RM-16.4:         The City will work with the Native American
              community and others to adopt an appropriate process and procedure for the
              monitoring of excavation in cultural and paleontological sensitive areas and
              adopt a process for ensuring the appropriate curation of any cultural or
              paleontological resources discovered. (MM)
POLICY RM-17: Seek to protect significant historical sites or structures by offering
              programs and/or incentives to preserve, restore, or reuse the structures
              while maintaining their historical significance and integrity. (MM)
              ACTION ITEM RM-17.1:         Identify opportunities for adaptive reuse of historic
              sites and buildings. (MM)
 AGRICULTURAL RESOURCES
POLICY RM-18: Ensure the compatibility of agricultural uses with adjacent urban areas by
              requiring development to set back adequate distances; provide buffers such
              as landscaping, earthen berms, or other physical barriers. (MM)
POLICY RM-19: Encourage the use of sound agricultural practices to minimize the
              disturbance of the natural environment while maximizing agricultural
              production capabilities. (MM)
     6-14                           CALIMESA GENERAL PLAN AUGUST 2014
               CHAPTER 7: OPEN SPACE,
               PARKS, AND RECREATION
INTRODUCTION
                                                               Parks, recreation, and open space are important
                                                               components of the quality of life desired by the
                                                               residents of Calimesa. This chapter of the
                                                               General Plan addresses the City’s goals and
                                                               policies related to these issues and the actions
                                                               the City will take to ensure that residents’ needs
                                                               and desires for parks, recreation, and open
                                                               space are recognized and addressed as the
                                                               development of the city continues. The city’s
                                                               open space potential is significant and identifies
                                                               the need to maintain existing open space and
                                                               natural recreational areas, as well as to create
The lake at Plantation on the Lake is one example of the many additional areas for the enjoyment of residents
open space resources that contribute to the quality of life in and the protection of the environment.
Calimesa.
The goals, policies, and actions of this Open Space, Parks, and Recreation Chapter are intended to
achieve the City’s vision of open spaces that are accessible to all members of the community. This
chapter establishes a policy framework and action program for the improvement, expansion, and
maintenance of the city’s open space and recreation lands.
BACKGROUND
Preservation of open space and provision of active recreation opportunities in Calimesa are a main
component in the Calimesa Community Vision. The City has emphasized its commitment to
preservation of open space through adoption of its Hillside Ordinance and Oak Tree Preservation
Ordinance and participation in the Western Riverside County Multiple Species Habitat Conservation
Plan.
However, despite a commitment to preserving open space, Calimesa’s lack of variety in public and
special interest park and recreation facilities indicates that the recreational facilities in the area need to
be expanded. In 2006, the City prepared a Neighborhood Park Study, which identified proposed sites
and the feasibility of those sites within the developed areas of the city.
                          CALIMESA GENERAL PLAN AUGUST 2014                                            7-1

                                     CHAPTER 7: OPEN SPACE,
                                    PARKS, AND RECREATION
PARK AND RECREATION FACILITIES
 CITY-OWNED RECREATION FACILITIES
 Recreational facilities in Calimesa are limited to a small park and the Norton Younglove
 Multipurpose Senior Center. These facilities occupy approximately 2.47 acres, in addition to 2.79
 undeveloped acres located on 4th Street south of the Calimesa Drainage Channel (see Figure OSPR-
 1).
 •   The Norton Younglove Multipurpose
     Senior Center. The senior center (photo
     right) is located at 908 Park Avenue,
     adjacent to City Hall. Operation of the
     Senior Center ensures Calimesa seniors
     access to available community resources
     and assures seniors that continuing
     efforts will be made to assist them in
     living independently in the community.
     The center also serves as the venue for
     meetings and events when not serving the
     needs of seniors.
 •   Creekside Park. This park encompasses
     1.17 acres on 7th Place between West
     Avenue L and West County Line Road, west               Norton Younglove Multipurpose Senior Center
     of Interstate 10. It includes a comfort station, basketball hoops, a children’s play area, and
     picnic areas.
 •   4th Street Park. As of the writing of this General Plan (2013), a new 2.8-acre park on 4th Street is
     scheduled to open in early 2014. Designed through a community-based process, the park will
     include a playground area, picnic areas, a multi-use trail with fitness stations, garden areas, and
     a dog park.
 Park and recreation programs are supported by the Community Services Commission, which is
 responsible for recommending policies and procedures to the City Council for the administration,
 operation, development, improvement, and maintenance of community facilities, including parks,
 recreation facilities, and park and recreation programs.
     7-2                                     CALIMESA GENERAL PLAN AUGUST 2014

             CHAPTER 7: OPEN SPACE,
             PARKS, AND RECREATION
FIGURE OSPR-1:        EXISTING PUBLIC PARKS AND OPEN SPACE AREAS
   PRIVATELY OWNED RECREATION FACILITIES
   The Calimesa Golf and Country Club is a 108-acre, semi-private commercial facility on 3rd Street
   between the Sandalwood and Buena Mesa single-family residential neighborhoods. This recreational
   facility provides an 18-hole public golf course and a clubhouse in the Garden Air Wash, a major
   drainage for the foothills.
                      CALIMESA GENERAL PLAN AUGUST 2014                                 7-3
                                           CHAPTER 7: OPEN SPACE,
                                           PARKS, AND RECREATION
    MULTI-USE TRAILS
    Calimesa recognizes that a series of multi-use trails is a key component in developing a linked park
    and open space system. The Calimesa Multi-Use Trail Manual 1 includes guidelines and standards for
    the development of trails, while the Calimesa Multi-Use Trail System and Map 2 includes a
    comprehensive multi-use trail system providing a variety of options for activities and linkages.
    Trails are designed to incorporate the historic trails throughout the city while preserving sensitive
    open space and wildlife corridors. A primary objective for the trail system is to provide connectivity
    between neighborhoods, open space and park areas, and regional trails beyond the city limits.
    OPEN SPACE
    Open space preservation may serve multiple functions, including protection of natural open areas,
    watersheds, environmentally sensitive areas such as creeks and riparian areas, wildlife habitat,
    hillsides, and visual resources. Open spaces in Calimesa currently include the Southern California
    Edison easement, the Calimesa Channel and Calimesa Creek, Calimesa Golf and Country Club, and
    other unimproved stream courses. However, the many hillsides and canyons in the Calimesa area
    provide opportunities for further preservation of open space areas as the city develops.
    Note to the Reader: The issue of open space is closely related to parks and recreation. While open
    spaces are not “parks,” they can provide important benefits for both Calimesa residents and the
    natural systems that still exist in the area. The City’s goals and policies for the preservation of open
    space for a variety of uses are addressed in the Resource Management Chapter and the Safety
    Chapter of this General Plan. The reader is invited to consult those chapters for detailed policies
    and actions dealing with open space in all its forms.
1
  Available here: http://www.cityofcalimesa.net/Forms/Calimesa%20Multi-Use%20Trail%20Manual.pdf
2
  Available here: http://www.cityofcalimesa.net/Forms/The%20Multi-
Use%20Trail%20System%20&%20Master%20Trail%20Map%20Proposal%20-%20November%202007.pdf
         7-4                                        CALIMESA GENERAL PLAN AUGUST 2014

          CHAPTER 7: OPEN SPACE,
         PARKS, AND RECREATION
NEARBY RECREATIONAL FACILITIES
There are several local, regional, and state parks in San Bernardino and Riverside counties that are
close to and available to Calimesa residents (shown in part in Figure OSPR-1). Many other smaller
parks are found in the neighboring cities of Yucaipa and Redlands.
•   I Street Park (Yucaipa). This park encompasses approximately 11 acres located at 5th Street and
    Avenue I in Yucaipa, approximately a quarter-mile north of Calimesa. Facilities at the park
    include softball diamonds, basketball courts, and two tennis courts. Between 1968 and 1970,
    the Calimesa Chamber of Commerce helped form County Service Area 74, which appropriated
    funds from Riverside County residents’ parcel fees to develop and improve Calimesa (I Street)
    Park. A Joint Powers Agreement with the Yucaipa Valley Park and Recreation District in San
    Bernardino County provided the means for bi-county cooperation to complete this park.
    Although Calimesa parcel fees were used to improve this facility, I Street Park is owned and
    operated by the City of Yucaipa.
•   Yucaipa Wildwood Park (Yucaipa). This facility is located at Mesa Grande and Wildwood
    Canyon Road and features the beauty of large oak trees. In addition to picnic and play areas,
    there is an equestrian staging area. This park is operated by the City of Yucaipa.
•   Yucaipa Regional Park and Yucaipa Community Park (Yucaipa). These facilities are located
    along Oak Glen Road in the northwest portion of Yucaipa, 2 miles northwest of Calimesa.
    Features of the 400-acre park include three large lakes, a swimming complex, a snack bar, and
    an administrative office. Summer activities include use of two 350-foot water slides,
    paddleboats, and aqua cycles. Freshwater rainbow trout fishing is also available, and the San
    Bernardino County Regional Parks Department stocks the lake. Winter activities include tent and
    RV camping. The park is operated and maintained by the County of San Bernardino. Yucaipa
    Community Park is contiguous to the Yucaipa Regional Park and includes a community center
    and ball fields; it is operated by the City of Yucaipa.
•   Wildwood Canyon State Park (Wildwood). This park includes over 900 acres of rolling tree-
    studded hills. The park is open without charge for daytime non-motorized activities, including
    hiking, equestrian, and biking activities.
•   Bogart Park (Cherry Valley). This park is in the community of Cherry Valley, approximately
    1.75 miles east of Calimesa. The park covers 600 acres and consists of hilly land with live oak
    trees and a lake fed by Noble Creek. Available recreational activities include equestrian, hiking,
    picnicking, and group camping. The park is operated by the County of Riverside.
                   CALIMESA GENERAL PLAN AUGUST 2014                                       7-5

                                          CHAPTER 7: OPEN SPACE,
                                          PARKS, AND RECREATION
   •   Noble Creek Park (Cherry Valley). This park is in the community of Cherry Valley
       approximately 1.5 miles southeast of Calimesa. The park’s 63 acres are developed with softball
       fields, baseball diamonds, tennis courts, picnic and playground facilities, an equestrian arena, a
       recreation center for receptions, and an administrative office. Noble Creek Park is part of the
       Beaumont-Cherry Valley Parks and Recreation District.
   •   San Bernardino National Forest. The border of the National Forest touches Calimesa’s eastern
       boundary (see Figure OSPR-1). The San Bernardino National Forest offers camping facilities,
       multi-use trails, and picnic and rest areas for public use.
   LIBRARY SERVICES
                                                    The library in Calimesa is operated by Library
                                                    Systems and Services (LSSI) under contract with the
                                                    Riverside County Library System. The library (photo
                                                    left) currently provides 0.35 square feet of library
                                                    space per capita, well below the 0.50 square feet
                                                    recommended by the American Library Association.
                                                    The San Bernardino Public Library System operates a
                                                    branch at 12040 5th Street in Yucaipa, which is also
                                                    available to Calimesa residents. The Beaumont
                                                    Library District operates its library at 125 E. 8th Street
                                                    in Beaumont.
The public library on Calimesa Boulevard.           The City has purchased the former post office site
                                                    adjacent to the library as part of a plan to expand the
   library in the future. The combined site totals 1.14 acres; the long-range plan is to merge the two
   parcels and construct a new expanded library on the site. As of 2013, the land is being banked
   until funding for an expanded library facility is secured.
        7-6                                   CALIMESA GENERAL PLAN AUGUST 2014

             CHAPTER 7: OPEN SPACE,
             PARKS, AND RECREATION
RELATED PLANS AND PROGRAMS
The Open Space, Parks, and Recreation Chapter relates to several other plans and programs, including
the following:
    •   Calimesa Multi-Use Trail Manual, 2006. This manual contains trail design guidelines and
        standards with the purpose of supplementing existing and future trail enhancement. The
        purpose of the manual is to preserve open space and recreation opportunities for walking,
        hiking, biking, and equestrian activities as well as to ensure access to regional trail systems.
        The manual works in conjunction with the Calimesa Multi-Use Trail System and Master Trail
        Map.
    •   Calimesa Multi-Use Trail System and Master Trail Map, 2007. A key component of the Multi-
        Use Trail System and Map is to provide connectivity within all areas of the city as well as with
        neighboring jurisdictions, nearby parks, and regional trail systems. This plan is a companion
        document to the Calimesa Multi-Use Trail Manual.
    •   Quimby Act. The act is state legislation that allows local jurisdictions to require dedication of
        land and/or payment of fees for park and recreation purposes during the subdivision process.
KEY ISSUES
This Parks, Open Space, and Recreation Chapter addresses issues identified during the preparation of
the City’s General Plan through discussions with the General Plan Advisory Committee and City staff,
and feedback received during the various public meetings. The goals, policies, and actions included in
this chapter have been prepared in consideration of these issues, which include the need to:
    •   Preserve open space.
    •   Expand the existing trail system.
    •   Continue community programs and services, particularly for youth and active adults.
    •   Increase active recreation opportunities and facilities.
                       CALIMESA GENERAL PLAN AUGUST 2014                                      7-7

                                       CHAPTER 7: OPEN SPACE,
                                       PARKS, AND RECREATION
OPEN SPACE, PARKS, AND RECREATION GOALS
GOAL OSPR-1:           Provide a network of open space areas that preserve natural resources and
                       wildlife corridors to provide visual and physical relief from urban
                       development.
GOAL OSPR-2:           Provide a safe, comprehensive network of interconnecting off-road trails
                       and amenities to connect new and existing neighborhoods, parks and open
                       space areas and areas outside the City for the purposes of maintaining and
                       enhancing opportunities for equestrian riding, bicycle riding, walking, and
                       hiking throughout the city.
GOAL OSPR-3:           Develop active and passive park sites and multi-use trails that will serve all
                       segments of the community based on reasonable service needs.
GOAL OSPR-4:           Develop and maintain facilities for the use of all community members for
                       recreation, relaxation, and social interaction based on reasonable service
                       needs.
GOAL OSPR-5:           Provide opportunities for the joint use of public facilities for recreational
                       purposes.
OPEN SPACE, PARKS, AND RECREATION POLICIES
Policies are provided in this chapter in the following areas:
    •   Open Space Areas – Page 7-8
    •   Parks and Trails – Page 7-9
    •   Recreational Facilities – Page 7-13
    •   Joint Use and Coordination – Page 7-13
Note to the Reader: The policies and action items designated with (MM) provide mitigation for impacts
identified through the Environmental Impact Report analysis prepared for this General Plan.
  OPEN SPACE AREAS
POLICY OSPR-1:         The City shall seek the dedication, acquisition, creation, and maintenance of
                       contiguous open space lands and trails within development projects
                       connecting to those open space lands to provide a network of multi-use
                       trails throughout the city. (MM)
         7-8                                   CALIMESA GENERAL PLAN AUGUST 2014

          CHAPTER 7: OPEN SPACE,
          PARKS, AND RECREATION
               ACTION ITEM OSPR-1.1:         Require dedication of contiguous open space lands
               in order to provide a network of multi-use trails throughout the city. (MM)
               ACTION ITEM OSPR-1.2:         Seek funding sources for the preservation and
               maintenance of open space areas in the city. (MM)
POLICY OSPR-2: Protect and preserve areas with endangered plant and animal species
               habitat and land containing unique geographic features as open space
               through acquisition, dedication, or other means of preservation. (MM)
               ACTION ITEM OSPR-2.1:         Implement the Western Riverside County Multiple
               Species Habitat Conservation Plan. (MM)
POLICY OSPR-3: Encourage open space and quasi-passive recreational uses for utility
               corridors and areas identified for limited building due to flood, earthquake,
               and landslide risk. (MM)
               ACTION ITEM OSPR-3.1:         Designate city scenic corridors and viewsheds and
               develop guidelines for developments along or adjacent to these corridors. (MM)
 PARKS AND TRAILS
POLICY OSPR-4: The City will seek to provide 5 acres of developed parkland per 1,000
               residents. (MM)
POLICY OSPR-5: Encourage the development of a central community park site and other park
               sites easily accessible to neighborhoods. (MM)
POLICY OSPR-6: Encourage the development of active and passive parks on open space lands
               not designated for habitat protection. (MM)
POLICY OSPR-7: The City will work with the Counties of Riverside and San Bernardino and
               other municipalities to explore areas of cooperation regarding connectivity
               between city multi-use trails and regional trail systems. (MM)
POLICY OSPR-8: Implementation of a well-designed, interconnected system of equestrian
               riding, bicycle riding, and walking and hiking trails throughout the
               community continues to be a priority for the City. For that purpose, Figure
               OSPR-2, “Trails Master Plan,” depicts the City’s desired trails system. Trail
               alignments are not intended to be specific and deviations from the specific
               location shall be allowed provided that the deviation does not eliminate a
               CALIMESA GENERAL PLAN AUGUST 2014                                        7-9

                                CHAPTER 7: OPEN SPACE,
                                PARKS, AND RECREATION
                trail connection between one neighborhood and another neighborhood or
                area of the city, and the opportunity for a deviation in a specific location is
                not used by a property owner or developer to eliminate an existing trail
                connection or avoid providing trail connections along or across his or her
                property if one does not currently exist.
                ACTION ITEM OSPR-8.1:         Update and maintain the Master Trails Map and
                Multi-Use Trail Manual to guide existing and future trail development. (MM)
                ACTION ITEM OSPR-8.2:         Evaluate development proposals on or near
                proposed trails, and to the fullest extent permitted by law, require dedication,
                construction, or both dedication and construction, of trails as a condition of
                project approval.
                ACTION ITEM OSPR-8.3:         Seek out and pursue all forms of federal, state,
                local, private, foundation, and endowment support to assist in the continuing
                acquisition, development, and programming of park, trail, and recreation
                resources in the city. (MM)
POLICY OSPR-9:  Encourage neighborhood groups, organizations, clubs, and businesses to
                take a greater interest and financial responsibility in the improvement of
                the park and recreation system in the city through the donation of land,
                equipment, services, and/or financial support. (MM)
POLICY OSPR-10: Encourage private individual endowment of specific recreational needs.
                (MM)
      7-10                              CALIMESA GENERAL PLAN AUGUST 2014
                                  CHAPTER 7: OPEN SPACE,
                                  PARKS, AND RECREATION
FIGURE OSPR-2: TRAILS MASTER PLAN
                                     CALIMESA GENERAL PLAN AUGUST 2014 7-11
         CHAPTER 7: OPEN SPACE,
         PARKS, AND RECREATION
     This page intentionally left blank.
7-12             CALIMESA GENERAL PLAN AUGUST 2014
          CHAPTER 7: OPEN SPACE,
          PARKS, AND RECREATION
 RECREATIONAL FACILITIES
POLICY OSPR-11: Encourage the development of private recreational facilities, when
                appropriate, to increase the recreational opportunities available to
                residents. (MM)
POLICY OSPR-12: Require the provision of recreational              facilities concurrent  with the
                development they serve. (MM)
POLICY OSPR-13: Encourage development of additional cultural facilities (community center,
                theater, library, etc.) to meet the needs of the community. (MM)
                ACTION ITEM OSPR-13.1:          Develop an achievable five-year and ten-year capital
                facilities plan for parks and recreational facilities. (MM)
                ACTION ITEM OSPR-13.2:          Survey community residents every five years to
                develop strategies to meet their desires and needs for recreation. (MM)
 JOINT USE AND COORDINATION
POLICY OSPR-14: The City will work cooperatively with other agencies to maximize the use of
                all types of open space and parks facilities and programs for the benefit of
                the public. (MM)
                ACTION ITEM OSPR-14.1:          Develop cooperative programs with school districts
                and other agencies where joint use of facilities would lead to increased and
                enhanced facility use. (MM)
                ACTION ITEM OSPR-14.2:          Continue to develop programs for special
                populations such as seniors, persons with special needs, and teens. Joint
                planning of such programs should be coordinated with other service providers.
                (MM)
                ACTION ITEM OSPR-14.3:          Continue to coordinate with school districts in the
                location of future elementary and junior high school sites to allow for adjacent
                park acquisition and subsequent park/library/school complexes. (MM)
                ACTION ITEM OSPR-14.4:          Continue to evaluate adult programs and classes
                offered by community colleges and school district adult programs to identify
                opportunities for shared programs and overall cost savings. (MM)
                CALIMESA GENERAL PLAN AUGUST 2014                                        7-13
         CHAPTER 7: OPEN SPACE,
         PARKS, AND RECREATION
     This page intentionally left blank.
7-14           CALIMESA GENERAL PLAN AUGUST 2014
                       CHAPTER 8: SAFETY
INTRODUCTION
                                                        Safety is an important aspect in ensuring the general
                                                        well-being of city residents, and it encompasses the
                                                        response to many man-made and naturally occurring
                                                        hazards. The City’s response to general safety concerns
                                                        will determine its success in maintaining and attracting
                                                        residents and businesses.
                                                        This Safety Chapter seeks to recognize and remedy both
                                                        present and anticipated concerns about the ongoing
                                                        well-being of city residents, employees, and visitors. The
                                                        goals, policies, and actions identify viable solutions to
 Wildfire is a fact of life in Calimesa’s hillsides and minimize the potential risk of death, injuries, property
 canyons. This 2005 fire burned in San Timoteo
 Canyon.                                                damage,     and     economic     hardship   and     social
                                                        displacement resulting from fires, floods, earthquakes,
landslides, and other hazards. Additionally, this chapter addresses safety and hazards related to the
potential release of hazardous materials into the community and general issues related to police and
fire protection services.
BACKGROUND
Like many places in California, Calimesa is subject to a variety of potential safety hazards. Some
hazards are created by the natural environment; others are man-made and result from human
activities.
This chapter briefly describes the following types of safety issues that affect Calimesa:
     •   Seismic hazards
     •   Flooding and inundation
     •   Fire hazards
     •   Hazardous materials and waste
     •   Critical facilities and lifelines
One additional safety-related issue—police and fire protection—is addressed in the Infrastructure and
Public Services Chapter of this General Plan.
                           CALIMESA GENERAL PLAN AUGUST 2014                                           8-1

                                           CHAPTER 8: SAFETY
SEISMIC HAZARDS
While Calimesa is at risk from many natural and man-made hazards, the event with the greatest
potential for loss of life or property and economic damage is an earthquake. This is true for most of
Southern California, since damaging earthquakes are frequent, affect widespread areas, trigger many
secondary effects, and can overwhelm the ability of local jurisdictions to respond. In Calimesa,
earthquake-triggered geologic effects include ground shaking, landslides, liquefaction, and
subsidence. Earthquakes can also cause human-made hazards such as fires and toxic chemical
releases.
Earthquake risk is very high in western Riverside County (which includes Calimesa), due to the nearby
presence of two of California’s most active faults: the San Andreas and the San Jacinto.
Most of the loss of life and injuries from earthquakes are due to damage and collapse of buildings
and structures. Building codes have generally been made more stringent following damaging
earthquakes.
In addition to ground shaking, earthquakes can also lead to other, secondary effects as described
below. Maps showing areas in Calimesa that are potentially affected by these hazards are shown in
the Environmental Impact Report for this General Plan and are available online and from other
locations.
  FAULT RUPTURE
  Damage due to earthquake fault rupture typically results in a relatively small percentage of the total
  damage in an earthquake, but proximity to a rupturing fault can cause profound damage. The
  proximity of Calimesa to the San Andreas and San Jacinto faults, as well as to other smaller faults in
  the region associated with the San Andreas fault system, has the potential for generating
  earthquakes that would result in strong ground shaking including surface rupture.
  Known fault zones are shown in Figure SAF-1 below. Updated official information on fault zones in
  California is available at: http://www.consrv.ca.gov/cgs/rghm/ap/Pages/index.aspx.
     8-2                                   CALIMESA GENERAL PLAN AUGUST 2014

                   CHAPTER 8: SAFETY
FIGURE SAF-1:          FAULT ZONES
   SEISMICALLY INDUCED LIQUEFACTION
   Liquefaction occurs primarily in saturated, loose, fine- to medium-grained soils in areas where the
   groundwater table is within approximately 50 feet of the surface. When liquefaction occurs, the soil
   behaves more like a liquid than a solid. Severe damage to structures can result when they sink into
   the liquefied soil.
   In the Calimesa area, most of the canyon tributaries to San Timoteo Creek are filled with loose,
   unconsolidated deposits that have the potential for liquefaction during a moderate to large
   earthquake. Additionally, various engineering, geology, and geotechnical studies conducted in the
   Oak Valley area of Calimesa have confirmed the presence of liquefiable soils. Shaking causes the
   soils to lose strength and behave as liquid. Excess water pressure is vented upward through
   fissures and soil cracks, and a water-soil slurry bubbles onto the ground surface.
                       CALIMESA GENERAL PLAN AUGUST 2014                                    8-3
                                            CHAPTER 8: SAFETY
   Liquefaction-related effects include loss of bearing strength, ground oscillations, lateral spreading,
   and flow failures or slumping. Site-specific geotechnical studies are the only practical and reliable
   way of determining the specific liquefaction potential of a site; however, a determination of general
   risk potential can be provided based on soil type and depth of groundwater. Areas identified as
   susceptible to liquefaction are identified in Figure SAF-2.
FIGURE SAF-2:         LIQUEFACTION SUSCEPTIBILITY
      8-4                                   CALIMESA GENERAL PLAN AUGUST 2014
                 CHAPTER 8: SAFETY
SUBSIDENCE AND EXPANSIVE & COLLAPSIBLE SOILS
Subsidence refers to the sudden sinking or gradual downward settling and compaction of soil and
other surface material with little or no horizontal motion. It may be caused by a variety of human
and natural activities, including earthquakes and the long-term extraction of underlying
groundwater, oil, or gas. Much of Calimesa is susceptible to subsidence. Figure SAF-3 shows areas
in the city that are subject to subsidence.
Expansive soils have a significant amount of clay particles which can give up water (shrink) or take
on water (swell). The change in volume exerts stress on buildings and other loads placed on these
soils. The occurrence of these soils is often associated with geologic units having marginal stability.
Expansive soils can be widely dispersed and can be found in hillside areas as well as in low-lying
alluvial basins. Figure SAF-4 shows general geologic conditions in Calimesa.
Expansion testing and mitigation are required by current grading and building codes. Special
engineering designs are used effectively to alleviate problems caused by expansive soils.
Homeowner involvement is required to maintain these standards. Homeowners are important
because moisture control and modified drainage can minimize the effects of expansive soils.
Homeowners should be educated about the importance of maintaining a constant level of moisture
below their home’s foundation.
Hydroconsolidation, or soil collapse, typically occurs in recently deposited (less than 10,000 years
old) soils that were deposited in an arid or semi-arid environment. These soils collapse when they
are saturated by water; rapid, substantial settlement results. An increase in surface water
infiltration, such as from irrigation or a rise in the groundwater table, combined with the weight of
a building or structure, can initiate settlement and cause foundations and walls to crack.
                    CALIMESA GENERAL PLAN AUGUST 2014                                      8-5

                            CHAPTER 8: SAFETY
FIGURE SAF-3: AREAS SUBJECT TO SUBSIDENCE
    8-6                     CALIMESA GENERAL PLAN AUGUST 2014
              CHAPTER 8: SAFETY
FIGURE SAF-4:  GENERAL GEOLOGIC CONDITIONS
               CALIMESA GENERAL PLAN AUGUST 2014 8-7
                                           CHAPTER 8: SAFETY
FLOOD HAZARDS
In Calimesa, flood hazards are primarily limited to the areas along the various creeks in the Planning
Area. These areas are planned (please see the Land Use Chapter of this General Plan) for uses
consistent with periodic flooding (such as open space and parks). Potential flood hazards are known
to affect County Line Road, Calimesa Boulevard, and Park Avenue. Occasional flooding is also known
to occur at the City Fire Station site due to its proximity to the Calimesa Creek, which abuts the
property to the north. During heavy storm events, water from Calimesa Creek encroaches onto the
fire station property causing localized flooding at the site. The City is planning improvements to
both Calimesa Creek and the Garden Air Wash to enhance flood protection, consistent with the
Riverside County Flood Control and Water Conservation District standards to safely convey 100-year
flood events. These improvements will alleviate flooding to local roads, utilities, and public facilities.
In developed areas of Calimesa, flood risk will remain low if canyon drainages remain undeveloped
and drainage-control facilities are properly maintained.
Figure SAF-5 illustrates 100- and 500-year flood hazard zones.
Note to the Reader: Although recent changes in state law require cities to identify areas subject to
“200-year” flooding, neither the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) nor the Department
of Water Resources (DWR) have yet (as of 2013) mapped these areas for Calimesa. These areas will
be more extensive than the 100-year flood zones shown in Figure SAF-5. Additionally, the City has no
historical data on flooding available.
One additional type of flooding that can occur is the catastrophic flood caused by the failure of a
dam. Calimesa is not in an area that would be affected by inundation due to the failure of an
upstream dam.
     8-8                                   CALIMESA GENERAL PLAN AUGUST 2014

                    CHAPTER 8: SAFETY
FIGURE SAF-5:          FLOOD ZONES
  FIRE HAZARDS
  Chaparral-filled canyon areas pose a significant fire hazard in the city, highlighting the need for strict
  enforcement of brush management and fire prevention programs.
    WIND-RELATED FIRE HAZARDS
    Wildland fires that occur while Santa Ana winds are present constitute a worst-case fire suppression
    scenario. Because of dry vegetation conditions and Santa Ana winds, the fire danger for Riverside
    County is considered extremely high for 25 percent of each year. Therefore, there is a statistically
    significant chance that this worst-case fire suppression scenario could occur.
    Fire hazard areas in Calimesa are shown in Figure SAF-6.
                       CALIMESA GENERAL PLAN AUGUST 2014                                        8-9
                                           CHAPTER 8: SAFETY
FIGURE SAF-6:         FIRE HAZARD AREAS
  HAZARDOUS MATERIALS AND WASTE
  Technically, the term “hazardous materials” would include the entire spectrum of such substances
  from pre-product materials to waste.
       Pre-product materials are considered to have value and are used in or are the purpose of the
       manufacturing process, and are referred to as hazardous materials. Because they have value,
       hazardous materials are subject to proper management procedures.
       Waste is just that—the valueless byproduct of the manufacturing process that must be
       disposed of—and is referred to as hazardous waste when this byproduct poses a potential
       threat to human health. Hazardous materials which have been spilled, disposed, dumped, or
       are otherwise released into the environment immediately become hazardous waste.
     8-10                                  CALIMESA GENERAL PLAN AUGUST 2014

                    CHAPTER 8: SAFETY
Although the term “hazardous waste” is much more widely known, and the effects of its poor
management are very evident, hazardous materials are actually more commonly in close proximity to
the general public. Hazardous materials are more frequently transported on freeways and public
roads and are more frequently stored in close proximity to residential areas. (An excellent example is
the local service station that stores thousands of gallons of a highly volatile, flammable, and
carcinogenic material—gasoline—adjacent to or near residential development with virtually no
concern on the part of the public.)
Hazardous waste, on the other hand, is in the spotlight of public concern. The Love Canal (New York),
Stringfellow Acid Pits (Riverside County), Times Beach (Missouri), and other incidents have
dramatically publicized the result of improper disposal of hazardous waste and have emphasized the
need for strict regulation and management of hazardous waste.
CRITICAL FACILITIES AND LIFELINES
Critical facilities are parts of infrastructure that must remain operational after a disaster or facilities
that pose unacceptable risks to public safety if severely damaged. In Riverside County, critical
facilities include schools, hospitals, fire and police stations, emergency operation centers,
communication centers, dams, and industrial sites that use or store explosives, toxic materials, or
petroleum products. It is essential that critical facilities have no structural weaknesses and remain
operable in the event of an area-wide emergency.
  EVACUATION ROUTES
  Identifying and maintaining routes to provide ingress and egress during a disaster is critical. The
  established routes for Calimesa include Interstate 10 and California Street for north-south
  movement of traffic, and County Line Road for east-west movement of traffic. Additional streets
  that can augment the routes include Calimesa Boulevard, 3rd Street and 5th Street for north-south
  traffic flow, as well as Avenue L and Singleton Road for east-west traffic movement. The identified
  roads maintain widths from 66 feet for collectors to 100 feet for major arterials with Interstate 10
  as a six-lane freeway. See Figure TM-1 for roadway designations.
  Established evacuation routes in Calimesa are shown in Figure SAF – 7 Evacuation Routes.
                       CALIMESA GENERAL PLAN AUGUST 2014                                      8-11

                                           CHAPTER 8: SAFETY
FIGURE SAF-7:         EVACUATION ROUTES
   ADEQUACY OF PEAK LOAD WATER SUPPLIES FOR FIRE RESPONSE
   While there is no standard water flow rate for fire response, the City collaborates with the South
   Mesa Water District, Yucaipa Valley Water District, Beaumont Cherry Valley Water District, and
   project applicants to ensure that required flows for new and significantly redeveloped projects are
   met. In the event of a disaster, secondary water systems may be necessary to supplement the
   City’s water supply. Emergency generators to pump water wells can be used to supplement the
   supply of water for emergency fire flow. The City shall coordinate with the applicable water
   districts in the upgrade of the existing water system to provide adequate emergency fire flow
   capacity over the maximum water demand.
     8-12                                 CALIMESA GENERAL PLAN AUGUST 2014

                   CHAPTER 8: SAFETY
RELATED PLANS AND PROGRAMS
The Safety Chapter relates to several other plans and programs, including the following:
   •   City of Calimesa Operations Emergency Plan, 2007. As the City’s official emergency
       operations plan, the objective of this plan is to incorporate and coordinate all the facilities and
       personnel of the City into an efficient organization capable of responding effectively to any
       emergency. The Emergency Plan is an extension of the State Emergency Plan.
   •   Riverside County Operational Area Emergency Operations Plan, 2006. Establishes the
       emergency organizational structure, assigns tasks, specifies policies and general procedures,
       and provides for coordination of planning efforts of the various emergency staff and service
       elements using the Standardized Emergency Management System. The objective of the
       Emergency Operations Plan is to incorporate and coordinate all the facilities and personnel of
       the County and Operational Area member jurisdictions, including Calimesa, into an efficient
       organization capable of responding effectively to any emergency. The Emergency Operations
       Plan is an extension of the State Emergency Plan.
    •  Riverside County Operational Area Multi-Jurisdictional Local Hazard Mitigation Plan, 2012.
       Identifies the county’s hazards, reviews and assesses past disaster occurrences, estimates the
       probability of future occurrences, and sets goals to mitigate potential risks to reduce or
       eliminate long-term risk to people and property from natural and man-made hazards for the
       County and Operational Area member jurisdictions, including Calimesa.
In addition to the plans and programs listed above, the following agencies provide support and
oversight on safety related issues within the Planning Area:
    •  Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). FEMA is the federal agency charged with
       preparing the nation for all hazards and effectively managing federal responses and recovery
       efforts following any national incident (e.g., major flood, earthquake, tornado, and hurricane).
       FEMA also initiates proactive mitigation activities, trains first responders, and manages the
       National Flood Insurance Program and the US Fire Administration. FEMA will coordinate with the
       City’s designated emergency responders.
    •  Plans and Actions of the Federal Environmental Protection Agency (EPA). The EPA regulates
       cleanup of groundwater contamination and other pollutants that may be unsafe to humans and
       the natural environment. There are cleanup sites within the Planning Area, which must comply
       with the regulations of the EPA.
    •  Governor’s Office of Emergency Services (OES). The OES coordinates overall state agency
       response to major disasters in support of local government. The office is responsible for
       assuring the state’s readiness to respond to and recover from natural, man-made, and war-
       caused emergencies and for assisting local governments in their emergency preparedness,
       response, and recovery efforts. The OES reviews and supports the City’s adoption of a local
       Emergency Management Plan.
                      CALIMESA GENERAL PLAN AUGUST 2014                                       8-13

                                              CHAPTER 8: SAFETY
KEY ISSUES
This Safety Chapter addresses issues identified during the preparation of the City’s General Plan
through discussions with the General Plan Advisory Committee and City staff, and feedback received
during the various public meetings. The goals, policies, and actions included in this chapter have been
prepared in consideration of these issues, which include the need to:
    •   Protect residents and businesses from all types of hazards.
    •   Protect hillsides and canyon areas, particularly those subject to flooding, from development.
    •   Plan and prepare for potential natural hazards.
SAFETY GOALS
GOAL SAF-1:             Minimize injury, loss of life, property damage, and other impacts caused by
                        safety hazards of all types.
GOAL SAF-2:             Reduce the potential for health and safety exposure caused by hazardous
                        waste contamination in the city.
SAFETY POLICIES
Policies are provided in this chapter in the following areas:
    •   Seismic Hazards – Page 8-15
    •   Flood Hazards – Page 8-15
    •   Police Protection – These policies are found in the Infrastructure and Public Services Chapter of
        this General Plan.
    •   Fire Protection – These policies are found in the Infrastructure and Public Services Chapter of
        this General Plan.
    •   Hazardous Waste and Solid Waste Materials – Page 8-16
    •   Disaster Response – Page 8-17
Note to the Reader: The policies and action items designated with (MM) provide mitigation for impacts
identified through the Environmental Impact Report analysis prepared for this General Plan.
      8-14                                   CALIMESA GENERAL PLAN AUGUST 2014

              CHAPTER 8: SAFETY
 SEISMIC HAZARDS
POLICY SAF-1:  Discourage development near areas susceptible to potential seismic or
               geological hazards. (MM)
               ACTION ITEM SAF-1.1:           Require geological and geotechnical investigations
               in areas of potential seismic or geologic hazards as part of the environmental
               and development review process. Require mitigation of seismic or geologic
               hazards to the satisfaction of responsible agencies. (MM)
               ACTION ITEM SAF-1.2:           Require liquefaction assessment studies in areas
               identified as having moderate to high liquefaction susceptibility. (MM)
               ACTION ITEM SAF-1.3:           Develop an information program to familiarize
               citizens with seismic risk. (MM)
POLICY SAF-2:  The City supports and will require earthquake strengthening and provisions
               for alternative or backup essential services, such as water, sewer, electricity,
               and natural gas pipelines and connections, especially in areas of high
               seismic or geologic hazard.
POLICY SAF-3:  The City will adopt and enforce building code provisions to help buildings
               and other structures survive an earthquake. (MM)
               ACTION ITEM SAF-3.1:           Discourage pole platforms as foundations for new
               single-family residences and encourage correction of existing foundation
               problems of older pre-1952 residences. (MM)
               ACTION ITEM SAF-3.2:           Continue to enforce seismic design provisions for
               Seismic Zone 4 of the Uniform Building Code and encourage the design of critical
               facilities with greater margins of safety.
 FLOOD HAZARDS
POLICY SAF-4:  Ensure that development does not divert stormwater runoff onto adjacent
               properties or cause alteration of natural drainage courses that cannot be
               adequately handled by existing drainage facilities or the flood control
               improvements proposed with the development. (MM)
POLICY SAF-5:  New development shall not be permitted to cause alteration of natural
               drainage courses that could result in adverse impacts to other properties.
               (MM)
               CALIMESA GENERAL PLAN AUGUST 2014                                       8-15
                                            CHAPTER 8: SAFETY
POLICY SAF-6:         All development shall comply with the flood control requirements of the
                      City, as well as of the county, state, and federal governments. (MM)
                      ACTION ITEM SAF-6.1:          Require     maintenance     of    storm  drains    by
                      homeowners. (MM)
                      ACTION ITEM SAF-6.2:          Require storm drain maintenance in private
                      systems to prevent local flooding, mud, and debris flows from adversely
                      affecting storm drains during strong storms. Maintain public storm drain
                      systems to be able to accommodate their full design capacity. (MM)
                      ACTION ITEM SAF-6.3:          Install neighborhood and private drains to prevent
                      sheet flow onto adjacent properties. (MM)
                      ACTION ITEM SAF-6.4:          Continue to participate in the National Flood
                      Insurance Program. (MM)
                      ACTION ITEM SAF-6.5:          Provide drainage improvements according to the
                      City’s Master Flood Control and Drainage Plan to reduce the threat of inundation
                      to developed areas of the city. (MM)
  POLICE PROTECTION
Note to the Reader: Policies related to fire protection are contained in the Infrastructure and Public
Services Chapter of this General Plan.
  FIRE PROTECTION
Note to the Reader: Policies related to fire protection are contained in the Infrastructure and Public
Services Chapter of this General Plan.
  HAZARDOUS WASTE AND SOLID WASTE MATERIALS
POLICY SAF-7:         Land uses involved in the production, storage, transportation, handling, or
                      disposal of hazardous materials shall be located a safe distance from land
                      uses that may be adversely impacted by such activities. (MM)
                      ACTION ITEM SAF-7.1:          The City will enforce disclosure laws that require all
                      users, producers, and transporters of hazardous materials and wastes to clearly
                      identify such materials at the site and notify the appropriate county, state,
                      and/or federal agencies in the event of a violation. (MM)
                      ACTION ITEM SAF-7.2:          The City will identify any city roadways along which
                      hazardous materials may be transported and restrict the transport of such
                      materials on those routes. (MM)
      8-16                                  CALIMESA GENERAL PLAN AUGUST 2014

              CHAPTER 8: SAFETY
               ACTION ITEM SAF-7.3:           The City will coordinate with the Riverside County
               Fire Department and the Riverside County Department of Environmental Health
               to ensure prompt response and adequate capability when handling hazardous
               materials incidents. (MM)
               ACTION ITEM SAF-7.4:           Coordinate with the Riverside County Department
               of Environmental Health when conducting annual household hazard waste
               community collection at City facilities, including the collection of batteries, auto
               batteries, motor oil, and related products. (MM)
               ACTION ITEM SAF-7.5:           Conduct twice-yearly e-waste collection at City
               facilities in cooperation with the City’s franchise solid waste hauler to include
               computers, computer monitors, televisions, and other electronic devices. (MM)
               ACTION ITEM SAF-7.6:           The City will promote efforts to reduce or eliminate
               the use of hazardous materials. Potential efforts include:
               •   Encouraging residents to buy toxic substances only in the amount needed to
                   do the job.
               •   Encouraging the use of safer alternative products that do not pose a threat to
                   the environment.
               •   An education and collection process for batteries and other materials that
                   residents might be inclined to dispose of in their household waste. (MM)
               ACTION ITEM SAF-7.7:           Continue to conduct twice-yearly citywide curbside
               collection of oversize items and coordinate this action with the City’s franchise
               solid waste hauler. (MM)
 DISASTER RESPONSE
POLICY SAF-8:  The City supports efforts to provide for rapid and efficient response to
               disasters and to help Calimesa residents and businesses cope with
               disasters. (MM)
               ACTION ITEM SAF-8.1:           Create an education program for citizens and
               ensure that every household and business is informed about disaster planning
               and resources. (MM)
               ACTION ITEM SAF-8.2:           Establish and maintain mutual aid agreements with
               neighboring cities and other government emergency relief agencies, and
               establish a cooperative relationship with private enterprises such as the Red
               Cross, Salvation Army, and local medical institutions to assist in shelter, relief,
               and first aid operations. (MM)
               CALIMESA GENERAL PLAN AUGUST 2014                                       8-17

                           CHAPTER 8: SAFETY
     ACTION ITEM SAF-8.3:             Establish traffic control contingency plans for
     disaster routes and support actions to provide secondary access to development.
     (MM)
     ACTION ITEM SAF-8.4:             Identify, designate, and maintain critical facilities
     as emergency shelters and reception centers. (MM)
     ACTION ITEM SAF-8.5:             Inventory    existing     disaster   communication
     equipment and increase to an acceptable level for the city. (MM)
     ACTION ITEM SAF-8.6:             Coordinate with the County Sheriff’s Department
     and Fire Department to identify casualty collection points and staging areas.
     (MM)
     ACTION ITEM SAF-8.7:             Assign a disaster coordinator to inform public
     personnel and volunteers of their responsibilities during a disaster event. (MM)
     ACTION ITEM SAF-8.8:             Encourage residents to put together a 72-hour
     home emergency kit. (MM)
     ACTION ITEM SAF-8.9:             Encourage private businesses to develop disaster
     preparedness plans for their employees. (MM)
     ACTION ITEM SAF-8.10:            Increase public awareness of City emergency
     response plans, evacuation routes, and shelters, and how to reduce risks at
     home or office. (MM)
     ACTION ITEM SAF-8.11:            Coordinate with Citizens on Patrol, neighborhood
     watch groups, church groups, and other similar types of organizations to provide
     emergency assistance in the event of a natural disaster. (MM)
     ACTION ITEM SAF-8.12:            Coordinate with managers of dependent care
     centers (nursing homes, day-care centers, etc.), mobile/manufactured home
     parks, and critical facilities located in the city to facilitate emergency response.
     (MM)
     ACTION ITEM SAF-8.13:            Implement the City’s Emergency Operations Plan,
     including execution of the specific hazard checklists to address water demand
     and access during emergency response actions.
     ACTION ITEM SAF-8.14:            Participate in countywide emergency         disaster
     scenarios, coordinated by City and County Disaster Services. (MM)
8-18                       CALIMESA GENERAL PLAN AUGUST 2014

                        CHAPTER 9: NOISE
INTRODUCTION
                                                                  Simply stated, “noise” is unwanted sound. Sound
                                                                  can be measured in a variety of ways, but the
                                                                  determination of whether a sound is noise is
                                                                  purely subjective. For example, the sound of
                                                                  children playing may be wonderful to some, but
                                                                  not to others. And of course the sounds of
                                                                  playing during the early afternoon may be
                                                                  perceived differently than late in the evening.
                                                                  Laughter at 2 P.M. is charming; the same laughter
                                                                  at 2 A.M. can be annoying and disruptive to sleep.
Roadway noise, which is caused primarily by vehicle tires, is the
most prevalent noise source in Calimesa.                          Managing noise is both a quality of life issue and
                                                                  an important means of encouraging commerce. If
noise standards are too stringent, businesses may have a difficult time locating and operating, and
mitigation from traffic noise or other sources may make it difficult to build new homes. If the noise
standards are too lenient, the quality of life in the community may suffer.
This chapter of the General Plan attempts to balance these issues and to separate sound from noise.
SETTING
Calimesa has a relatively quiet noise environment. The primary sources of noise in the city are
transportation-related. Interstate 10 and the other major transportation corridors in the community
accommodate local and regional traffic; this traffic creates noise that is relatively constant and easy to
measure and predict. Because the City cannot control freeway noise, land uses near the freeway would
also have to be constructed to prevent excessive noise impacts, and noise-sensitive uses (such as
churches, schools, libraries, medical facilities, and residences) would best be located away from these
areas. Air and rail transportation noise is minimal as Calimesa is not located within the noise impact
areas of nearby airports and the only rail line is located in the San Timeteo Canyon, away from sensitive
land uses.
Other noise sources in the city include outdoor speakers and alarms, air conditioning, heating,
generators, sirens, car and home stereos, etc. Industrial activities may result in high noise levels when
machinery is in operation. Trucks serving industrial and commercial uses also create noise that could
disrupt adjacent residential areas. Commercial and business activities, clients, and patrons are the
main sources of noise along the Calimesa Boulevard commercial corridor.
                          CALIMESA GENERAL PLAN AUGUST 2014                                               9-1

                                              CHAPTER 9: NOISE
TERMS AND DEFINITIONS
The science of acoustical (sound) analysis has its own
terminology that makes a straightforward discussion difficult.              Sound Terminology
The terms shown in the definition block (see text box) are        Ambient Sound: The normal or existing
                                                                  level of environmental sound at a given
used to measure sound. The various sound levels are then
                                                                  location.
used to develop or establish policy that affects noise
                                                                  CNEL (Community Noise Equivalent
generation and attenuation.                                       Level): The average equivalent A-
                                                                  weighted sound level during a 24-hour
NOISE-SENSITIVE LAND USES                                         day, obtained after addition of 5 decibels
                                                                  to sound levels in the evening (from 7:00
                                                                  P.M . to 10:00 P .M .) and after the addition
A series of land uses have been deemed “sensitive” by the         of 10 decibels to sound levels in the
State of California. These land uses require attention to noise   night (from 10:00 P.M. to 7:00 A.M .).
to ensure that they can operate as designed. Sensitive uses       dBA (A-weighted decibel): The A-
typically include schools, hospitals, rest homes, long-term care  weighted decibel scale discriminates
                                                                  upper and lower frequencies in a manner
facilities, mental care facilities, homes, places of worship,     approximating the sensitivity of the
libraries, and passive recreation areas. Activities conducted in  human ear. The scale is based on a
proximity to these sensitive uses must consider their sound       reference pressure level of 20
                                                                  micropascals.
output and ensure that they don't create unacceptable noise
levels.                                                           Leq (Equivalent Energy Level): The
                                                                  average acoustic energy content of sound
                                                                  during the time it lasts. The City uses a
Similarly, noise-generating uses need to be protected from        10-minute Leq measurement.
encroachment by noise-sensitive uses (that is, from complaints    Ldn (Day-Night Average Level): The
that would make it difficult for them to operate in the way they  average equivalent A-weighted sound
need to). Existing agricultural operations and industrial and     level during a 24-hour day, obtained after
                                                                  addition of 10 decibels to sound levels in
commercial activity that generates noise should not be
                                                                  the night (from 10:00 P.M. to 7:00 A.M .).
required to curtail their activity because of a newly
constructed housing project or other noise-sensitive use.
Most communities handle noise issues by taking care to put compatible uses near each other and avoid
placing noisy uses next to homes and other noise-sensitive uses.
This chapter includes estimates of future noise conditions that will need to be addressed as the City
makes land use decisions.
        9-2                                  CALIMESA GENERAL PLAN AUGUST 2014

                    CHAPTER 9: NOISE
Table N-A provides information on projected noise levels along
major roadways in the city—specifically, what the future noise               How Loud Is It?
level could be at a given distance from the centerline of the         Sound Levels for Common
roadway. This information is useful to residents seeking                      Noise Sources
information on neighborhoods and to planners who want to
                                                                                                 Noise
ensure that noise impacts are properly addressed when new                                        Level
                                                                 Activity
development proposals are reviewed. The noise information is                                     in
expressed in A-weighted decibels (dBA) and divided into bands                                    Decibels
                                                                 Limit of Hearing                0 dB
or contours ranging from 55 to 70 dBA in 5 dBA increments.
                                                                 Normal Breathing                10 dB
The contours are used in ordinances and policy statements.       Soft Whisper                    30 dB
                                                                 Library                         40 dB
Noise created by stationary sources (i.e., outdoor mechanical    Refrigerator                    50 dB
equipment) is difficult to predict and will need to be addressed Rainfall                        50 dB
on a case-by-case basis.                                         Washing Machine                 50–75 dB
                                                                 Normal Conversation             60 dB
                                                                 Hair Dryer                      60–95 dB
                                                                 Alarm Clock                     65–80 dB
                                                                 Power Mower                     65–95 dB
                                                                 Dumpster Pickup                 80 dB
                                                                 Garbage Disposal                80–95 dB
                                                                 Noisy Restaurant                85 dB
                                                                 Train Approaching               85–90 dB
                                                                 (Engines)
                                                                 Tractor                         90 dB
                                                                 Shouting in Ear                 110 dB
                                                                 Loud Rock Concert               120 dB
                                                                 Jet Engine at Takeoff           150 dB
                                                                 These are typical noise levels. Distance
                                                                 from the source will reduce the noise
                                                                 level. A 10 dB increase doubles perceived
                                                                 loudness. Continued exposure to noise
                                                                 above 85 dB can cause hearing loss; the
                                                                 maximum exposure to 85 dB noise in the
                                                                 workplace is eight hours. A single
                                                                 exposure to 140 dB noise can cause some
                                                                 hearing loss.
                                                                 Source: National Institute for
                                                                 Occupational Safety and Health.
                      CALIMESA GENERAL PLAN AUGUST 2014                                        9-3

                                                   CHAPTER 9: NOISE
                              TABLE N-A: DISTANCE TO NOISE LEVELS
                                 BY MAJOR ROADWAY DESIGNATION1
              Roadway Classification             70 dBA          65 dBA          60 dBA 55 dBA
             Urban Arterial – 6 Lanes              141             297             638   1,373
             Urban Arterial – 4 Lanes              106             227             487   1,048
             Major Highway                          91             190             407    879
             Secondary Highway                      65             135             288    620
             Collector Street                       27              59             126    272
             Source: Appendix I: Noise Element Data, Riverside County General Plan
             Note: 1. Distance is measured from the centerline.
NOISE MITIGATION STRATEGIES
When an existing or proposed land use emits sound that exceeds the City’s determined acceptable
level, the sound is characterized as noise (“unwanted sound”) and becomes subject to regulation. A
number of methods exist for reducing noise from both the source and at the sensitive use. When
design or regulatory methods are used to reduce noise, the methods attenuate or mitigate the noise.
There are both indoor and outdoor standards for this type of mitigation.
Policies included in this chapter provide a number of methods for mitigation. However, with changing
technology and advances in design, this list is not comprehensive, and new methods should be
considered. Note too that the strategies used will depend to a large degree on the planned land use
and existing uses on and near a site.
NOISE SOURCES
    STATIONARY NOISE
    A stationary noise source is any entity in a fixed location that emits noise. Stationary noise
    sources are common in many noise-sensitive areas. Motors, appliances, air conditioners, lawn and
    garden equipment, power tools, and generators are often found in residential neighborhoods, as
    well as on or near the properties of schools, hospitals, and parks. These structures are often a
    permanent fixture and are required for the particular land use. Industrial and manufacturing
    facilities are also stationary noise producers that may affect adjacent sensitive land uses. The
    emitted noise from the noise source can be mitigated to acceptable levels either at the source or
     9-4                                         CALIMESA GENERAL PLAN AUGUST 2014

                    CHAPTER 9: NOISE
    on the adjacent property through the use of proper planning, setbacks, noise walls, acoustic-
    rated windows, dense landscaping, or other noise control measures.
    TRANSPORTATION
    The most common mobile noise sources in the city are transportation-related. Motor vehicle noise
    is characterized by the number of vehicles generating engine and tire noise on local roads and
    freeways, which often creates a higher sustained noise level in proximity to areas sensitive to
    noise exposure. Transit associated with bus service in the city is a small part of the transportation
    noise environment. Railway noise affects a small portion of Calimesa near the rail lines in San
    Timoteo Canyon. This impact is limited by the lack of existing development in the canyon.
NOISE ATTENUATION (REDUCTION)
One of the most effective means of reducing noise in a sensitive area is to construct and design
buildings in such a way that the noise is deflected, absorbed, or mitigated so as not to affect the
occupants. If the building has already been constructed, then landscaping, physical barriers, sound-
dampening technology, and other design techniques can be used to absorb the noise. These building
and design techniques should serve two purposes: to mitigate noise to acceptable indoor and
outdoor levels and to enhance the community character rather than detract from the surroundings.
VIBRATION
Another community annoyance related to noise is vibration. Vibration can be described by both its
amplitude and frequency, where amplitude is characterized by displacement, velocity, and/or
acceleration. Typically, particle velocity (measured in inches or millimeters per second) and/or
acceleration (measured in gravities) are used to describe vibration.
Vibration can be felt outdoors, but the perceived intensity of vibration impacts are greater indoors,
due to the shaking of the structure. Some of the most common sources of vibration come from trains
and/or transit vehicles, construction equipment, airplanes, and large vehicles. Several land uses are
especially sensitive to vibration and therefore have a lower vibration threshold. These uses include,
but are not limited to, concert halls, hospitals, libraries, vibration-sensitive research operations,
residential areas, schools, and offices.
Table N-B presents the human reaction to various levels of peak particle velocity. Typical construction
vibrations fall in the 10 to 30 Hertz (Hz) range and usually occur around 15 Hz. Traffic vibrations
exhibit a similar range of frequencies. However, due to their suspension systems, buses often
generate frequencies around 30 Hz at high speeds. It is more uncommon, but possible, to measure
traffic frequencies above 30 Hz.
                     CALIMESA GENERAL PLAN AUGUST 2014                                         9-5
                                                 CHAPTER 9: NOISE
              TABLE N-B: HUMAN REACTION TO TYPICAL VIBRATION LEVELS
           Peak Particle
             Velocity                                    Human Reaction
        (inches/second)
         0.0059–0.0188         Threshold of perception, possibility of intrusion
              0.0787           Vibrations readily perceptible
              0.0984           Continuous vibration begins to annoy people
              0.1968           Vibrations annoying to people in buildings
                               Vibrations considered unpleasant when continuously subjected and
         0.3937–0.5905
                               unacceptable by some walking on bridges
       Source: Caltrans 1992
  ISSUES FOR FUTURE PLANNING
  As population and development increase in Calimesa, the noise levels in the community will likely
  also increase. Methods of addressing the increase in noise can be evaluated before noise levels reach
  an annoyance level. Noise attenuation will be important for noise-sensitive uses located along major
  roadways or in the vicinity of industrial or heavy commercial activities.
NOISE GOALS
GOAL N-1:                 Ensure that all land uses are protected from excessive and unwanted noise.
GOAL N-2:                 Prevent and mitigate the adverse impacts of excessive noise exposure on
                          the residents, employees, visitors, and noise-sensitive uses in Calimesa.
NOISE POLICIES
Policies are provided in this chapter in the following areas:
    •   General Noise – Page 9-7
    •   Noise Mitigation Strategy – Page 9-8
    •   Noise Sources – Page 9-12
    •   Building and Design – Page 9-14
       9-6                                     CALIMESA GENERAL PLAN AUGUST 2014

                     CHAPTER 9: NOISE
Note to the Reader: The policies and action items designated with (MM) provide mitigation for impacts
identified through the Environmental Impact Report analysis prepared for this General Plan.
  GENERAL NOISE
POLICY N-1:        Future development that could increase ambient noise levels shall be required
                   to mitigate the anticipated noise increase to the extent possible.
POLICY N-2:        Noise-sensitive uses (such as schools, libraries, homes, hospitals, and medical
                   facilities) shall be discouraged in areas where noise levels exceed acceptable
                   limits. See also Policy N-3.
POLICY N-3:        Noise-tolerant land uses should be located in areas that are expected to be
                   subject to noise for the foreseeable future, such as transportation corridors.
                   (MM)
POLICY N-4:        Encourage noise-tolerant land uses such as commercial or industrial
                   development to locate in areas already committed to land uses that are noise-
                   producing. (MM)
POLICY N-5:        Ensure that noise-sensitive uses do not encroach into areas needed by noise-
                   generating uses. (MM)
POLICY N-6:        The City will continue to work to reduce noise impacts from vehicular traffic
                   and trains.
POLICY N-7:        Consider the following uses to be sensitive to noise and vibration, and
                   discourage these uses in areas where existing or projected future noise levels
                   would be in excess of 65 dBA CNEL and/or vibration would be more than 0.0787
                   peak particle velocity (inches per second):
                   •   Schools
                   •   Hospitals
                   •   Rest homes
                   •   Long-term care facilities
                   •   Mental care facilities
                   •   Residential uses
                   •   Libraries
                   •   Passive recreation uses
                      CALIMESA GENERAL PLAN AUGUST 2014                                     9-7

                                                         CHAPTER 9: NOISE
                        •    Places of worship (MM)
POLICY N-8:             Exterior noise forecasts shall use the appropriate level of service for the
                        adjacent roadways or a 20-year projection of traffic volumes (whichever is
                        greater) for future noise forecasts. (MM)
POLICY N-9:             The City will work to create and preserve a quiet living environment for all
                        residential neighborhoods.
   NOISE MITIGATION STRATEGY
POLICY N-10:            When making decisions regarding changes to the General Plan or Zoning Maps,
                        or regarding the suitability of a proposed use, the standards in Table N-C shall
                        apply. (MM)
                       TABLE N-C: NOISE COMPATIBILITY BY LAND USE TYPE
                                                   Completely     Tentatively     Normally     Completely
         Land Use Designations
                                                   Compatible     Compatible    Incompatible  Incompatible
  All Residential                                   Less than                                  Greater than
                                                                   60–70 dBA      70–75 dBA
  (Single- and Multi-Family)                         60 dBA                                      75 dBA
  All Nonresidential
                                                    Less than                    Greater than
  (Commercial, Industrial &                                        70–75 dBA                        (1)
                                                     70 dBA                        75 dBA
  Institutional)
  Public Parks
                                                    Less than                                  Greater than
  (Lands on which public parks are                                 65–70 dBA      70–75 dBA
                                                     65 dBA                                      75 dBA
  located or planned)
All noise levels shown in this table are designated CNEL.
1. To be determined as part of the project review process.
        9-8                                            CALIMESA GENERAL PLAN AUGUST 2014

                     CHAPTER 9: NOISE
POLICY N-11:       Table N-D provides the City’s standards for maximum exterior non-
                   transportation noise levels to which land designated for residential land uses
                   may be exposed for any 30-minute period on any day. Where existing ambient
                   noise levels exceed these standards, the ambient noise level shall be highest
                   allowable noise level as measured in dBA LEQ (30 minutes). (MM)
Note to the Reader: Public schools are not regulated by the City; therefore, no noise standards for
public schools are included in this chapter.
   TABLE N-D: EXTERIOR NOISE LEVEL STANDARDS FOR NON-TRANSPORTATION
                           NOISE, MEASURED AS dBA LEQ (30 MINUTES)
                                                                                      Maximum Noise
                      Land Use Type                               Time Period
                                                                                        Level (dBA)
                                                                10 P.M. to 7 A.M.           50
 Single-Family Homes and Duplexes
                                                                7 A.M. to 10 P.M.           60
 Multi-Family Residential – 3 or More Units Per Building        10 P.M. to 7 A.M.           55
 (Triplex +)                                                    7 A.M. to 10 P.M.           60
                        ACTION ITEM N-11.1: Establish acceptable standards for residential noise
                        sources such as, but not limited to, leaf blowers, mobile vendors, mobile stereos,
                        and stationary noise sources such as home appliances, air conditioners, and
                        swimming pool equipment. (MM)
                        ACTION ITEM N-11.2: Evaluate noise producers for the possibility of pure tone–
                        producing noises. Mitigate any pure tones that may be emitted from a noise
                        source. (MM)
POLICY N-12:       The noise levels specified in Policy N-11 shall be lowered by 5 dBA for simple
                   tonal noises (such as humming sounds), noises consisting primarily of speech
                   or music, or recurring impulsive noises (such as pile drivers, punch presses,
                   and similar machinery). Example: The single-family/duplex standard from 10
                   P.M . to 7 A.M. for these types of noises is 45 dBA. (MM)
                       CALIMESA GENERAL PLAN AUGUST 2014                                       9-9

                                      CHAPTER 9: NOISE
POLICY N-13: The City may impose exterior noise standards which are less restrictive than
             those specified in Table N-D, provided that all of the following are true:
                 1. The noise impact on the residential or other noise-sensitive use is
                    addressed in an environmental analysis and at least one outdoor area
                    meets the standard.
                 2. A finding is made by the approving body specifying why the exception
                    would not be detrimental to the public health, safety, and general
                    welfare.
                 3. The exception would not        adversely    affect  the  character of the
                    surrounding development.
                 4. The exception would not be injurious to adjacent uses, property, and
                    improvements.
                 5. Alternatives have been considered but none are technologically feasible
                    for the proposal.
                 6. Interior noise levels resulting from an external source will be no more
                    than 45 dBA CNEL from 7 A.M. to 10 P.M.
                 7. Residents of noise-sensitive uses are informed of the proposal during
                    the review stage and prior to approval. (MM)
POLICY N-14: The City’s standards for acceptable indoor noise levels for various types of land
             uses are provided in Table N-E. These standards should receive special
             attention when projects are considered in Tentatively Compatible or Normally
             Incompatible areas.
             •   Noise created inside a use listed below shall not count toward the
                 acceptable noise levels to be maintained in accordance with this policy. (MM)
     9-10                            CALIMESA GENERAL PLAN AUGUST 2014

                        CHAPTER 9: NOISE
                           TABLE N-E: MAXIMUM ACCEPTABLE INTERIOR
                     NOISE LEVELS CREATED BY EXTERIOR NOISE SOURCES
                                                                                            Acceptable Noise Level
                                   Land Use Type
                                                                                                    (dBA CNEL)
 Residential Living and Sleeping Areas                                                                 45 dBA
 Residential Living and Sleeping Areas where the dwelling unit is subject
 to noise from railroad tracks, aircraft overflights, or similar sources
 which produce clearly identifiable, discrete noise events (such as the                                40 dBA
 passing of a train as opposed to relatively steady or constant noise
 sources such as roadways)
 Private School Classrooms(1)                                                                          55 dBA
                                                                                            Conform with applicable
                                                                                                 state and federal
 All Places of Work Other Than Private School Classrooms
                                                                                                 workplace safety
                                                                                                     standards
    1.  Standards for public schools are set and regulated by the State of California and are not regulated by the
        City of Calimesa.
POLICY N-15:          Because public schools are governed by the State of California, this standard
                      applies only to private schools. (MM)
POLICY N-16:          Developers of new residential or other noise-sensitive uses which are placed in
                      environments subject to existing or projected noise exceeding the Completely
                      Compatible guidelines in Table N-C shall be responsible for ensuring that
                      acceptable exterior and interior noise levels will be achieved. (MM)
                          ACTION ITEM N-16.1: For noise-sensitive land uses listed in Table N-E that are
                          proposed in areas where existing or projected future noise levels would be in
                          excess of 65 CNEL, an acoustical specialist shall be required to prepare a study
                          of the noise environment and recommend structural and site design features that
                          will adequately mitigate the noise problem. (MM)
POLICY N-17:          The City’s preferences for providing noise mitigation are, in order of preference
                      (#1 is most preferred and #5 is the least):
                      1. Reduce noise at the source.
                      2. If #1 is not practical, designate land uses that are compatible with projected
                          noise levels.
                          CALIMESA GENERAL PLAN AUGUST 2014                                                   9-11

                                       CHAPTER 9: NOISE
             3. If #1 or #2 is not practical, use distance from the source to reduce noise to
                 acceptable levels.
             4. If #1, #2, or #3 is not practical, use buildings, berms, or landscaping or a
                 combination of these to reduce exterior noise to acceptable levels. Use
                 construction techniques (sound-reducing windows, insulation, etc.) to reduce
                 interior noise to acceptable levels.
             5. The last measure that should be considered is the use of a sound wall to
                 reduce noise to acceptable levels. (MM)
POLICY N-18: The City encourages good acoustical design in new construction.
POLICY N-19: Natural buffers, setbacks, or other noise attenuation shall be established
             between freeways and urban arterial roadways and adjoining noise-sensitive
             areas.
POLICY N-20: The City shall adopt and apply measures to limit construction noise in
             residential areas.
POLICY N-21: An acoustical study shall be required for new residential development in areas
             within a designated CNEL contour of 60 dB or greater to determine what level of
             sound insulation, landscape buffer, or sound attenuation wall, if any, is required
             to meet the CNEL acceptable interior noise level of 45 dBA.
POLICY N-22: Noise mitigation measures will be included in the design and approval of any
             development on property located adjacent to active railroad lines.
POLICY N-23: Residential development in areas adjacent to the freeway, arterial streets, the
             railroad, and other noise sources shall be designed to reduce the potential for
             noise impacts.
POLICY N-24: The City will regulate the use of residential streets by trucks, trailers, and
             construction vehicles to reduce noise to the extent possible.
 NOISE SOURCES
POLICY N-25: Noise sources should be located away from existing noise-sensitive land uses
             unless appropriate noise control measures are provided. (MM)
POLICY N-26: Include noise mitigation measures in the design of new arterial roadway
             projects.
     9-12                             CALIMESA GENERAL PLAN AUGUST 2014
               CHAPTER 9: NOISE
                 ACTION ITEM N-26.1: The City will coordinate with adjacent cities and county
                 agencies and Caltrans for noise abatement.
                 ACTION ITEM N-26.2: Develop and adopt a comprehensive noise ordinance that
                 will prohibit unwanted and unnecessary noise within Calimesa. The noise
                 ordinance will establish a noise enforcement and regulation program, along with
                 setting standards for noise levels in the community.
POLICY N-27: Ensure compatibility between industrial and commercial development and
             adjacent land uses. To achieve compatibility, industrial and commercial
             development projects may be required to include noise mitigation measures to
             avoid or minimize project impacts on adjacent uses. (MM)
POLICY N-28: Require that loading docks/delivery areas of commercial or industrial land uses
             and similar noise sources be designed to minimize potential noise impacts on
             adjacent noise-sensitive land uses. (MM)
POLICY N-29: If noise levels in Table N-D are exceeded or are projected to be exceeded as a
             result of the proposed commercial or industrial loading dock or delivery area,
             require delivery hours to be limited when adjacent to noise-sensitive land uses.
             (MM)
POLICY N-30: Encourage the development and use of alternative transportation modes,
             including bicycle paths and pedestrian walkways, to minimize vehicular noise in
             residential and other noise-sensitive areas. (MM)
POLICY N-31: Ensure that construction activities are regulated to establish hours of operation
             in order to prevent and/or mitigate the generation of excessive or adverse
             noise impacts on surrounding areas. (MM)
                 ACTION ITEM N-31.1: Condition subdivision and other land development
                 approval adjacent to developed/occupied noise-sensitive land uses to require the
                 developer to submit a construction-related noise mitigation plan to the City for
                 review and approval prior to issuance of a grading permit. The plan must depict
                 the location of construction equipment and specify how the noise from this
                 equipment will be mitigated during construction of this project, through the use
                 of such methods as:
                 •   Temporary noise attenuation fences;
                 •   Preferential location of equipment;
                 •   Length of equipment use and idling time; and
                 CALIMESA GENERAL PLAN AUGUST 2014                                    9-13

                                       CHAPTER 9: NOISE
                 •  Use of current noise suppression technology and equipment. (MM)
POLICY N-32: Require that all construction equipment be kept properly tuned and use noise
             reduction features (e.g., mufflers and engine shrouds) that are no less effective
             than those originally installed by the manufacturer. (MM)
 BUILDING AND DESIGN
POLICY N-33: Development should use natural barriers such as berms, setbacks, and/or
             dense vegetation to assist in noise reduction. (MM)
POLICY N-34: Noise reduction measures shall be included in the design of new development
             through measures which may include:
             •   Separation of noise-sensitive buildings from noise-generating sources;
             •   Use of natural topography and intervening structures to shield noise-
                 sensitive land uses; and
             •   Adequate soundproofing of noise sources or receptor structures to maintain
                 desired interior noise levels. (MM)
POLICY N-35: Require that commercial and residential mixed-use structures minimize the
             transfer or transmission of noise and vibration from the commercial land use to
             the residential land use through appropriate building technologies. (MM)
     9-14                            CALIMESA GENERAL PLAN AUGUST 2014

             CHAPTER 10: AIR QUALITY
INTRODUCTION
                                                          Air quality affects human health, the natural and
                                                          built environments, the production and quality of
                                                          agricultural crops, and the earth’s climate. It is a
                                                          major factor in defining the quality of life.
                                                          However, the City cannot control local or regional
                                                          air quality on its own. Regional climate and
                                                          weather, as well as local, nearby, and distant
                                                          pollutant sources, affect air quality in Calimesa
                                                          and the larger South Coast Air Basin. Although
                                                          Riverside County, including Calimesa, generates
                                                          the lowest emissions of any county in the South
                                                          Coast Air Basin, air quality in the county is among
 Clean, clear air provides for beautiful views of the San
                                                          the basin’s worst because onshore winds
 Bernardino mountains.                                    transport vast amounts of pollutants from Los
Angeles and Orange counties into the Inland Empire. At the same time, reducing pollution from local
sources would improve air quality in downwind areas of the city.
This Air Quality Chapter focuses on strategies to improve local air quality and contribute to the
attainment of regional, state, and federal air quality standards.
BACKGROUND
Six “criteria air pollutants” (ozone, nitrogen dioxide, carbon monoxide, particulate matter, sulfur
dioxide, and lead) have been established for every air basin in California. These are pollutants for
which acceptable levels of exposure have been determined and for which ambient air quality standards
have been set. Federal and state standards have been established for ozone, carbon monoxide,
nitrogen dioxide, sulfur dioxide, and coarse particulate matter (PM10). Federal primary standards for air
pollutants have been established to protect the public health, while secondary standards protect the
public welfare by preventing impairment of visibility and damage to vegetation and property. State
standards have also been established, which are generally more stringent than federal standards.
Air quality in the South Coast Air Basin, which includes Calimesa, has historically been cleaner than
what local, state, or federal standards require, except for particulates (very fine dust particles).
                         CALIMESA GENERAL PLAN AUGUST 2014                                          10-1

                                     CHAPTER 10: AIR QUALITY
Note to the Reader: For up-to-date information on air                     Greenhouse Gases
quality in the Calimesa area, see the website of the South
Coast Air Quality Management District (www.aqmd.gov).
 POLLUTION SOURCES
 Pollution sources are categorized into two primary
 groups: mobile source pollutants and stationary source
 pollutants. Air quality regulations address both groups
 of pollutant sources.
   MOBILE SOURCES
   Mobile pollution       sources are  divided   into  two
   categories:
   1. On-road (generally motorized vehicles            like Gases that trap heat in the atmosphere are
        automobiles, motorcycles, and trucks)               known as greenhouse gases. Four types of
                                                            gases (shown above by their prevalence in
   2. Non-road sources (trains, boats, jet skis, and all-   the atmosphere) are generally considered to
        terrain vehicles)                                   be the cause of climate change:
                                                            Carbon Dioxide (CO2): Carbon dioxide
   STATIONARY SOURCES                                       comes from the burning of fossil fuels (oil,
                                                            natural gas, and coal), solid waste, trees, and
   Stationary pollution sources are generally divided       wood products, and also results from other
                                                            chemical reactions (e.g., manufacture of
   into two categories:                                     cement).
                                                            Methane (CH4): Methane is emitted during
   1. Point sources (such as power plants and refinery
                                                            the production and transport of coal, natural
        boilers)                                            gas, and oil. Methane emissions also result
   2. Area sources (including small emission sources        from livestock and other agricultural
                                                            practices and by the decay of organic waste
        such     as   residential  water    heaters    and  in municipal solid waste landfills.
        architectural coatings)
                                                            Nitrous Oxide (N2O): Nitrous oxide comes
                                                            from agricultural and industrial activities, as
                                                            well as the combustion of fossil fuels and
                                                            solid waste.
                                                            Fluorinated Gases: Hydrofluorocarbons,
                                                            perfluorocarbons, and sulfur hexafluoride are
                                                            synthetic, powerful greenhouse gases that
                                                            are emitted from a variety of industrial
                                                            processes. These gases are typically emitted
                                                            in smaller quantities, but because they are
                                                            potent greenhouse gases, they are
                                                            sometimes referred to as high global
                                                            warming potential gases (“high GWP gases”).
                                                            Source: US Environmental Protection Agency
      10-2                                  CALIMESA GENERAL PLAN AUGUST 2014

           CHAPTER 10: AIR QUALITY
SOUTH COAST AIR BASIN
The City of Calimesa is located in the South Coast Air Basin, which includes all of Orange County and
the non-desert portions of Los Angeles, Riverside, and San Bernardino counties. Air quality in the
basin is affected not only by various emissions sources (mobile, industry, etc.) but also by
atmospheric conditions such as wind speed and direction, temperature, and rainfall.
With very light average wind speeds and the presence of the surrounding mountains, the basin
atmosphere has a limited capability to disperse air contaminants horizontally. The dominant daily
wind pattern is a daytime sea breeze (onshore breeze) and a nighttime land breeze (offshore breeze),
broken only occasionally by winter storms and infrequent strong Santa Ana winds from the Great
Basin, Mojave Desert, and deserts to the north. The dominant wind pattern transports pollutants
northeast and east during the daytime and south and southeast during the nighttime. Particularly in
the summer, warm air caps the shallow layer of cooler ocean air and confines polluted air within the
basin.
Air quality in the South Coast Air Basin is under the jurisdiction of the South Coast Air Quality
Management District. According to the Air Quality Management Plan for the basin, pollutant levels in
the South Coast Air Basin exceed standards for ozone and particulates (there is more pollution from
these sources than there should be, according to the standards).
CLIMATE CHANGE
Climate change has become an issue of increasing concern in California, the nation, and the world.
Climate change is presently thought to be both naturally occurring and induced by increases in the
amounts of carbon dioxide (CO2) and other greenhouse gases (GHGs) in the earth’s atmosphere
attributable to a variety of human activities and sources.
  GREENHOUSE GASES AND CLIMATE CHANGE: AN EMERGING ISSUE
  Greenhouse gases (see the sidebar, page 10-2) have become the subject of increasing attention
  worldwide in recent years. Evidence has been steadily growing that human activities have helped
  speed and contributed to changes in the global climate. The burning of fossil fuels (mostly coal and
  oil) is the primary cause of GHGs, a fact that has led to calls for increased energy efficiency to
  reduce GHG emissions.
  Statewide efforts to address this issue are described below.
                     CALIMESA GENERAL PLAN AUGUST 2014                                     10-3

                                 CHAPTER 10: AIR QUALITY
THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA RESPONDS TO GREENHOUSE GAS EMISSIONS
Since 2005, a number of legislative changes have addressed GHG impacts on land use planning
decisions.
•   Executive Order S-3-05 was issued in June 2005, setting GHG emission targets for the state to
    meet, starting with a reduction to 2000 GHG emission levels by 2010 and concluding with a
    reduction to 80 percent below 1990 numbers by 2050. This order directed the California
    Environmental Protection Agency, the Business, Transportation, and Housing Agency, the
    California Air Resources Board (CARB), the California Energy Commission, and the California
    Public Utilities Commission to work together to develop a Climate Action Plan and report back
    on progress on meeting the statewide targets.
•   In 2006, Assembly Bill (AB) 32 established the first set of limits on GHG emissions for
    California and put into place the regulatory framework needed to reach those targets. AB 32 set
    the 1990 GHG emissions level as a target to be achieved by 2020. In order to meet this goal,
    CARB developed GHG emissions reporting procedures and adopted rules and regulations for
    reducing emissions, to be enforceable by January 1, 2012.
•   In 2007, Senate Bill (SB) 97 directed the Governor’s Office of Planning and Research to prepare
    guidelines for the feasible mitigation of GHG emissions, or the effects of GHG emissions, under
    the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA). In 2010, the State CEQA Guidelines were
    amended to incorporate these provisions, and to allow jurisdictions to analyze and mitigate
    significant effects of GHGs at a programmatic level by adopting a climate action plan.
•   In 2008, SB 375 set out planning concepts intended to reduce vehicle travel by promoting more
    compact development. A goal of SB 375 is to help curb GHG emissions through local land use
    decisions.
Both S-3-05 and AB 32 set the emission targets that Calimesa will eventually be required to attain.
While explicit thresholds and requirements have yet to be developed, various state agencies have
begun to examine proposed land use plans and specific projects for their potential GHG impacts.
  10-4                                   CALIMESA GENERAL PLAN AUGUST 2014

          CHAPTER 10: AIR QUALITY
ADDRESSING CLIMATE CHANGE
Calimesa is a member agency of the Western Riverside Council of Governments (WRCOG). WRCOG is
coordinating subregional Climate Action Plan (CAP) and Energy Action Plan (EAP) processes on
behalf of its member agencies. As part of this program, WRCOG prepared a community-wide GHG
emissions inventory for Calimesa for the year 2010 and community-wide “business-as-usual”
emissions projections for the years 2020 and 2035 (the business-as-usual projection assumes
future development directed by the Land Use Chapter without a CAP). The inventory and
projections address community-wide emissions (i.e., those emissions attributable to all sources in
the city, both public and private).
The community-wide GHG emissions inventory and projections are divided into the following
sectors: residential, commercial, and industrial energy use; transportation; waste; and water use.
Table AQ-A summarizes the magnitude and relative contribution of community-wide baseline
emissions from each sector for each year (2010, 2020, and 2035). All GHG emissions are presented
in units of metric tons of carbon dioxide equivalent emissions per year (MTCO2e/yr).
                            TABLE AQ-A                  CALIMESA COMMUNITY-WIDE
                      GREENHOUSE GAS EMISSIONS: 2010, 2020, AND 20351
                                     2010 Inventory                 2020 Inventory        2035 Inventory
                                       Emissions                      Emissions              Emissions
    Community Sector
                                 MTCO2e            %           MTCO2e           %      MTCO2e           %
 Energy Consumption
    Residential                   15,743          23%            29,911        26%      52,254        27%
    Commercial/Industrial          7,865          12%            13,213        11%      20,147        10%
 Transportation                   43,562          64%            71,988        62%     117,440        61%
 Waste                              938            1%             1,735         1%      2,967          2%
 Total                            68,108          100%          116,848        100%    192,808       100%
 Notes: CO2e = carbon dioxide equivalent; MT= metric tons
 1
      The emissions inventory shown in this table does not include expected statewide GHG reductions in the
 projections.         See          the        Burbank            Greenhouse        Gas    Reduction       Plan
 (http://www.burbankca.gov/home/showdocument?id=23440) for further details about the current GHG inventory and
 future projections that include statewide and local reductions.
                       CALIMESA GENERAL PLAN AUGUST 2014                                               10-5

                                     CHAPTER 10: AIR QUALITY
   Community-wide GHG emissions totaled approximately 68,100 MTCO2e per year in 2010.
   Transportation, the largest source, made up 64 percent of the emissions, followed by 35 percent
   from energy consumption. Under a business-as-usual scenario considering planned growth,
   community-wide GHG emissions are projected to increase by about 72 percent in 2020 and by
   about 183 percent in 2035 (compared to 2010 levels). Projected community-wide GHG emissions
   for 2020 and 2035 are similar to 2010 emissions in terms of percentage contributions by sector.
   The projected increase in GHG emissions underscores the need for Calimesa to promote emission
   reductions in both existing and future development, both through the implementation of this
   General Plan and through participation in the WRCOG subregional Climate Action Plan.
RELATED PLANS AND PROGRAMS
The Air Quality Chapter relates to several other plans and programs, including the following:
   •   South Coast Air Quality Management Plan, December 2012. The Air Quality Management Plan
       was prepared by the South Coast Air Quality Management District in conjunction with CARB, the
       Southern California Association of Governments, and the US Environmental Protection Agency.
       The plan includes a comprehensive strategy aimed at controlling pollution from all sources,
       including stationary sources, on-road and off-road mobile sources, and area sources.
   •   Climate Change Scoping Plan, December 2008. The Scoping Plan, required to outline the
       state’s strategy to achieve the 2020 GHG emissions limits, was developed by CARB and
       proposes a comprehensive set of actions designed to reduce overall GHG emissions in
       California, improve the environment, reduce dependence on oil, diversify energy sources, save
       energy, create new jobs, and enhance public health.
     10-6                                   CALIMESA GENERAL PLAN AUGUST 2014

            CHAPTER 10: AIR QUALITY
KEY ISSUES
This Air Quality Chapter addresses issues identified during the preparation of the City’s General Plan
through discussions with the General Plan Advisory Committee and City staff, and feedback received
during the various public meetings. The goals, policies, and actions included in this chapter have been
prepared in consideration of these issues, which include the need to:
    •   Work to improve air quality at the local level and, in doing so, help improve regional air quality.
AIR QUALITY GOALS
GOAL AQ-1:             Improve air quality in Calimesa.
GOAL AQ-2:             Reduce vehicle trips and resulting emissions.
GOAL AQ-3:             Conserve energy, fuel, and water throughout the community.
GOAL AQ-4:             Minimize exposure of sensitive uses to air pollution.
GOAL AQ-5:             Reduce greenhouse gas emissions and adapt to the anticipated effects of
                       climate change.
AIR QUALITY POLICIES
Policies are provided in this chapter in the following topics:
    •   Reduced Air Pollution – Page 10-7
    •   Reduced Vehicle Trips – Page 10-7
    •   Energy, Fuel, and Water Conservation – Page 10-8
    •   Sensitive Uses – Page 10-9
    •   Greenhouse Gases – Page 10-9
Note to the Reader: The policies and action items designated with (MM) provide mitigation for impacts
identified through the Environmental Impact Report analysis prepared for this General Plan.
                       CALIMESA GENERAL PLAN AUGUST 2014                                       10-7

                            CHAPTER 10: AIR QUALITY
 REDUCED AIR POLLUTION
                                                                     Air Pollutants
POLICY AQ-1: Seek to attain or exceed the more         Air pollutants monitored by the state and
             stringent of federal or state             federal governments include the
                                                       following:
             ambient air quality standards for
             each regulated air pollutant.             Ozone is a product of chemical reactions
                                                       between nitrogen oxides (NOx) and
                                                       reactive organic gases (ROG) in sunlight
             ACTION ITEM AQ-1.1:            Require    and heat. These ozone precursors are
             projects that generate potentially        caused by automobile emissions and the
                                                       evaporation of solvents, paints, and
             significant levels of air pollutants,
                                                       fuels.
             such as landfill operations or large
                                                       Nitrogen dioxide is toxic by inhalation.
             construction projects, to incorporate     Sources include internal combustion
             best    available  air   quality    and   engines, thermal power stations, and, to
             greenhouse gas mitigation in project      a lesser extent, pulp mills. Butane gas
                                                       heaters and stoves are also minor
             design. (MM)
                                                       sources.
             ACTION ITEM AQ-1.2:            Encoura    Carbon monoxide inhibits the blood's
                                                       ability to carry oxygen to body tissues,
             ge businesses and residents to            including vital organs such as the heart
             participate in the South Coast Air        and brain.
             Quality Management District’s public      Particulate matter includes a wide range
             education programs.                       of solid and liquid particles, including
                                                       smoke, dust, aerosols, and metallic
                                                       oxides.
 REDUCED VEHICLE TRIPS
                                                       Sulfur dioxide results from the
                                                       combustion of fuels containing sulfur or
POLICY AQ-2: Require appropriate and feasible          sulfurous chemicals, the combustion of
             transit amenities in high-density         hydrogen sulfide (H2S) in flares, paper
             and mixed-use developments. (MM)          production, and the smelting of ores
                                                       containing sulfides.
POLICY AQ-3: Promote pedestrian and bicycle            Lead comes from fuel combustion,
                                                       industrial processes, and solid waste
             circulation in both existing and
                                                       combustion. Lead can end up in water
             planned commercial and residential        and soils through corrosion of leaded
             areas. (MM)                               pipelines in a water-transporting system
                                                       and from leaded paints.
POLICY AQ-4: Adopt and implement a multi-use trail system that connects commercial,
             residential, and open space areas. (MM)
             ACTION ITEM AQ-4.1:            Require large development projects to include
             bicycle lanes, where feasible. (MM)
     10-8                         CALIMESA GENERAL PLAN AUGUST 2014

            CHAPTER 10: AIR QUALITY
Note to the Reader: Please see the Transportation and Mobility Chapter of this General Plan for
additional policies related to public transit and other alternative travel modes.
POLICY AQ-5:            Promote and support mixed-use land patterns that integrate retail, office,
                        institutional, and residential uses. (MM)
Note to the Reader: Please refer to the Land Use Chapter of this General Plan for more detailed policies
related to planned land uses in Calimesa.
POLICY AQ-6:            Develop neighborhood parks in high-density residential                districts  to
                        encourage pedestrian travel to recreation facilities. (MM)
POLICY AQ-7:            Encourage centrally located parking in commercial areas to allow shoppers
                        to walk to a number of destinations. (MM)
Note to the Reader: Please refer to Land Use; Transportation and Mobility; and Open Space, Parks, and
Recreation chapters of this General Plan for additional trip reduction policies.
  ENERGY, FUEL, AND WATER CONSERVATION
POLICY AQ-8:            Require use of energy- and fuel-efficient equipment and low-emission
                        materials in City facilities and infrastructure. (MM)
                        ACTION ITEM AQ-8.1:            Consider fuel efficiency when selecting vehicles for
                        the City fleet. (MM)
POLICY AQ-9:            Encourage energy conservation and solar design features to be incorporated
                        in all new development projects. (MM)
POLICY AQ-10:           Support recycling programs to reduce                emissions   associated     with
                        manufacturing and waste disposal. (MM)
POLICY AQ-11:           Require use of drought-resistant vegetation in City landscaping projects.
                        (MM)
POLICY AQ-12:           Encourage use of drought-resistant vegetation in new development projects.
                        (MM)
POLICY AQ-13:           Reduce the effects of air pollution and the urban heat island effect with
                        increased tree planting in public and private spaces. (MM)
                       CALIMESA GENERAL PLAN AUGUST 2014                                       10-9
                                      CHAPTER 10: AIR QUALITY
POLICY AQ-14:          Encourage use of energy-efficient            street   cleaning   equipment     and
                       landscaping practices. (MM)
Note to the Reader: Please refer to the Sustainability Chapter of this General Plan for additional energy,
fuel, and water conservation policies.
  SENSITIVE USES
POLICY AQ-15:          Separate sensitive uses such as residences, schools, parks, and day-care
                       facilities from sources of air pollution and toxic chemicals. (MM)
                       ACTION ITEM AQ-15.1:           Continue to use the California Environmental
                       Quality Act review process as a tool to evaluate the air quality effects of
                       proposed plans and development projects and to identify and reduce impacts to
                       sensitive uses. (MM)
                       ACTION ITEM AQ-15.2:           Require proper site planning and design features to
                       buffer and protect when physical separation of these uses is not feasible. (MM)
                       ACTION ITEM AQ-15.3:           Require businesses that cause air pollution to
                       provide pollution control measures. (MM)
POLICY AQ-16:          Reduce fugitive dust emissions from construction activities. (MM)
                       ACTION ITEM AQ-16.1:           Require all feasible fugitive      dust   reduction
                       techniques to be utilized during construction activities. (MM)
POLICY AQ-17:          Provide public information describing air quality standards, health effects,
                       and efforts that residents and businesses can make to improve regional air
                       quality.
      10-10                                 CALIMESA GENERAL PLAN AUGUST 2014
         CHAPTER 10: AIR QUALITY
 GREENHOUSE GASES
POLICY AQ-18: Support local, regional, and statewide efforts to reduce greenhouse gas
              emissions. (MM)
              ACTION ITEM AQ-18.1:           Establish a goal and strategies to         reduce
              community-wide greenhouse gas emissions by 2020 and 2035. (MM)
              ACTION ITEM AQ-18.2:           Adopt and implement Calimesa-specific actions
              identified in the Western Riverside Council of Governments (WRCOG) Regional
              Climate Action Plan. (MM)
              ACTION ITEM AQ-18.3:           Continue to participate in WRCOG regional climate
              change, renewable energy, and energy-efficiency programs that benefit Calimesa
              residents and businesses. (MM)
              ACTION ITEM AQ-18.4:           Update Calimesa’s     greenhouse  gas   emissions
              inventory every three to five years. (MM)
POLICY AQ-19: The City will work to evaluate the potential effects of climate change on
              Calimesa’s human and natural systems and prepare strategies that allow the
              City to appropriately respond. (MM)
              ACTION ITEM AQ-19.1:           Consult with state resource and emergency
              management agencies regarding updates to climate change science and
              development of adaptation priorities. (MM)
              ACTION ITEM AQ-19.2:           As needed, amend this General Plan and the City’s
              Zoning Code and other codes to incorporate strategies to adapt to climate
              change. (MM)
              CALIMESA GENERAL PLAN AUGUST 2014                                    10-11

         CHAPTER 10: AIR QUALITY
      This page intentionally left blank
10-12         CALIMESA GENERAL PLAN AUGUST 2014
          CHAPTER 11: SUSTAINABILITY
                                                               INTRODUCTION
                                                               “Sustainability” is the term used to show how the
                                                               City of Calimesa will balance the various interests
                                                               and needs of existing and future residents.
                                                               Sustainability planning involves applying well-
                                                               known principles of good design and taking a
                                                               holistic view of development—considering how
                                                               new development affects a broad range of topics,
                                                               from land use to energy to air quality to health
                                                               and more.
                                                               The concept of sustainability is generally defined
                                                               as meeting the needs of current generations
Renewable energy, like the solar energy that powers this home
in one of Calimesa’s new neighborhoods, is part of the overall without compromising the ability of future
strategy to create a more sustainable community.               generations to meet their own needs. In practical
 terms, a sustainable approach reduces resource consumption, avoids pollution, develops in harmony
 with the environment, and helps people live healthier lives. Sustainable development considers the
 impact of decisions on the key aspects of sustainability:
      •   The Environment;
      •   The local Economy; and
      •   The Equity of such decisions on all people.
 Under these broad headings, this Sustainability Chapter addresses a number of more specific topics:
      •   Public health
      •   Promoting equity and opportunity
      •   Compact, walkable, and transit-friendly development
      •   Urban and community center revitalization
      •   Reduced automobile use and fuel consumption
      •   Water conservation, quality, and supply
      •   Energy efficiency and conservation
      •   Calimesa economy
 A brief introduction to these topics follows.
                          CALIMESA GENERAL PLAN AUGUST 2014                                           11-1

                                  CHAPTER 11: SUSTAINABILITY
Note to the Reader: One additional topic related to sustainability—greenhouse gases—is addressed in
the Air Quality Chapter of this General Plan.
PUBLIC HEALTH
This topic is included in this Sustainability Chapter to recognize the importance of the health, safety,
and general welfare of Calimesa’s residents, workers, and visitors. It highlights the connections
between health and the physical, social, and economic environment, and provides goals and policies
aimed at achieving and maintaining a healthy community.
A person’s or population’s health status is determined by a mix of genetics, surrounding environment,
and behavior. One’s environment can have a direct effect on health, such as if someone is regularly
exposed to tobacco smoke or contaminated water. It can also influence day-to-day behavior, such as
what someone eats or how much exercise they get. The goal of the health-related policies in this
chapter is to create a built environment that limits exposure to health risks while also supporting
healthy behavior and lifestyles.
Although the City of Calimesa will not be directly responsible for implementing all of the various
programs that lead to a healthy community, it will promote, encourage, and coordinate these activities,
relying on other agencies, the private sector, and individual residents to promote and lead healthy
lifestyles.
EQUITY AND OPPORTUNITY
“Equity” in terms of sustainability means ensuring equal access to the benefits of living and working in
Calimesa and equal exposure to potential risks and hazards—essentially, dealing fairly with all
segments of the community. Ideas in this General Plan that promote equity include:
     •   Adequate housing for all income levels.
     •   A fair and predictable land use planning process.
     •   Development that is equitable in terms of sharing costs and benefits among users and those
         that would benefit.
     •   Fair treatment in the development, adoption, and enforcement of regulations and policies.
     •   Alternative transportation options to increase circulation and access throughout the city.
       11-2                                 CALIMESA GENERAL PLAN AUGUST 2014

        CHAPTER 11: SUSTAINABILITY
COMPACT, WALKABLE DEVELOPMENT
Compact development helps support sustainability in many ways, enabling Calimesa’s residents to live
in a way that lets them drive less, walk more, and have convenient access to housing, goods, and
services. The goals and policies in this chapter work in concert those of many other chapters, including
Land Use, Transportation and Mobility, and Air Quality.
URBAN AND COMMUNITY CENTER REVITALIZATION
Calimesa’s downtown area has been an important and vital part of the community since the
community’s earliest days. The policies of this chapter recognize the value of a strong downtown in
maintaining the character of Calimesa and encouraging long-term sustainability.
REDUCED AUTOMOBILE USE AND FUEL CONSUMPTION
Reducing vehicle use has many benefits related to sustainability. Providing a city where residents have
the choice to walk, bike, or use public transit will lead to lower costs (for gasoline, vehicle
maintenance, etc.) and better health (by walking and being more active). The policies of this chapter
are closely related to policies in the Land Use Chapter, the Transportation and Mobility Chapter, and
other chapters.
WATER CONSERVATION, QUALITY, AND SUPPLY
Whether it comes from local groundwater sources or from distant locations, water is not an unlimited
resource. Becoming a more sustainable Calimesa includes protecting this finite resource and using it in
a way that extends its use far into the future.
ENERGY EFFICIENCY AND CONSERVATION
Energy efficiency is a core component of sustainability. Although some energy sources (sun and wind)
are not finite, most are (coal, natural gas), and the efficient use of energy is critical to maintaining
Calimesa’s economy. The spillover air quality and health benefits of using reduced amounts of fossil
fuels are another advantage of this particular aspect of sustainability.
                     CALIMESA GENERAL PLAN AUGUST 2014                                       11-3

                                 CHAPTER 11: SUSTAINABILITY
CALIMESA ECONOMY
Calimesa’s economy is very important to the community’s long-term future. As long as Calimesa’s
economy remains strong, the community will remain strong, and the City will have the resources
needed to provide important public services.
SUSTAINABILITY GOALS
GOAL SUS-1:            Improve health and wellness through community design.
GOAL SUS-2:            Expand business growth and job opportunities.
GOAL SUS-3:            Support infill multi-family and commercial development with adequate
                       public facilities.
GOAL SUS-4:            Improve downtown          public   infrastructure, transportation routes, and
                       recreation uses.
GOAL SUS-5:            Reduce automobile use and fuel consumption.
GOAL SUS-6:            Conserve and manage water resources.
GOAL SUS-7:            Reduce energy use and improve energy efficiency.
GOAL SUS-8:            Support commercial development that serves local and regional needs.
SUSTAINABILITY POLICIES
Policies are provided in this chapter in the following topics:
    •   Public Health – Page 11-5
    •   Promote Equity and Opportunity – Page 11-6
    •   Compact, Walkable, and Transit-Friendly Development – Page 11-6
    •   Urban and Community Center Revitalization – Page 11-7
    •   Reduced Automobile Use and Fuel Consumption – Page 11-7
    •   Water Conservation, Quality, and Supply – Page 11-8
    •   Energy Efficiency and Conservation – Page 11-8
    •   Calimesa Economy – Page 11-9
      11-4                                 CALIMESA GENERAL PLAN AUGUST 2014

        CHAPTER 11: SUSTAINABILITY
Note to the Reader: The policies and action items designated with (MM) provide mitigation for impacts
identified through the Environmental Impact Report analysis prepared for this General Plan.
  PUBLIC HEALTH
POLICY SUS-1:          The City encourages a built environment that promotes physical activity and
                       access to healthy foods while reducing driving and pollution.
POLICY SUS-2:          The City supports the development of community gardens at appropriate
                       locations in Calimesa.
                       ACTION ITEM SUS-2.1:         Amend the Zoning Code to allow community
                       gardens as a permitted use in appropriate zoning districts and establish
                       standards for their development and use. (MM)
POLICY SUS-3:          The City will promote increased physical activity, reduced driving, and
                       increased walking, cycling, and public transit by:
                       •   Encouraging the development of compact development patterns that are
                           pedestrian- and bicycle-friendly.
                       •   Increasing opportunities for active transportation (walking and biking)
                           and transit use. (MM)
POLICY SUS-4:          The City encourages the development of a wide range of health care and
                       mental health facilities in and near Calimesa that are transit-accessible and
                       pedestrian-friendly.
POLICY SUS-5:          The City encourages public transit agencies to locate routes and stops near
                       health care and mental health facilities. (MM)
POLICY SUS-6:          The City encourages the development of recreational centers to serve all
                       segments of Calimesa’s population (children, families, and senior citizens).
POLICY SUS-7:          The City encourages the location of schools, recreational centers, and day-
                       care centers in places that are easily accessible by public transportation.
                       (MM)
POLICY SUS-8:          The City will promote and sponsor community public health programs and
                       events, such as farmers markets and festivals.
                    CALIMESA GENERAL PLAN AUGUST 2014                                       11-5

                                 CHAPTER 11: SUSTAINABILITY
Note to the Reader: Please refer to the Land Use, Transportation and Mobility, Air Quality, and
Resource Management chapters of this General Plan for additional policies promoting mixed-use
development, alternative transportation, and parking that benefit public health.
  PROMOTE EQUITY AND OPPORTUNITY
POLICY SUS-9:         Encourage a variety of business enterprises that provide local employment
                      at appropriate wages.
                      ACTION ITEM SUS-9.1:          Review the City’s zoning regulations and
                      development standards to ensure that a wide range of business uses are
                      permitted to enhance local employment opportunities and that nonessential
                      regulatory requirements and procedures are eliminated to enhance opportunities
                      for existing and new businesses. (MM)
POLICY SUS-10:        Encourage increased residential densities that can support expanded public
                      transit ridership at all income levels. (MM)
POLICY SUS-11:        Continue to support and promote special community events and programs
                      at City and public facilities that foster community pride, celebrate local
                      culture and history, and promote social equity and tolerance.
  COMPACT, WALKABLE, AND TRANSIT-FRIENDLY DEVELOPMENT
POLICY SUS-12:        Locate high-density residential developments in areas served by existing
                      and/or planned transit routes, infrastructure, and commercial development.
                      (MM)
                      ACTION ITEM SUS-12.1:         Evaluate the potential for higher-density residential
                      land uses in close proximity to the city’s downtown. (MM)
                      ACTION ITEM SUS-12.2:         Identify suitable locations within the city to allow
                      residential density bonuses for mixed-use development. Potential locations
                      include within and adjacent to the Downtown Business District and on the west
                      side of Interstate 10. (MM)
                      ACTION ITEM SUS-12.3:         Initiate a study to determine appropriate parking
                      standards and/or criteria to apply to residential uses located within a mixed-use
                      development. Such a land use arrangement would create the potential for fewer
     11-6                                 CALIMESA GENERAL PLAN AUGUST 2014

       CHAPTER 11: SUSTAINABILITY
                        vehicle trips due to the proximity of commercial uses and the associated need
                        for multiple vehicles. (MM)
POLICY SUS-13:          Provide for the development of retail, commercial, and light industrial and
                        service uses in close proximity to transit, schools, and housing.
POLICY SUS-14:          Encourage the development of appropriate recreational and/or park land
                        that is easily accessible to neighborhoods.
                        ACTION ITEM SUS-14.1:         Allocate development impact fees and other
                        funding sources for the purchase and improvement of parkland development in
                        close proximity to existing and proposed residential land uses, preferably multi-
                        family development.
Note to the Reader: Refer to the Land Use and Resource Management chapters of this General Plan for
additional infill and compact development policies.
  URBAN AND COMMUNITY CENTER REVITALIZATION
POLICY SUS-15:          Develop and maintain a strong, vital, and dynamic downtown that
                        encourages pedestrian-oriented development and provides opportunities for
                        public transit ridership. (MM)
                        ACTION ITEM SUS-15.1:         Extend bicycle and multipurpose trails to the
                        downtown business area to provide alternative transportation opportunities.
                        Identify downtown routes in a community-wide bicycle path and multipurpose
                        trail master plan. (MM)
                        ACTION ITEM SUS-15.2:         Use Community Development Block Grant funding
                        to install sidewalks, crosswalks, and streetlights downtown, where appropriate
                        and necessary. (MM)
Note to the Reader: Please refer to the Land Use and the Infrastructure and Public Services chapters of
this General Plan for additional related policies.
                      CALIMESA GENERAL PLAN AUGUST 2014                                      11-7
                                 CHAPTER 11: SUSTAINABILITY
  REDUCED AUTOMOBILE USE AND FUEL CONSUMPTION
POLICY SUS-16:        Reduce vehicle miles traveled by creating expanded bicycle and multi-use
                      trails. (MM)
                      ACTION ITEM SUS-16.1:         Develop design standards for multi-use trails and
                      bicycle paths. (MM)
                      ACTION ITEM SUS-16.2:         Coordinate with the Riverside County Flood Control
                      and Water Conservation District to evaluate the potential use of their channels
                      and easements as multi-use trails. (MM)
POLICY SUS-17:        The City will promote and encourage community-wide use of alternative
                      transportation methods. (MM)
                      ACTION ITEM SUS-17.1:         Work with the Riverside Transit Authority to
                      evaluate the potential for public transit routes through Calimesa, including the
                      use of smaller feeder systems that utilize vans or other smaller vehicles which
                      would connect with existing systems or operate only in localized areas. (MM)
POLICY SUS-18:        Encourage convenient bicycle, pedestrian, and transit access to new
                      commercial and industrial development. (MM)
                      ACTION ITEM SUS-18.1:         Require the installation of improvements such as
                      sidewalks, bike racks and lockers, bus turnouts, and bus stops as part of the
                      conditions of development for commercial and industrial development, where
                      appropriate. (MM)
POLICY SUS-19:        The City encourages local businesses to seek out and hire Calimesa
                      residents when filling employment positions.
Note to the Reader: Refer to the Land Use, Transportation and Mobility, and Air Quality chapters of this
General Plan for additional policies to reduce automobile use and fuel consumption.
  WATER CONSERVATION, QUALITY, AND SUPPLY
Note to the Reader: Please refer to the Infrastructure and Public Services and the Resource
Management chapters of this General Plan for policies related to water conservation, quality, and
supply.
     11-8                                  CALIMESA GENERAL PLAN AUGUST 2014
       CHAPTER 11: SUSTAINABILITY
 ENERGY EFFICIENCY AND CONSERVATION
POLICY SUS-20:        Promote and support green building techniques and practices to reduce
                      energy use. (MM)
                      ACTION ITEM SUS-20.1:         Construct new significant municipal facilities to
                      meet at least the baseline certification level of Leadership in Energy and
                      Environmental Design (LEED) or its equivalent. (MM)
                      ACTION ITEM SUS-20.2:         Include a Green Development Checklist and
                      supporting materials with City planning and building applications and permits,
                      highlighting ways to incorporate green development principles into project
                      design. (MM)
                      ACTION ITEM SUS-20.3:         Provide regular training to ensure that City
                      employees are able to implement the state’s Green Building Code, conduct
                      energy audits, and review or rate green building projects. (MM)
                      ACTION ITEM SUS-20.4:         Revise the Municipal Code to allow deviations from
                      normal development standards such as height limits, setbacks, or screening
                      when doing so is necessary to allow the efficient use of renewable energy
                      devices. (MM)
POLICY SUS-21:        Evaluate the potential for municipal alternative-fuel vehicle programs. (MM)
POLICY SUS-22:        Collaborate with utilities and regional agencies to             increase   public
                      participation in energy efficiency and conservation. (MM)
Note to the Reader: Please refer to the Transportation and Mobility and the Air Quality chapters of this
General Plan for additional energy efficiency and conservation policies.
 CALIMESA ECONOMY
POLICY SUS-23:        Promote dining, grocery shopping, and retail businesses for residents within
                      the city and the region, and encourage residents to shop in Calimesa.
                      ACTION ITEM SUS-23.1:         Develop and implement an Environmentally
                      Preferable Purchasing Program that directs the purchase of products and services
                      by the City that are environmentally preferable (e.g., renewable, recyclable,
                      nontoxic) and sold locally where possible.
                    CALIMESA GENERAL PLAN AUGUST 2014                                       11-9

      CHAPTER 11: SUSTAINABILITY
      This page intentionally left blank.
11-10        CALIMESA GENERAL PLAN AUGUST 2014
