                 ,                                          -,                                              "
                                                      ~~
                                                                              / '
                                                                             t! i I
            ;¡                :';                                                                             "
                                      I'
                         ,
                         -:.i
                       ,
                    I'
                                                              G E N E'R A L-" , ; '~
                                           1,\ .'"
      ,'; I
-¡,.,
      I'       'FlooidHazåttls 'Elem.erif
                   ':.-~ .--. .' '. - .~. - ',. ,- -'- ,r,J'L, ,;,:~_-. .:: ': ...- - ~'
                                  . f'"                              .' t'
                                                                                  .-' 'j
                                                                                                            i ..
                                                                                                           x- )
                                                                                         ..'j
                                                                                              ,'
                                         "
                                                                                     !
                                                                                       ,
                                                                                              ,\ '
                                           j -l
                                               A      1-'
                                                                  \1
                                                    l     '_J
                                                                                                   " '
                                                                                                   ,I
                                                                                                       -:ì
                                                               ",
                                              "I
                                                                           "
                                                 I:

I ,
                                                             10.0 FWOD HAZARDS ELEMENT
"
    STATUTORY REOUIREMENTS
    Government Code Section 65302(g) states the following:
           "The General Plan shall include a safety element for the protection of the
           community from any unreasonable risks associated with the effects of
           seismically induced surface rupture, ground shaking, ground failure,
           tsunami, seiche, and dam failure; slope instability leading to mudslides and
           landslides; subsidence and other geologic hazards known to the legislative
           body; flooding; and wild land and urban fires,"
    This section addresses flooding as it pertains to public safety,
            THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                                              10-1
                                                      10.0 FLOOD HAZARDS ELEMENT    ,Î
OPPORTUITIES AND CONSTRINTS (ISSUES)
New hillside development may increase the amount and velocity of water runoff,      , '!
particularly during periods of high intensity rainfall, thereby impacting the storm
drainage system and potentially causing flooding at lower elevations.
                                                                                    , 1
Signficant portions of the Plannng Area are within a 100-year floodplain, which     , ,
means that existig and futue development in these areas could be at risk unless
adequate mitigation measures are implementéd.
       THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                                        10-2

I
                                                       10.0 FWOD HAZARDS ELEMENT
 1
   OVERVIEW OF FLOODING HAZARDS POLICIES
   The policies found with ths element address the following:
-
   1. The maintenance of flood control systems.
   2. The restriction of development that lacks adequate mitigation measures in
       hazardous flood zones.
   3. The establishment of design and construction standards for flood prone portions
      of the Planng Area.
   4. The establishment and maintenance of emergency response operations in the
      event of flooding.
          THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                                         10-3
                                                                                10.0 FWOD HAZARDS ELEMENT
                                                                                                            ''!
                                                                                                                :
GOALS, OBffCTIVES AND POLICIES                                                                              i ¡
The following section presents the goals, objectives, and policies related to flooding
in the City of American Canyon. Implementing programs are referenced at the
conclusion of each policy by an "1" and a number in parentheses and are described in
the last subsection of the element.
                                                                                                            " J
Goal
10         Protect the lives and property of American Canyon's residents and visitors                       , 1
           from flood hazards.
Objective
                                                                                                            "' i
10.1 Design both new development and redevelopment projects in a manner
           that minimizes hazards associated with flooding.                                                 ~¡
                                                                                                            .,
Policies
10.1.1     Retain and enhance natural watercourses, including perennial and
           intermittent streams, as the City's primary flood control channels
           whenever feasible. (I                    10.8)
10.1.2     Encourage the adoption of building setbacks that protect natural
           watercourses and ensure their use as flood control resources. (I
                                                                                                10.7)
10.1.3     Require that property owners keep natural drainage courses on their sites
           free of obstructions such as structures, dams, and debris, which may
           adversely affect flooding on the site or downstream properties. (I
                                                                                                  10.8)
10.1.4     Ensure that storm water drainage is designed for peak flow conditions.
           (I 10.1)
10.1.5     Prohibit the development of structures designed for human occupancy
           within the 100-year floodplain, unless flood hazards are adequately
           mitigated. Mitigation can be accomplished by building foundations a
           minimum of one (1) foot above the 100-year flood elevation, or by other
           means approved by the City Engineer (see Figure 10-1). (I 10.2 and 110.8)
10.1.6     Require that vacant or undeveloped lands within the 100-year floodplain
           be retained for low intensity recreational, agricultural, or rural uses,
           provided that such uses do not adversely impact flood conditions. (I
                                                                                                      10.6)
10.1.7     Update existing drainage and retention studies and improvement plans
            accordingly. (110.1)
10.1.8     Require that primary and secondary access and egress routes for new
            development be located outside of the ioO-year floodplain to ensure that
            they remai dry during episodes of flooding. (I 10.2)
         THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                                                                    10-4

                                                                    ~~~~                            -",
                                                                                                       ¡
                                                                                                       ,
                                                                                                         ")
                                                                                                            ,
                                                                                                             I
                                                                                                               '.
                                                                                                                  ",
                                                                                                                    \
                                                                                                                     ,,
                                                                                                                          ì
                                                                                                                   (l
                                                                                                                    ..
                                                                                                                       ..
                                                                                        (...
                                                                                             /l
                                                                                          \
                                                                                 ".-
                                                                                 \'.
                                                                                    i
                                                                                    !
                                                                                 (",
                                                                                      \
                                                                                        , '.. ~''''-'
 LEGEND
ø City of American Canyon               ø Drainage Cours
L//I Planning      Area                 _ Body      of Water
Ie ~ / I Proposed City Urban Limit Line I' '1100 Year Floo Area
J,,""') Southern Pacific Railroad
ø Wale~hed Boundary
SOURCE: Wt! y~ Aibte, 1993
                                                                         rr¿ Envi Cortioo Gr.phJcs
MAJOR DRAINAGE FACILITIES AND
1 00 YEAR FLOOD EVENT                                   ~Io     10J IIß I ~ ~lO-l

                                                              10.0 FLOOD HAZARDS ELEMENT
 10.1.9 Require project designs to ensure that natural gas, electric, water and sewer
            services remain operable during an episode of flooding. (I 10.2)
 10.1.10 Implement the City's Master Drainage Plan through the development
            review process, the Capital Improvement Program and the Master
            Inrastructure Pee Program. (I            10.1)
 10.1.11 Implement public financing programs to provide for required drainage
           improvements, and coordinate the design and construction of flood
           control improvements with adjacent jurisdictions, where appropriate and
           feasible. (l1O.3 and I.0,9)
10.1.12 Require that proposed developments within the 100-year floodplain
           submit information regarding the flood hazard prepared by a qualified
           Civil Engineer or Hydrologist. (I            10.4)
10.1.13 Require that proposed developments within the 100-year floodplain
           submit plans to adequately mitigate flood hazards and demonstrate that
           such improvements wil not create or increase downstream or upstream
           flood hazards. (I 10.4)
10.1.14 Encourage the use of pervious paving materials in hardscape areas; swale
           designs in landscape areas that slow runoff and maximize infiltration; and
           directed roof drainage that channels runoff into pervious greenbelt and
          seepage pit areas to reduce increases in downstream runoff resultng from
          new development. (I 10,5)
Objective
10.2 Establish and maintain emergency response operations for flooding.
Policy
10.2.1    Define and coordinate appropriate procedures for police, fire and other
          emergency response agencies during flooding, consistent with federal,
          state and county regulations, as well as the City's Emergency Response and
          Operations Plans. (I               10.10)
       THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                                                    10-6
~
                                                           10.0 FWOD HAZARDS ELEMENT
      IMPLEMENTATION PROGRAMS
"
     The following programs implement the flood hazard policies found in the
     preceding subsection of this element. The capital "IN and the number preceding
     each program are referenced by the policies that they implement.
     DEVLOPMENT CODES
     II0.1 Update and implement existing drainage and retention studies and plans,
              intiate appropriate Capital Improvement Programs and create a Master
              Inrastructure Fee Program.
              Responsibilty: City of American Canyon Public Works Department in
                                 cooperation with the Napa County Department of Public
                                Works
              Funding Source: City of American Canyon General Fund and/or other
                                 available fundig sources approved by the City
              Schedule: As necessary, or as funding permits
     IlO.2    The City's building and grading codes shall be modified to incorporate
              provisions for the mitigation of floodplain hazards.
  i           Responsibilty: City of American Canyon Plannng Department
              Funding Source: City of American Canyon General Fund and/or other
                                available funding sources approved by the City
              Schedule: As necessary, or as funding permits
    110.3    Utilze public financing mechanisms to provide for required drainage
             improvements.
             Responsibilty: City of American Canyon Plannng Department
             Funding Source: City of American Canyon General Fund, development
                                applicants, and/or other available funding sources
                                approved by the City
             Schedule:          As necessary, or as fuding permits
    110.4    Require the preparation of a flood hazard report by a qualifed civil or
             hydrological engineer for any proposed development with the 100-year
             floodplain. This report shall contain information regarding the
             mitigation of flood hazards and wil demonstrate that such measures wil
             not adversely impact flood conditions.
             Responsibilty: City of American Canyon Plannng Department
             Funding Source: City of American Canyon General Fund iind/or other
                                available funding sources approved by the City
             Schedule: As necessary, or as fuding permits
    ILO.5 Amend the City's building codes so as to coordinate flood control
             mitigation measures associated with new development, including
           THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                                             10-7
                                                                                    ~
                                                      10.0 FLOOD HAZARDS ELEMENT . ,
                                                                                     .,
        construction of storm drains and the use of runoff reducing design
        measures, with the storm drainage policies set forth in the Utilties
        Element of the General Plan.
        Responsibilty: City of American Canyon Plannng Department
        Funding Source: City of American Canyon General Fund and/or other
                            available funding sources approved by the City
        Schedule: As necessary, or as funding permits
110.6   Amend the building and zoning codes to ensure that vacant and
        undeveloped land located in the 100-year floodplain is retained for low
        intensity uses.
        Responsibilty: City of American Canyon Plannng Department
        Funding Source: City of American Canyon General Fund and/or other
                            available funding sources approved by the City
        Schedule:           As necessary, or as funding permits
110.7   Amend the City's buiding codes to ensure that buildings are setback from    . !
        natural watercourses, including perennial and intermittent streams, so as   ;. 1
        to preserve these natual flood control resources.
        Responsibilty: City of American Canyon
        Funding Source: City of American Canyon General Fund and/ or
                            development fees
        Schedule: Within 12 months of the General Plan's adoption
DEVELOPMENT REVIEW PROCEDURES
110.8   Development proposals for projects within the 100-year floodplain shall be
        reviewed for consistency with Federal Emergency Management Agency
        requirements in addition to state, county and city requiements.
        A site-specific hydrology study that meets the standards of the City of
        American Canyon and the County Public Works Department shall be
        prepared by a qualiied civil engineer as a prerequisite to the approval of
        projects within the 100-year floodplain. The hydrology study shall be
        reviewed by the City Engineer and shall be subject to his/her approval.
        Staff recommendations regarding the facilities necessary to mitigate
        flooding hazards resulting from project implementation and/or impacts
        to flood facilities shall become conditions of project approvaL. Mitigation
        against flooding hazards must be provided prior to the issuance of
        certificates of occupancy.
        Responsibilty: City of American Canyon Planning Department in
                            cooperation with the Napa County Department of Public
                            Works
        Funding Source: Administrative: City of American Canyon General
                            Fund and/or development application fees
      THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                                         10-8
=¡
   I
                                                           10.0 FLOOD HAZARDS ELEMENT
, 1
                                 Hydrology Study: project applicant funds
               Schedule:         Ongoing as development applications are submitted or
. ,                              as funding permits
      AGENCY COORDINATION
      110.9    Coordinate with local, state and federal agencies to ensure that the design
               and construction of flood control improvements within the City of
               American Canyon are not in confict with the efforts of neighboring
              jurisdictions.
               Responsibilty: City of American Canyon Plannig Department
. 1            Funding Source: City of American Canyon General Fund and/or other
                                available funding sources approved by the City
               Schedule:        As necessary, or as funding permits
.,
     EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS
, f
     I 10.10  Maintain the City's Emergency Response and Operations Plan, periodically
              reviewing and updating its procedures in response to actual floodig and
              as conditions and information warrant.
              Responsibilty: City of American Canyon Planning and Fire
                                Departments in cooperation with the County Sheriff's
                                Department
              Funding Source: City of American Canyon General Fund and/or other
                                available funding sources approved by the City
              Schedule: As needed when flood conditions and information
                                changes or as funding permits
             THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                                             10-9

  Adopted November 3, 1994
As amended through June 2010

                                                                            1.0 LAND USE ELEMENT
STATUTORY REQUIREMENTS
State of California law requires that a land use element be prepared as a part of a City’s General
Plan, as follows:
        Government Code Section 65302(a): A land use element which designates the
        proposed general distribution and general location and extent of uses of the land
        for housing, business, industry, open space, including agriculture, natural
        resources, recreation, and enjoyment of scenic beauty, education, public buildings
        and grounds, solid waste disposal facilities, and other categories of public and
        private uses of land. The land use element shall include a statement of the
        standards of population density and building intensity recommended for the various
        districts and other territory covered by the plan. The land use element shall identify
        areas covered by the plan which are subject to flooding and shall be reviewed
        annually with respect to those areas.
Of the General Plan elements required by the State, the Land Use Element has the broadest scope.
Since it governs how land is to be utilized, many of the issues and policies contained in other plan
elements are influenced by or influence this element. For example, the Circulation Element
defines policies for the accommodation of vehicular and other trips generated by the population and
uses permitted by the Land Use Element. Similarly, the location and density of use prescribed by
this element are influenced by policies for the protection of environmental resources prescribed by
the Natural and Historic/Cultural Resources Element.
                          THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                                                  1-1

                                                                               1.0 LAND USE ELEMENT
OPPORTUNITIES AND CONSTRAINTS (ISSUES)
The following summarizes the significant issues associated with land use in the City of American
Canyon. These have been derived from technical analyses conducted by the consultant team and
input from City staff and the public.
1.  The location and setting of the City of American Canyon represents opportunities that can
    significantly influence the future role, character, and image of the City.
    The City is located in a transitional area between the Sulphur Springs Mountains and the Napa
    River. A high quality visual image and environmental character distinguish the area from
    other cities in the northern San Francisco Bay region. These visual and physical qualities
    provide a sense of escape from the urbanized areas to the south. The mountains and river offer
    potential recreational opportunities for residents and visitors, such as hiking, equestrian, water
    sports, camping, and nature education and observation.
    From Interstate 80, State Highway 29, and Highway 12, American Canyon is situated as a
    primary entry to the vineyards and wineries of the Napa Valley. Many of the annual visitors to
    the Napa Valley travel through the City. Uses and services could be provided for these
    tourists, such as hotels/motels, restaurants, recreation, and information services.
    The City is on the northern edge of the outward growth from the San Francisco Bay area.
    Forecasts of population and employment growth by regional agencies indicate that the
    American Canyon area will experience strong growth pressures as the region expands. The
    presence of the Napa County Airport, the location of the City along primary travel corridors,
    and access to the Southern Pacific Railroad contribute to growth pressures. This is both an
    asset and liability. There may be, from one perspective, sufficient economic activity to warrant
    additional jobs and commercial uses to support the needs of the population. Growth, if not
    carefully directed, could seriously impact the quality of life and rural environment that make
    American Canyon a desirable location to live.
2.  A fundamental issue confronting the City is the determination of what American Canyon
    should be in the future. Questions regarding the community character, ultimate population, the
    phasing of development, and physical form must be addressed. Functionally the City has the
    opportunity to have one or a combination of four roles: (a) a “bedroom” community serving
    the greater region, (b) a balanced residential community containing sufficient commerce and
    services to support the residents, (c) an employment center for the surrounding subregion,
    and/or (d) a destination for visitors to the wineries and recreational facilities of the Napa Valley
    and adjacent Napa River wetlands.
3.  The City of American Canyon and lands within the Urban Limit Line contain a diversity of
    significant environmental resources, including foothills and canyons, woodlands and
    grasslands, riparian corridors, wetlands, and wildlife habitats. Historically, growth in
    comparable areas has significantly disrupted and impacted such resources. Of concern is how
    growth can be directed in American Canyon to preserve the integrity and values of these
    environmental resources.
                         THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                                                   1-2

                                                                                1.0 LAND USE ELEMENT
4. The character of development that has occurred in urban areas to the south of the City is
   perceived by local residents as negative. The quality and form of development, as well as
   social and economic conditions, are among the contributors to this negative image. Numerous
   residents have clearly stated that these characteristics should not spill over into American
   Canyon as future growth occurs.
5. Today, American Canyon is functionally two places. It is an older rural environment wherein
   heavy industrial and commercial uses have been scattered along Highway 29, with larger lot
   residences developed on its periphery. These residences were isolated from traditional
   suburbs, permitting tenants the comparative freedom to use their property freely without design
   and few maintenance controls. The outdoor areas of many of these properties have been used
   to store vehicles, boats, and other materials, reflecting the rural setting.
   Recent development has been characterized by uses and patterns typical of planned residential
   communities throughout northern California. These generally consist of smaller lot single
   family housing developments with consistent architectural styles, building materials, color
   schemes, and moderate street landscaping. Most of these neighborhoods are visually attractive
   and prohibit, through development restrictions, outdoor storage of vehicles and equipment.
   Efforts to establish consistent rules for property appearance and maintenance have resulted in
   conflicts between the two communities in the past. What some consider to be important in
   maintaining a high level of visual quality is threatening to others who moved from such places
   for the freedoms that American Canyon had offered. This issue will be exacerbated as further
   growth occurs.
6. The pattern of the current City development is inconsistent. There is little organization or
   structure of the various districts and neighborhoods that comprise the City. The City
   encompasses a number of homogeneous suburban tract residential neighborhoods, isolated
   mobile home parks that are not integrated with adjacent development, independent lot rural
   residential areas, clusters of multi-family dwellings, commercial and industrial uses scattered
   along a linear corridor, a concentrated industrial park, and open space. Highway 29 acts as a
   barrier that divides the City into eastern and western portions. The manner in which the City
   can evolve to establish neighborhoods and districts that convey a distinct identity, character,
   and sense of place is a paramount concern. This includes the consideration of the
   establishment of a place that functions as the symbolic and functional “downtown” of
   American Canyon. Methods to link and unify the various neighborhoods and districts into a
   cohesive City, particularly across Highway 29, must be considered.
7. Highway 29 is characterized by a fragmented mix of commercial and industrial uses that
   cumulatively convey a poor quality and blighted image for travelers. This window is the only
   image that passers-by have of American Canyon. The manner in which existing uses can be
   enhanced and more viable uses accommodated to improve visual quality and character of the
   highway and better serve nearby residents is a significant concern. Effective use of the corridor
   is compounded by high traffic volumes and speed, lack of access points, and lack of crossings.
    The dual purposes of the highway, as a travel conduit and location of development, conflict
   with one another.
                        THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                                                 1-3

                                                                              1.0 LAND USE ELEMENT
8.  The vacated basalt plant represents a unique opportunity for development. The site is elevated
    and visible from Highway 29 and much of American Canyon and offers views of the Napa
    River. The plant is located in proximity to Highway 29 and the Southern Pacific Railroad and
    at the edge of the foothills and vineyards. The abandoned structures are unique in both scale
    and form. They represent a sculptural image on the landscape. Development could potentially
    capitalize on these assets to create a project that would be uniquely identifiable in the region.
9.  The City does not currently contain the range of commercial services that are needed to support
    the residents. There are few businesses that offer basic food supplies, retail goods (clothing,
    video rentals, and other), household goods, or services (beauty and barber shops, shoe repair,
    and other). In addition, there are limited offices providing basic professional services
    (medical, financial, and other). Residents must travel to Vallejo or Napa for these needs
    increasing vehicular commutes and air emissions and reducing sales tax revenue for the City.
    The establishment of a sufficient resident market to attract the development of these uses is a
    significant concern.
10. All American Canyon middle and high school students must travel to adjacent communities to
    attend school as there are no such facilities within the City. Increased growth will necessitate
    the building of facilities to provide higher education.
11. The City contains a substantial and prospective industrial base that provides jobs for residents
    and the region. Much of the land has been developed and the number of undeveloped parcels
    that have access to infrastructure services is declining. Over time it will be necessary to
    expand services and increase the inventory of industrial lands.
12. Napa County Airport abuts the City Urban Limit Line. This represents both an opportunity
    and a constraint. The airport provides an economic stimulus for the development of industries
    and commercial businesses in American Canyon. Airport operations result in noise and the
    potential risk of accidents that impact nearby land uses. The establishment of appropriate land
    use and development controls to mitigate any potential hazards is of concern.
13. There is an incompatible mix of land uses in some locations. This is particularly evident where
    industrial and commercial areas abut residences. The manner in which such incompatibilities
    can be resolved where they exist and how they can be avoided in future development is of
    concern.
14. Older developments in the City contain some buildings that are visually unattractive, poorly
    maintained, and need structural improvements. This will be exacerbated unless there is
    continuous maintenance and upgrades as the City’s inventory of buildings age. The
    establishment of the processes and incentives by which this can be accomplished is of concern.
                          THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                                                   1-4

                                                                         1.0 LAND USE ELEMENT
OVERVIEW OF LAND USE ELEMENT POLICIES AND PROGRAMS
The goals, objectives, policies, and programs (cumulatively, the “policy” contained in this
element are intended to provide guidance regarding the manner in which lands are to be used in the
City of American and within the Urban Limit Line. This encompasses the retention of existing uses
and open spaces, re-use of obsolete uses, and development of vacant lands. The land use policies
are an integrative element that account for the diverse policies contained in all General Plan
Elements. For example, they provide the capacity for the development of the range of housing
specified in the Housing Element, define the intensity of development that will be accommodated
by the Circulation and Public Services and Facilities Elements, and prescribe the manner in
which environmental resources will be maintained.
                        THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                                               1-5

                                                                               1.0 LAND USE ELEMENT
GOALS, OBJECTIVES, AND POLICIES
The following presents the goals, objectives, and policies for land use in the City of American
Canyon. They are to be applied in concert with a map, the Land Use Plan, which depicts the
locations by which each category and density of use prescribed herein shall be permitted (Figure
1-1). This Plan map is supplemented by a map that desegregates the City into a series of planning
districts and subareas, Community District and Subarea Map (Figure 1-2). Programs that
implement the goals, objectives, and policies are defined in the following section of this element.
Each policy is concluded by an italicized number within parentheses that lists the pertinent
program(s) that implement the policy.
The goals, objectives, and policies are structured in the following manner:
I.     Policies regarding the manner in which lands are to be developed within the City.
     A. Policies pertaining to development of uses regardless of their location in the City.
     B.    Policies pertaining to development at specific locations.
II.    Policies pertaining to specific land use issues that are to be applied citywide or wherever the
       condition occurs.
Users of the General Plan should note that both the Land Use Plan and Community District
Subarea maps should be reviewed in determining the appropriate land use and standards for
development for parcels within the City. The first is integrated with policies and standards (I. A.,
above) that are applicable to any like category of use or overlay regardless of location. The second
(I. B., above) references the applicable citywide policies and, where appropriate to achieve
development objectives for a specific subarea or district, prescribes additional policies and
standards.
DEVELOPMENT POLICY: CITYWIDE APPLICATIONS BY LAND USE CATEGORY
TYPES AND DENSITIES OF LAND USE TO BE PERMITTED
Goal
1A         Provide for a diversity of land uses that
           a.    serve the needs of existing and future residents;
           b.    capitalize upon the tourism and agricultural heritage of the region;
           c.    capitalize upon and preserves the unique environmental resources and
                 character of the area;
           d.    offer sustained employment opportunities for residents of the City and the
                 surrounding region;
           e.    sustain and enhance the long term economic viability of the City;
           f.    revitalize areas of physical and economic deterioration and/or obsolescence;
                           THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                                                   1-6
                                                                                             1.0 LAND USE ELEMENT
          g.      are developed at densities/intensities that are economically viable and
                  complementary with the natural environmental setting and existing
                  development; and
          h.      provide a greater balance of jobs and housing.
Objective
1.1          Accommodate the development of a balance of land uses that (a) provide for the
             housing, commercial, employment, educational, cultural, entertainment, and recreation
             needs of residents, (b) capture visitor and tourist activity, (c) provide employment
             opportunities for residents of the greater subregion; and (d) provide open space and
             aesthetic relief from developed urban/suburban areas.
Policies
1.1.1        Establish land use designations that provide for the continuation of existing uses and
             development of new uses oriented toward the needs of residents, employees, and
             visitors (including housing units of diverse types and prices; neighborhood-,
             community-, regional-, and visitor/recreation-serving retail, office, personal service,
             entertainment, overnight lodging, and food uses; employee-generating light and heavy
             industrial; recreational; governmental service; utility and infrastructure; institutional and
             religious; and open space uses) as defined by the Land Use Schedule (below) and in
             accordance with Community District and Subarea policies (Policy 1.26.1).
             (I 1.1, I1.2, I1.4, I1.5, and I1.8)
         Land Use Schedule
            Land Use Category                       Typical Permitted Use                                Density
           AGRICULTURE
           Agriculture               Agricultural production, ancillary and supporting uses,     1 unit per 40 gross
           (A)                       open space, passive recreation, and very low density        acres
                                     housing (to support property owner, tenant, and/or
                                     workers).
           RESIDENTIAL
           Residential Estate        • Single-family detached dwelling units                     1 to 2 units per gross
           (RE)                      • Single family semi-attached (“0-lot line”) units if       acre
                                        clustered to preserve open space.
                                     • Parks, schools, trails, and open spaces
           Residential Low           • Single-family detached dwelling units                     2 to 5 units per gross
           (RL)                      • Single family semi-attached (“0-lot line”) units if       acre
                                        clustered to preserve open space.
                                     • Community facilities (meeting rooms, recreational
                                        facilities)
                                     • Parks, schools, trails, and open spaces
                                     • Religious facilities
                               THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                                                              1-7

                                                                              1.0 LAND USE ELEMENT
 Land Use Category                Typical Permitted Use                                    Density
Residential        • Single-family detached dwelling units                        • Housing: 2 to 5
Low-1              • Multi-family dwelling units for a maximum of 15                 units per gross acre
(RL-1)                percent of the total units allowed by the prescribed
                      density, if clustered to preserve open space.               • Retail/services:
                   • Neighborhood retail and services (in large scale master         maximum of 20,000
                      planned communities)                                           square feet
                   • Community facilities (meeting rooms, recreational
                      facilities)
                   • Parks, schools, trails, and open spaces
                   • Religious facilities
Residential        • Single-family residential units                              • Single family: 2 to
Low-2              • Multi-family dwelling units on ten (10) acres                   5 units per gross
Multi-Family       • Neighborhood retail and services (in large scale master         acre
Minimum               planned communities)
(RL-2)             • Community facilities (meeting rooms, recreational            • Multi family: 12 to
                      facilities)                                                    16 units per gross
                   • Parks, schools, trails, and open spaces                         acre
                   • Religious facilities
                                                                                  • Retail/services:
                                                                                     maximum of 20,000
                                                                                     square feet
Residential        • Multi-family dwelling units and mobile homes                 5 to 12 units per gross
Medium             • Community facilities (meeting rooms, recreational             acre
(RM)                  facilities)
                   • Parks, schools, trails, and open spaces
                   • Religious facilities
Residential High   • Multi-family dwelling units                                  12 to 16 units per
(RH-1)             • Community facilities (meeting rooms, recreational             gross acre
                      facilities)
                   • Parks, schools, trails, and open spaces
                   • Religious facilities
Residential High   • Multi-family dwelling units                                  20 units per gross acre
(RH-2)             • Community facilities (meeting rooms, recreational
                      facilities
                   • Parks, schools, trails, and open spaces
                   • Religious facilities
COMMERCIAL
Neighborhood       Retail commercial, professional offices, eating and            Floor area ratio of
Commercial (CN)    drinking establishments, household goods, food sales,           0.35; also see Policies
                   drugstores, personal services, recreational commercial,         1.14.1 and 1.14.2
                   cultural facilities, government offices, and similar uses.
                   Multi-family dwelling units for a maximum of 50% of the
                   site.
                   Excludes large footprint commercial uses such as
                   “chain” department stores and discount retail.
Commercial Office Deleted
(CO)
                THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                                            1-8

                                                                              1.0 LAND USE ELEMENT
 Land Use Category                 Typical Permitted Use                                   Density
Community           All Neighborhood Commercial uses and large footprint          • Floor area ratio of
Commercial          commercial uses such as “chain” department stores and            0.35; also see
(CC)                electronics stores, and overnight accommodations.                Policies 1.15.1 and
                                                                                     1/15.2
                    Multi-family dwelling units for a maximum of 50 percent
                    of the site west of Broadway, and 60% of the site east of
                    Broadway.
Specialty           Restaurants, hotels/motels, supporting retail, and similar    Floor area ratio of
Commercial          uses.                                                          0.5
(CS)
Commercial          Recreation vehicle parks, interpretative nature centers and   To be determined
Recreation (CR)     conference facilities, and similar uses.                       based on
                                                                                   characteristics of site
                                                                                   and resources
Commercial          Golf courses and ancillary facilities (clubhouse, pro shops, • Residential: 1 to 2
Recreation: Golf    tennis courts, etc.), hotel/motel, local commercial services,    units per gross
Course (CR-1)       single family detached, single family semi-detached, and         acre.
                    multi-family dwelling units (for clustering of units only).   • Other uses to be
                                                                                     determined to
                                                                                     account for site
                                                                                     characteristics
MIXED USE
Town Center         Government and community services, retail commercial,         • Residential
(TC)                professional offices, entertainment, restaurants, cultural       densities and
                    facilities (museums, libraries, etc.), visitor-serving           intensities of non-
                    facilities (hotels, information centers), event/conference       residential
                    center, wineries, transit, parking, variety of housing types     development shall
                    including single family attached and detached,                   be determined
                    townhouses, condominiums, mixed-use and apartments,              through
                    and public park and school and other amenities.                  subsequent
                                                                                     specific plan(s)
Corridor Mixed      Deleted
Use (MU)
                 THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                                              1-9

                                                                                        1.0 LAND USE ELEMENT
       Land Use Category                     Typical Permitted Use                                  Density
      INDUSTRIAL
      Industrial (I)          Light manufacturing, aviation-related, agribusiness           • Labor intensive
                              related, industrial sector “clusters,” thematic industries,      industries and
                              business park, warehouses, professional offices,                 supporting uses:
                              supporting retail, restaurant, and financial, and similar        FAR of 0.5
                              uses.                                                         • Low labor uses:
                                                                                               FAR of 0.7
      SPECIAL STUDY
      Special Study           All Agriculture (A) and Open Space (OS) uses.                 • 1 housing unit per
      (SS)                    Other uses to be determined by subsequent study and              40 gross acres
                              amendment of the General Plan.                                • Other uses to be
                                                                                               determined
      PUBLIC
      Public (P)              Governmental administrative and related facilities, public    N/A
                              utilities, schools, public parking, parks, landfills, and
                              similar uses.
      OPEN SPACE
      Open Space (OS)         Publicly-owned or privately-owned properties to be            N/A
                              retained for open space purposes including passive
                              recreation (e.g., hiking and nature observation), aesthetic,
                              and/or resource management purposes.
1.1.2  Accommodate the development of the various categories of land use in accordance with
       the Land Use Plan Map (Figure 1-1). (I 1.1, I 1.2, I 1.4, I 1.5, and I 1.8)
1.1.3  Control the location and number of adult-oriented businesses, game arcades, alcohol
       sales, entertainment establishments, gun sales, and similar uses that are characterized by
       intensities of use or activities that may conflict with the residential and semi-rural
       character of American Canyon as permitted by legislative and legal requirements. (I 1.1,
       I 1.2, I 1.5, and I 1.8)
1.1.4  Provide adequate transportation (vehicle, bicycle, and pedestrian) and utility (sewer,
       water, energy, etc.) infrastructure and public services (police, fire, schools, etc.) to
       support the needs of the residents and businesses of American Canyon. (I 1.4, I 1.5, I 1.8-
       I 1.13, I 1.15, and I 1.17)
1.1.5  Provide adequate open space and recreational facilities to ensure a high quality
       environment for American Canyon’s residents. (I 1.4, I 1.5, I 1.8-I 1.12, and I1.15)
1.1.6  Promote the retention and continued production of agricultural lands. (I 1.1, I 1.2, and I
       1.8)
                         THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                                                       1-10

                                                                                    1.0 LAND USE ELEMENT
MANAGEMENT AND PHASING OF GROWTH
Goal
1B        Provide for the orderly development of American Canyon that maintains its
          distinctive character.
Objective
1.2       Promote a rate of growth that is consistent with the ability of the City to provide
          adequate infrastructure and services ands does not adversely impact the distinctive
          character and quality of life in American Canyon.
Policies
1.2.1     Monitor the rates of development in the City on an annual basis and, should these show
          significant increases from historic averages, evaluate the appropriateness of establishing
          a phased program of growth. (I 1.9 and I 1.10)
1.2.2     Establish as a priority the development of projects that are contiguous with and infill the
          existing pattern of development, avoiding leap-frog development, except for large scale
          master-planned projects that are linked to and planned to be extensions of existing
          development and for which infrastructure and services are in place or funded. (I 1.9 and I
          1.11)
Objective
1.3       Ensure that land use development is coordinated with the ability to provide adequate
          public infrastructure (transportation facilities, wastewater collection and treatment,
          water supply, electrical, natural gas, telecommunications, solid waste disposal, and
          storm drainage) and pubic services (governmental administrative, capital improvements,
          police, fire, recreational, cultural, etc.).
Policies
1.3.1     Implement public infrastructure and service improvements necessary to support land
          uses accommodated by the Land Use Plan (as defined in the Circulation and Public
          Utilities and Services Elements. (I 1.4, I 1.5, I 1.8, I 1.10-I 1.13, I 1.15, and I 1.17)
1.3.2     Require that type, amount, and location of development be correlated with the provision
          of adequate supporting infrastructure and services (as defined in the Circulation and
          Public Utilities and Services Elements. (I 1.4, I 1.5, I 1.8, and I 1.9)
1.3.3     Regulate the type, location, and/or timing of development as necessary in the event that
          there is inadequate public infrastructure or services to support land use development. (I
          1.9)
1.3.4     Limit the total additional new development that can be accommodated in the City and
          its Urban Limit Line to the following provided that the highway improvements
          stipulated by the Circulation Element are implemented. (I 1.9)
                         THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                                                  1-11
                                                                                     1.0 LAND USE ELEMENT
          Use                          City                       City Urban Limit       Total
                                                                  Line
          Residential
             • Single Family           1,678 units                3,204 units            4,882 units
             • Multi-Family            967 units                  466 units              1,433 units
          Commercial
             • Retail                  607,500 square feet                               607,500 square feet
             • Office                  270,000 square feet                               270,000 square feet
          Industrial                   1,560,195 square feet      4,218,305 square feet  5,778,500 square feet
1.3.5      Consider increases in development capacity when it can be demonstrated that additional
           transportation improvements have been implemented or are funded, or demands have
           been reduced (based on highway level of service and vehicle trips), and such increases
           are consistent with community needs and desires. (I 1.9 and I 1.10)
1.3.6      Monitor the capacities of other infrastructure (water, sewer, and other) and services and
           establish appropriate limits on development should their utilization and demands for
           service exceed acceptable levels or increase the cost burdens for existing residents. (I
           1.10)
DISTRIBUTION AND PATTERN OF DEVELOPMENT
Goal
1C         Create a pattern and character of land use development that establishes American
           Canyon as a distinct "place" differentiated from adjacent urban areas, maintains
           a semi-rural character, and respects the environmental setting.
Objective
1.4        Provide for a pattern of development that (a) establishes distinct neighborhoods,
           districts, places of community activity and culture and open spaces that are interlinked
           and promote a cohesive image, (b) locates jobs, commerce, recreation, and other places
           of community activity within close proximity to all housing units, minimizing the need
           for vehicular use, (c) achieves a balance of uses to serve both sides of Highway 29, and
           (d) establishes an overall compact urban form surrounded by open space.
Policies
1.4.1      Accommodate land use development in accordance with the patterns and distribution of
           use and density depicted on the Land Use Plan Map (Figure 1-1). (I 1.1, I 1.2, I 1.4, I 1.5,
           and I 1.8)
1.4.2      Require that development within each land use classification adheres to applicable
           requirements and standards. (I 1.1, I 1.2, I 1.4, I 1.5, and I 1.8)
                          THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                                                   1-12

                                                                                1.0 LAND USE ELEMENT
1.4.3          Allow for the continued occupancy, operation, and maintenance of legal uses and
structures existing at the time of the adoption of this General Plan that are inconsistent with the land
use classification of the Land Use Plan Map (Figure 1-1). (I 1.1)
1.4.4       Establish the following as the principal centers of community activity and identity in
            American Canyon (as depicted on Figure 1-1):
            a.      Town Center: at the vacated basalt plant site and immediately surrounding
                    areas.
            b.      Community Commercial Center: west of the Town Center, between Napa
                    Junction and South Napa Junction Road.
            c.      Neighborhood Commercial Center: at the intersection of Highway 29 and
                    American Canyon Road.
            d.      Local-Serving Commercial/Service Centers: dispersed in large scale master
                    planned residential communities.
            e.      Mixed Commercial and Residential District:          along Highway 29, north of
                    American Canyon Road.
            f.      Commercial Office Center: along Highway 29, south of American Canyon
                    Road.
            g.      Golf Course and Residential Community: northeast of the intersection of
                    American Canyon Road and the Flosden Road northern extension.
            h.      Residential Communities: infill (“core”) areas between Highway 29 and
                    Flosden Road from the City of Vallejo limits to the Town Center, foothill areas
                    east of Flosden Road, and west from existing residential neighborhoods to the
                    Napa River wetlands.
            i.      Industrial/Business Park Center: areas generally north of Eucalyptus Drive
                    (portion) and Napa Junction Road, extending to Napa County Airport.
            j.      Napa River wetlands resource interpretative center, river access, recreation
                    vehicle facilities, possible marina, and water recreational uses: west end of
                    Eucalyptus Drive.
            k.      Foothill Trails Staging Area: east of the Town Center and Flosden Road
                    extension (linked to the proposed regional park).
            l.      Community Schools and Parks: to be distributed throughout the Residential
                    Communities, including a new middle school at American Canyon Community
                    Park.
            m.      Specialty commercial (hotel and/or restaurant) on Oat Hill.      (I 1.1, I 1.2, I 1.4, and
                    I 1.5)
                           THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                                                  1-13

                                                                                  1.0 LAND USE ELEMENT
1.4.5      Work with the Napa County Local Agency Formation Commission to establish an
           Urban Limit Line that delineates the planned maximum expansion of the City’s urban
           and related recreational development; outside of which uses shall be limited to
           agriculture, resource management, and open space purposes (as depicted on Figure 1.1).
            (I 1.20, I 1.22, and I 1.25)
Objective
1.5        Maintain the character and quality of the natural environmental resources of the City
           and protect the population and development from the adverse impacts of environmental
           hazards.
Policies
1.5.1      Require that development be designed and sited to protect significant environmental
           resources by adherence to the policies, standards, and programs contained in the
           Natural and Historic/Cultural Resources, Geology and Flood Hazards, and Noise
           Elements of the General Plan, as well as federal (NEPA) and State (CEQA) regulations.
            (I 1.1, I 1.2, I 1.4, I 1.5, I 1.8, I 1.11, and I 1.12)
AGRICULTURE
Goal
1D         Promote continued agricultural production.
Objective
1.6        Accommodate continued agricultural production capitalizing upon the historic role of
           the region and as a definable limit for the development of the City.
Policies
Permitted Uses and Densities
1.6.1      Accommodate agricultural uses, agricultural production, and ancillary facilities
           (including wineries and other processing functions) in areas designated as “Agriculture
           (A)” on the Land Use Plan Map. (I 1.1, I 1.2, I 1.4, I 1.5, and I 1.8)
1.6.2      Allow for the development of residential units at a maximum density of one (1) unit per
           40 gross acres, farmworker housing (at a density to be determined on a case-by-case
           basis), ancillary structures that support agricultural production activities, such as
           equipment storage and maintenance and harvesting facilities, water storage, access
           roadways, and similar uses. (I 1.1, I 1.2, I 1.4, I 1.5, and I 1.8)
Design and Development Principles
1.6.3      Require that structures and facilities be designed to maintain the agricultural viability of
           the site. (I 1.1, I 1.2, I 1.4, I 1.5, and I 1.8)
                              THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                                                              1-14

                                                                                  1.0 LAND USE ELEMENT
1.6.4      Require that elements be incorporated to adequately buffer agricultural operations from
           adjacent uses when abutting areas are developed or designated for urban/suburban uses.
            (I 1.1, I 1.2, I 1.4, I 1.5, and I 1.8)
1.6.5      Prohibit the implementation of infrastructure and other services that are conducive to
           future subdivision and urban development. (I 1.1, I 1.2, I 1.4, I 1.5, I 1.8, and I 1.15)
General
1.6.6      Encourage the use of Williamson Act contracts, easements, and other techniques that
           ensure the long-term use of properties for agricultural activities. (I 1.23)
1.6.7      Work with local agricultural producers to consider the possible establishment of farmers
           markets, festivals, site tours, and other events that emphasize the agricultural and rural
           character of the region. (I 1.23)
RESIDENTIAL COMMUNITIES
Goal
1E         Ensure the development of residential neighborhoods that provide a range of
           housing opportunities to meet the physical, economic, and social needs of the
           population, are designed to exhibit a high quality and character, contain
           appropriate supporting services, and reflect their environmental setting.
Single Family Residential
Objective
1.7        Provide for the development of single family residential neighborhoods.
Policies
Permitted Uses and Densities
1.7.1      Accommodate the development of single family detached and, if clustered to preserve
           open space, single family semi-detached (“0-lot line”) dwelling units in areas
           designated as “Residential Estate (RE)” at a density of 1 to 2 units per gross acre. (I
           1.1, I 1.2, I 1.4, I 1.5, and I 1.8)
1.7.2      Accommodate the development of single family detached and, if clustered to preserve
           open space, single family semi-detached (“0-lot line”) dwelling units in areas
           designated as “Residential Low (RL)” at a density of 2 to 5 units per gross acre. (I 1.1, I
           1.2, I 1.4, I 1.5, and I 1.8)
1.7.3      Allow for animal and horse-keeping on larger lots within areas designated as “RE”
           and “RL,” provided that they are compatible with adjacent residential uses. (I 1.1, I 1.2,
           I 1.4, I 1.5, and I 1.8)
                              THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                                                    1-15

                                                                                1.0 LAND USE ELEMENT
Design and Development Principles
1.7.4      Require that single family residential units be designed to convey a high level of quality
           and character by consideration of the following:
           a.         modulation and articulation of building elevations, facades, and masses
                      (avoiding undifferentiated box-like structures);
           b.         incorporation of a roof line that visually creates a horizontal terminus of the
                      structure;
           c.         avoidance of building materials, colors, and construction elements that call
                      attention to themselves and contradict the character of the community;
           d.         minimization of the amount and width of paving of front yards and driveways;
           e.         minimization of the garage facade as a dominant design element through such
                      design techniques as garages that are setback further from the street than the
                      remainder of the house, allowance of reduced setbacks of the primary dwelling
                      elevation from the street, detached garages, and/or use of rear alley; and
           f.         utilization of design techniques that promote neighborhood interaction and
                      activity in the front yard areas, such as usable front porches and defined unit
                      entries.
           (I 1.1, I 1.4-I 1.6, I 1.11, and I 1.14)
1.7.5      Require that animal and horse-keeping facilities in residential areas be designed and
           sited to ensure compatibility with adjacent residential functions. (I 1.1, I 1.4, I 1.5, I 1.11,
           and I 1.14)
Multi-Family Residential
Objective
1.8        Provide for the development of multi-family residential neighborhoods.
Policies
Permitted Uses and Densities
1.8.1      Accommodate the development of multi-family dwelling units or mobile homes in areas
           designated as “Residential Medium (RM)” at a density of 5 to 12 units per gross acre.
           (I 1.1, I 1.2, I 1.4, I 1.5, and I 1.8)
1.8.2      Accommodate the development of multi-family dwelling units in areas designated as
           “Residential High (RH-1)” and “Residential High (RH-2)” at a density of 12 to 16
           and 20 units per gross acre respectively. On the Town Center site, densities for multi-
           family residential shall be a minimum of 20 units per acre. (I 1.1, I 1.2, I 1.4, I 1.5, and I 1.8
           Revised 9/5/06)
                              THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                                                    1-16

                                                                                      1.0 LAND USE ELEMENT
1.8.3     Preclude the development of single family subdivisions in areas designated as “RM”
          and “RH,” unless environmental resources significantly constrain the development of
          the site requiring reductions in density. (I 1.1, I 1.2, I 1.4, I 1.5, and I 1.8)
Design and Development Principles
1.8.4     Require that multi-family residential projects be designed to convey a high level of
          quality and distinctive neighborhood character in conformance with the following:
          a.         treatment of building elevations to convey the visual character of individual
                     units rather than a singular building mass and volume;
          b.         location of the elevation of the first occupiable floor at or in proximity to the
                     predominant grade elevation, limiting the visibility of subterranean parking
                     facilities from the street frontage;
          c.         inclusion of separate and well-defined entries to convey the visual character of
                     individual identity for each residential unit, which may be developed as seen
                     from exterior facades, interior courtyards, and/or common areas;
          d.         siting and design of parking areas and facilities to be integrated with and not
                     dominate the architectural character of the structure;
          e.         use of an adequate setback along the street frontage containing landscape, which
                     provides physical and visual continuity with abutting sidewalks;
          f.         provision of usable and functional private open spaces, including ground level
                     patios where appropriate or enclosed balconies of adequate size for use
                     (minimum depth of 10 feet); and
          g.         and provides a sense of openness and unit separation while providing attractive
                     locations for functional activities such as children’s outdoor play, preferably
                     within sight of each residential unit.
          (I 1.1, I 1.4-I 1.6, I 1.11, and I 1.14)
Mixed Density Residential
Objective
1.9       Provide for the development of neighborhoods integrating single and multi-family
          residential units that minimizes the traditional segregation of unit types, avoids over
          concentration of apartments, preserves open spaces, and achieves a higher level of
          neighborhood quality.
                            THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                                                    1-17

                                                                                       1.0 LAND USE ELEMENT
Policies
Permitted Uses and Densities
1.9.1       Accommodate the development of single family detached and, to facilitate clustering for
            open space preservation, single family semi-detached and multi-family dwelling units in
            areas designated as “Residential Low-1 (RL-1)” at a cumulative density of 2 to 5 units
            per gross acre provided that the total number of multi-family units does not exceed 15
            percent of the total units allowed on the site. (I 1.1, I 1.2, I 1.4, I 1.5, and I 1.8)
1.9.2       Accommodate the development of single family detached dwelling units at a density of
            2 to 5 units per gross acre and, on a total of 10 acres, multi-family units at a density of
            12 to 16 units per gross acre in areas designated as “Residential Low-2 (RL-2).” (I 1.1,
            I 1.2, I 1.4, I 1.5, and I 1.8)
Design and Development Principles
1.9.3       Require that single family residential units be designed to achieve a high level of quality
            in accordance with Policy 1.7.4. (I 1.1, I 1.4-I 1.6, I 1.11, and I 1.14)
1.9.4       Require that multi-family residential units be designed to achieve a high level of quality
            in accordance with Policy 1.8.4. (I 1.1, I 1.4-I 1.6, I 1.11, and I 1.14)
1.9.5       Require that single and multi-family units be sited and designed to ensure compatibility
            and achieve a visual and physical sense of integration and cohesiveness (avoiding the
            character of physically separate developments), using such techniques as connecting
            pedestrian paths, extensive landscape, and similar architectural design elements. (I 1.1, I
            1.4, I 1.5, I 1.11, and I 1.14)
Infill of Existing Residential Neighborhoods
Objective
1.10        Provide for the retention and maintenance of existing residential neighborhoods and
            ensure that new development is compatible with their character.
Policies
Permitted Uses and Densities
1.10.1      Require that the replacement or infill of housing in existing residential neighborhoods
            be comparable in scale and intensity with existing uses. (I 1.1 and I 1.11)
Design and Development Principles
1.10.2      Require that the replacement or infill of housing in existing residential neighborhoods
            be compatible with existing development including the:
                               THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                                                  1-18

                                                                                 1.0 LAND USE ELEMENT
           a.        maintenance of the predominant or median existing front, side, and rear yard
                     setbacks; and
           b.        use of complementary building materials, colors, and forms, while allowing
                     flexibility for distinguished design solutions.
                     (I 1.1, I 1.6, I 1.11, and I 1.14)
New Residential Subdivisions
Objective
1.11       Provide for the development of new residential subdivisions and projects that
           incorporate a diversity of uses, are configured to establish a distinct sense of
           neighborhood and identity, and maintain significant environmental resources.
Policies
Permitted Uses and Densities
1.11.1     Permit the development of single family, multi-family, and mixed-density residential
           neighborhoods and communities on large scale parcels in accordance with the densities
           prescribed by the Land Use Plan Map. (I 1.1, I 1.2, I 1.4, I 1.5, and I 1.8)
1.11.2     Require the inclusion of a minimum number of accessory dwelling units in single
           family residential subdivisions as determined by a Master or Specific Plan. (I 1.1, I 1.2, I
           1.4, 1I .5, and I 1.8)
Design and Development Principles
1.11.3     Require that a Master or Specific Plan be submitted that provides for a cohesive and
           integrated residential community on sites of twenty (20) acres and greater in accordance
           with the principles and standards stipulated herein. (I 1.4, I 1.5, and I 1.8)
1.11.4     Require that land use and site design techniques be employed that achieve an integration
           of uses and sense of neighborhood and community, avoiding the character of
           undifferentiated residential tracts, based upon consideration of the following:
           a.        establishment of a street pattern based on interconnecting streets that create a
                     pattern of blocks rather than cul-de-sacs, to the extent permitted by topography,
                     property configurations, and policies for environmental resource management
                     and hillside preservation;
           b.        inclusion and provision of driveway access from alleys, where appropriate;
           c.        integration of public squares, mini-parks, or other landscaped elements to
                     visually terminate streets, where appropriate;
           d.        integration of comparatively small clusters of multi-family housing with single
                     family areas to preserve open space, topography, and significant environmental
                     resources, where appropriate;
                             THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                                                        1-19
                                         1.0 LAND USE ELEMENT
THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                   1-20
                                         1.0 LAND USE ELEMENT
THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                   1-21
                                                                               1.0 LAND USE ELEMENT
       e.         establishment of a common gathering or activity center within a reasonable
                  walking distance of residential neighborhoods, which may contain services
                  (such as child- or elder-care), recreation, public meeting rooms, recreational
                  facilities, small commercial uses, or similar facilities;
       f.         siting of common facilities around a public park or plaza to encourage a high
                  level of community activity;
       g.         establishment of a continuous network of sidewalks, pedestrian, bicycle, and
                  equestrian trails, and other elements that link all community areas and provide
                  linkages to adjacent neighborhoods and districts;
       h.         consideration of reduced street widths and/or curved streets to reduce
                  automobile speed and achieve more intimate relationships between structures, to
                  the extent feasible to maintain acceptable fire protection and traffic flows;
       i.         incorporation of extensive landscape along peripheral and interior streets,
                  pedestrian, bicycle, and equestrian trails, and at key public places;
       j.         exclusion of walls around the site’s perimeter and primary streets, unless an
                  extensive landscape setback or linear park is provided and walls are aesthetically
                  designed (prohibiting standard slumpstone and concrete block).
                  (I 1.1, I 1.4-1.8, and I 1.11)
1.11.5 Require that property frontages along arterial and secondary highways be designed to
       provide appropriate setbacks and buffers, using extensive landscape, berms, and other
       elements, and avoiding the use of walls. (I 1.1, I 1.4-I 1.7, I 1.11, and I 1.12)
1.11.6 Require that nonresidential structures and sites incorporated in “planned” communities
       (e.g., recreation facilities, community meeting rooms and auditoriums, neighborhood
       commercial, services, and religious facilities) be designed to be compatible with and
       convey the visual and physical scale and character of residential structures. These
       should be linked by pedestrian walkways, bicycle paths, and other elements. (I 1.1, I 1.4-
       I 1.6, I 1.11, and I 1.12)
1.11.7 Require that development be designed and sited to preserve the topographic character of
       hillsides and canyons including the consideration of the following:
       a.         concentration of development on areas of lesser slope, reducing densities as
                  slope increases;
       b.         no mass grading on slopes exceeding 25 percent, except for topographic
                  anomalies that are detached from the overall topographic character, minimizing
                  the depth of residential pads while preserving sufficient area for usable outdoor
                  space;
       c.         prohibition of development on slopes exceeding 50 percent and maintenance of
                  natural grades in higher elevation areas; and
       d.         minimization of the height of manufactured slopes to 30 feet or less which are
                  maintained by homeowners.
                  (I 1.1, I 1.2, I 1.4, I 1.5, and I 1.11)
                          THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                                                         1-22

                                                                                      1.0 LAND USE ELEMENT
1.11.8     Require that any lands proposed for dedication to the City (parks, schools, etc.) be
           usable and appropriate for the intended use and a source of funds to maintain the area be
           confirmed to ensure that inappropriate costs are not shifted to the City. (I 1.1, I 1.2, I 1.4, I
           1.5, and I 1.8)
Institutional Uses in Residential Areas
Objective
1.12       Provide for the inclusion of recreational, institutional, and service uses that support
           resident needs within residential neighborhoods.
Policies
Permitted Uses
1.12.1     Accommodate the development of parks, schools, libraries, community meeting
           facilities, religious facilities, and similar community-serving uses in all residential
           areas, provided that they are compatible with the intended residential function and
           subject to City review and approval. (I 1.1, I 1.2, I 1.4. I 1.5, and I 1.8)
Design and Development
1.12.2     Require that nonresidential structures incorporated in residential neighborhoods be
           designed to be compatible with and convey the visual and physical scale and character
           of residential structures. (I 1.1, I 1.4-I 1.6, I 1.11, and I 1.14)
Housing for Special Needs
Objective
1.13       Provide housing for senior citizens, the physically-challenged, and other populations
           with special needs.
Policy
Permitted Uses
1.13.1     Accommodate the development of housing types intended to meet the special needs of
           senior citizens, the physically challenged, and low- and moderate-income households in
           areas designated for multi-family residential and mixed-use on the Land Use Plan
           Map, in accordance with the Housing Element and State Law, and provided that they
           are designed to be compatible with adjacent uses. (I 1.1, I 1.4, I 1.5, I 1.8, and I 1.11)
                           THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                                                    1-23
                                                                                  1.0 LAND USE ELEMENT
COMMERCIAL CENTERS AND DISTRICTS
Goal
1F         Ensure the development of diverse, high quality commercial uses that function as
           distinctive places, meet resident needs, attract visitors, and contribute significant
           revenue to the City.
Neighborhood Commercial Uses
Objective
1.14       Provide for development of a diversity of retail and service commercial uses that are
           oriented to the needs of local residents.
Policies
Permitted Uses
1.14.1     Accommodate the development of retail commercial, eating and drinking
           establishments, household goods sales, food sales, drugstores, personal services, cultural
           facilities (e.g.., libraries and museums), and similar uses in areas designated as
           “Neighborhood Commercial (CN)” on the Land Use Plan Map (Figure 1-1).
           Emphasis should be placed upon the attraction of uses that serve adjacent
           neighborhoods, such as grocery and drug stores, restaurants and delicatessens, video
           rentals, and bookstores. Highway-oriented uses, such as gas stations and automobile
           service facilities should be discouraged at major intersections. Accommodate multi-
           family dwelling units at a density of 20 units per gross acre on selected sites subject to
           the Residential Overlay District consistent with Housing Element Appendix D,
           generally in conjunction with Neighborhood Commercial uses. Mixed-use structures
           with commercial uses (i.e. retail) on the bottom floor and residential uses on upper
           floor(s), live-work lofts, and/or commercial uses along the highway frontage and multi-
           family residential behind are encouraged. Structures used solely for residential purposes
           are discouraged from fronting along the highway. (I 1.1, I 1.4, I 1.5, I 1.8, and I 1.19) Revised
           9/5/06
Density
1.14.2     Accommodate the development of commercial uses at a maximum density of a floor
           area ratio of 0.35 and height of two (2) stories. On selected parcels consistent with
           Housing Element Appendix D, a maximum floor area ratio of 1.5 is permitted for
           mixed-use projects and height of 3 stories east of Broadway/Highway 29. The
           residential portion of a mixed use project is permitted to be a floor area ratio of 1.0, with
           the remainder for commercial uses. (I 1.1, 1.4, 1.5, and 1.8) Revised 9/5/06
Design and Development Principles
1.14.3     Require that development be designed to convey a local neighborhood, “village”
           environment in accordance with Policies 1.18.1 to 1.18.5 and the following:
                          THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                                                 1-24

                                                                                 1.0 LAND USE ELEMENT
           a.      buildings should be low-rise and pedestrian-oriented;
           b.      buildings should be sited on common sidewalks, pedestrian areas, and bicycle
                   paths that are connected with surrounding residential communities;
           c.      extensive landscaping should be used that visually “extends” the character of
                   surrounding residential neighborhoods; and
           d.      site and design structures so that they do not “back onto” adjacent residential
                   areas. (I 1.1, 1.4-1.7, 1.11, and 1.14)
Community Commercial Uses
Objective
1.15       Provide for development of a diversity of retail and service commercial uses that
           support the needs of multiple neighborhoods and the greater community, reduce the
           need for residents to make external trips to adjacent jurisdictions for goods and services,
           and provide shopping and service opportunities for commuters, visitors, and tourists.
Policies
Permitted Uses
1.15.1     Accommodate the development of retail commercial, professional offices, eating and
           drinking establishments, household goods sales, food sales, drugstores, retail building
           materials and supplies, personal services, overnight accommodations, cultural facilities,
           and similar uses in areas designated as “Community Commercial (CC)” on the Land
           Use Plan Map (Figure 1-1). Up to 25 percent of a site may be developed with
           multi-family dwelling units at a density of 16 to 20 units per gross acre, but only in
           conjunction with permitted commercial uses on the ground floor or on parcels without
           Highway 29 frontage. Structures used solely for residential purposes may not front on
           the Highway. On selected parcels subject to the Residential Overlay District consistent
           with Housing Element Appendix D, up to 50 percent of a site may be developed with
           multi-family dwelling units at a density of 20 units per gross acre west of
           Broadway/Highway 29, and up to 60 percent of a site may be developed with multi-
           family dwelling units at a density of 35 units per gross acre east of Broadway/Highway
           29. Mixed-use structures with commercial uses (i.e. retail) on the bottom floor and
           residential uses on upper floors, live-work lofts, and/or commercial uses along the
           highway frontage and multi-family residential behind are encouraged. Automobile sales
           are not permitted within this designation. Automobile service and repair facilities shall
           be permitted only as an ancillary use to a gasoline filling station. Public storage facilities
           such as mini-storage and vehicle storage yards are not permitted. Outdoor sales and
           displays are permitted only when in conjunction with a permanent on-site structure
           housing the business. (I 1.1, 1.4, 1.5, 1.8, and 1.19) Revised 9/5/06
                         THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                                                    1-25

                                                                                   1.0 LAND USE ELEMENT
Density
1.15.2     Accommodate the development of commercial uses at a maximum density of a floor
           area ratio of 0.35 and height of two (2) stories. Where a residential component is
           proposed in conjunction with a commercial development, a minimum site area of
           20,000 square feet is required. Except on selected parcels consistent with Housing
           Element Appendix D, a maximum floor area ratio of .60 is permitted for mixed-use
           projects, with the residential portion limited to a maximum floor area ratio of 0.25. On
           selected parcels consistent with Housing Element Appendix D, a maximum floor area
           ratio of 1.5 is permitted for mixed-use projects and height of 3 stories west of
           Broadway/Highway 29 and 4 stories east of Broadway. The residential portion of a
           mixed-use project is permitted to be a floor area ratio of 1.0, with the remainder for
           commercial purposes. A maximum floor area ratio of .50 and a height of three stories is
           permitted for hotels. Accommodate the development of multi-family dwelling units. (I
           1.1, 1.4, 1.5, and 1.8) Revised 9/5/06
Design and Development Principles
1.15.3     Require that development be designed to convey a local neighborhood, “village”
           environment in accordance with Policies 1.18.1 to 1.18.5. (I 1.1, 1.4-1.7, 1.11, and 1.14)
1.15.4     Require that mixed use structures and sites be designed to mitigate potential conflicts
           between the commercial and residential uses, considering such issues as noise, lighting,
           security, and truck and automobile access. (I 1.1, I 1.4,I 1.5, 1.11, and 1.14)
1.15.5     Require that mixed-use developments be designed to provide adequate transitions with
           adjacent land uses, which may include horizontal and vertical setbacks, landscape,
           screening elements, and similar techniques. (I 1.1, I 1.4,I 1.5, 1.11, and 1.14)
1.15.6     Require that mixed-use development projects be designed to achieve a high level of
           design quality in accordance with General Design principles for all Commercial
           Development (Section 1.18) and Policies 1.19.9 and 1.19.10. (I 1.1, I 1.4,I 1.7, 1.11, and I
           1.14) Revised 9/5/06
1.16 – 1.16.3 Deleted by Resolution 2000-07.
Specialty Commercial
Objective
1.17       Provide for development of uses that capitalize on and attract visitors due to their
           unique viewsheds of the Napa River, San Francisco Bay, and Napa Valley, site
           topography, and other natural characteristics.
Policies
Permitted Uses
1.17.1     Accommodate the development of restaurants, hotels/motels, supporting retail, and
           similar uses in areas designated as “Specialty Commercial (CS)” on the Land Use
           Plan Map (Figure 1-1). (I 1.1, I 1.4, I 1.5, I 1.8, and I 1.19)
                            THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                                                  1-26

                                                                                   1.0 LAND USE ELEMENT
Density
1.17.2    Accommodate the development of specialty commercial uses at a maximum density of
          a floor area ratio of 0.5 and height of two (2) stories. (I 1.1, I 1.4, I 1.5, and I 1.8)
Design and Development Principles
1.17.3    Require that development be sited and designed to emphasize the unique character of its
          setting and intended functions (e.g., maintenance of viewsheds) and convey a high level
          of quality in accordance with Policies 1.18.1 to 1.18.4. (I 1.1, I 1.4-I 1.7, I 1.11, and I 1.14)
General Design Principles for All Commercial Development
Objective
1.18      Ensure that commercial development be designed to exhibit a high quality of
          architectural character and emphasize a low scale “village” environment and
          pedestrian activity.
Policies
1.18.1    Require that commercial buildings be designed to convey a high level of design quality,
          including the following:
          a.      architectural treatment of all facade elevations, including the articulation and
                  modulation of facades to provide visual interest;
          b.      provision of visually and physically transparent building elements (windows,
                  doors, etc.) along the majority of the ground elevation facing street frontages and
                  primary parking areas;
          c.      incorporation of arcades, courtyards, and other recesses along the street
                  elevations to provide visual relief and interest;
          d.      clear identification of building entrances by design elements (recessed or
                  extended entries, porticoes, and other), signage, and/or landscape;
          e.      visual differentiation of upper from lower floors;
          f.      integration of signage with the architectural character of the structure and
                  limitation on their number and size;
          g.      screening and visual integration of rooftop air conditioning, heating, and other
                  mechanical equipment;
          h.      extensive use of landscape that provides a three-dimensional character,
                  including elements such as planting beds, raised planters, containers, or window
                  boxes; and
          i.      provision of clearly defined pedestrian access to parking areas, differentiated by
                  materials, texture, signage, lighting, landscape, and/or other appropriate design
                  elements (the use of painted walkways is unacceptable).
                  (I 1.1, I 1.4-I 1.7, I 1.11, and I 1.14)
                          THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                                                        1-27

                                                                                 1.0 LAND USE ELEMENT
1.18.2    Require that multi-tenant and large scale commercial development be sited and
          designed to convey a “village” environment in accordance with the following:
          a.      use of multiple building volumes and masses and highly articulated facades to
                  reduce the visual sense of large scale “boxes” and create a visual fabric of
                  multiple buildings and storefronts;
          b.      linkage of individual structures and storefronts by establishing common building
                  “walls” along pedestrian sidewalks, plazas, and other open spaces;
          c.      siting of a portion of the buildings along the primary street frontage, with
                  parking partially or fully screened by the buildings;
          d.      use of roofline and height variations to break up massing and provide visual
                  interest;
          e.      use of pedestrian-oriented signage;
          f.      design of parking structures to be visually integrated with the commercial
                  buildings and convey the image of occupied space; and
          g.      provision of pedestrian and bicycle paths to adjacent districts and
                  neighborhoods. (I 1.1, I 1.4-I 1.7, I 1.11, and I 1.14)
1.18.3    Require that the onsite lighting of commercial uses be unobtrusive and designed to
          ensure that only the intended area is illuminated, offsite glare is minimized, and
          adequate safety is provided. (I 1.1, I 1.4, I 1.5, and I 1.11)
1.18.4    Require that entertainment, drinking establishments, and other uses characterized by
          high levels of activity provide adequate physical, safety, and operational measures to
          prevent negative impacts on adjacent properties. (I 1.1, I 1.4, I 1.5, I 1.11, and I 1.12)
Goal 1G deleted by Resolution 2000-07
                        THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                                                  1-28

                                         1.0 LAND USE ELEMENT
THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                   1-29
                                         1.0 LAND USE ELEMENT
THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                   1-30
                                                                              1.0 LAND USE ELEMENT
Town Center
Objective
1.19       Provide for the development of a Town Center that physically and functionally serves as
           the symbolic and identifiable focus of community activities and events for the City of
           American Canyon and which is a regional destination within Napa Valley. The Town
           Center shall have two principal land use areas: (s) Town Center Core Area, and (b)
           Town Center Residential Neighborhoods. The Town Center Core Area shall mean the
           area around the basalt industrial ruins which will be developed with the land uses
           described in Policy 1.19.2 below to create a true “downtown” for American Canyon.
           The Town Center Residential Neighborhoods shall mean the residential areas portion of
           Town Center that surrounds the Town Center Core Area, which shall be developed with
           land uses described in 1.19.4 below.
Policies
Permitted Uses
1.19.1     Ensure that the Town Center shall have two principal land use areas: (a) Town Center
           Core Area, and (b) Town Center Residential Neighborhoods.
1.19.2     Require that the Town Center Core Area will be the “downtown” for the City of
           American Canyon, centered around the basalt industrial ruins and quarry lake,
           including:
           a. a rich diversity of land uses which may include government and community
               services, retail commercial, professional offices, entertainment, restaurants, cultural
               facilities (museums, libraries, etc.), visitor-serving facilities (hotels, information
               centers), event center/conference center, wineries, transit, parking, variety of
               housing types including single family attached and detached, townhouses,
               condominiums, mixed-use and apartments, and public park and other amenities;
           b. a plaza or “town square” to facilitate community gatherings and events.
1.19.3     Require that the Town Center Core Area is surrounded by the Town Center Residential
           Neighborhoods in order to satisfy the City’s need for housing and to support the
           economic vitality of the commercial uses within the Town Center Core Area.
1.19.4     Provide for a broad range of housing types within the Town Center Residential
           Neighborhoods, including single family detached, attached single family, townhouses,
           condominiums, and apartments.
1.19.5     Require that the Town Center Residential Neighborhoods provide sites for a public park
           and a public school, with the size of facilities corresponding to the future population of
           the Town Center and which may allow community facilities that support residences.
1.19.6     Provide for the extension of Newell Drive, which will define the eastern boundary of the
           Town Center, connecting with Highway 29 in the vicinity of Green Island Road and for
           the extension of South Napa Junction Road from Highway 29 to Newell Drive.
                          THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                                               1-31

                                                                             1.0 LAND USE ELEMENT
1.19.7     Determine the location of land uses within the Town Center through the subsequent
           approval of one or more Specific Plans.
Density and Intensity
1.19.8     Determine the range of residential densities allowed through the subsequent approval of
           one or more Specific Plans, with the guiding principle that, in general, densities will be
           highest around the Town Center Core Area with decreasing density further away.
1.19.9     Determine the range of intensities of non-residential uses, as measured in building
           height and/or floor area ratio, through the subsequent approval of one or more Specific
           Plans, with the guiding principle that in general, intensity will be highest around the
           Town Center Core Area with decreasing intensity further away.
Design and Development Principles
1.19.10    Provide for unified design standards and a cohesive development through the adoption
           of one or more Specific Plans for the Town Center.
1.19.11    Ensure that the Town Center is a sustainable, “green” development through the
           implementation of such features as:
           a. use of recycled water for landscape irrigation
           b. use of drought tolerant vegetation
           c. energy efficient buildings
           d. pedestrian and bicycle circulation system
           e. mix of land uses which reduce travel
1.19.12    Require that the Town Center Core Area provide a pedestrian-oriented, “village”
           environment, including a plaza or town square as a gathering place for community
           activities.
1.19.13    Require the implementation of public streetscape improvements that uniquely identify
           the Town Center, including elements such as landscape, street furniture, signage, and
           lighting; public street sections may vary from citywide standards in order to create this
           unique identity.
1.19.14    Require that development of Town Center incorporate the natural and cultural resources
           on site including:
           a. preserving portions of the basalt industrial ruins and incorporating them into the
               commercial and public activities, to the extent it is economically viable;
           b. preserving the quarry lake as a future public park site, for the benefit of both Town
               Center residents and the residents of the City as a whole.
                         THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                                                1-32

                                                                                     1.0 LAND USE ELEMENT
Objective 1.20 Deleted by Resolution 2000-07
Policies 1.20.1-1.20.10 deleted by Resolution 2000-07
COMMERCIAL RECREATION CENTERS
Goal
1H          Provide for the development of commercial enterprises that capitalize upon the
            natural environmental setting and resources of the City.
Objective
1.21        Provide for the development of recreation-oriented uses adjacent to the Napa River and
            wetlands and in the foothills of the City.
Policies
Permitted Uses
1.21.1      Allow for the development of interpretative nature centers, educational conference
            facilities, recreational vehicle parks, overnight camping, day-use camping and
            picnicking, and similar recreation and resource-oriented facilities in areas designated as
            “Commercial Recreation (CR)” on the Land Use Plan Map (Figure 1-1). (I 1.1, I 1.2, I
            1.4, I 1.5, I 1.8, and I 1.19)
1.21.2      Allow for the development of a small craft marina or launching facility on the Napa
            River. (I 1.1, I 1.2, I 1.4, I 1.5, I 1.8, and I 1.19)
1.21.3      Allow for the development of public and private golf courses, hotel/motel, and
            supporting facilities (e.g., pro shop, restaurant, banquet rooms, tennis courts, and
            swimming pool), single family detached dwellings, and. if clustered to preserve open
            space and topography, single family semi-detached and multi-family dwellings in areas
            designated as “Commercial Recreation-1 (CR-1)” on the Land Use Plan Map
            (Figure 1-1). (I 1.1, I 1.2, I 1.4, I 1.5, I 1.8, and I 1.19)
Density
1.21.4      Determine the appropriate scale of development on a case-by-case basis to account for
            the specific environmental characteristics of the site and nature of the proposed project
            in areas designated as “CR.” In areas abutting the Napa River, the determination of
            density should be made in collaboration with the Department of Fish and Game and
            other appropriate resource management agencies. (I 1.1, I 1.4, I 1.5, I 1.8, I 1.11, I 1.18, and I
            1.22)
1.21.5      Accommodate the development of dwelling units at a density of 1 to 2 units per gross
            acre in areas designated as “CR-1.” (I 1.1, I 1.2, I 1.4, I 1.5, and I 1.8)
                               THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                                                            1-33

                                                                                    1.0 LAND USE ELEMENT
Design and Development Principles
1.21.6     Require that structures be sited and design to preserve the environmental integrity of the
           site; emphasizing the use of natural and indigenous materials in construction and onsite
           waste management and recycling. (I 1.1, I 1.4, I 1.5, I 1.8, I 1.11, and I 1.12)
1.21.7     Require that commercial recreational uses be designed and sited to ensure compatibility
           with abutting residential neighborhoods. (I 1.1, I 1.4, I 1.5, I 1.8, and I 1.11)
1.21.8     Require that development projects that mix commercial-recreational and residential land
           uses be designed to create a high quality character and integrated and cohesive
           community in accordance with Policies 1.7.4, 1.8.4, 1.9.5, and 1.11.3-1.11.8. (I 1.1, I
           1.4-I 1.7, I 1.11, and I 1.14)
INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS
Goal
1I         Ensure the development of industrial uses that provide employment for residents
           of American Canyon and the surrounding region and contribute significant
           revenue for the City.
Objective
1.22       Provide for the continuation of existing and development of new industries that
           capitalize upon the geographic advantages of the City (including adjacency to Napa
           County Airport and the railroad), the agricultural production of the region, and emerging
           types of businesses (such as “thematic” and “environmental” based industries), offer
           opportunities for the clustering of key economic sectors, and maintain the
           environmental quality of the City.
Policies
Permitted Uses
1.22.1     Accommodate the continuation of existing and development of new manufacturing,
           research and development, warehouse and distribution, ancillary offices, and similar
           uses in areas designated as “Industrial (I)” on the Land Use Plan Map (Figure 1-1).
           (I 1.1, I 1.4, I 1.5, I 1.8, and I 1.19)
1.22.2     Allow for the inclusion of businesses that are ancillary to and support industrial uses
           such as related retail sales facilities for manufacturers, financial institutions, restaurants,
           photocopy shops, specialty recreational uses (batting cages and health clubs/spas), and
           similar uses. (I 1.1, I 1.4, I 1.5, and I 1.8)
Density
1.22.3     Permit development according to the following standards:
           a.         Labor-intensive uses: a maximum floor area ratio of 0.5.
                              THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                                                        1-34

                                                                                   1.0 LAND USE ELEMENT
          b.       Low labor uses (such as warehousing): a maximum floor area ratio of 0.7.
                   (I 1.1, I 1.4, I 1.5, and I 1.8)
Design and Development Principles
1.22.4    Require that development be designed to achieve a high level of quality and
          compatibility with existing uses including the consideration of the following:
          a.       architectural treatment of all building elevations;
          b.       use of extensive landscape along the primary street frontages and parking lots;
                   and
          c.       enclosure of storage areas visible from principal highways (including Highway
                   29) and peripheral residential and commercial districts with decorative screening
                   or other elements. (I 1.1, I 1.4-I 1.7, I 1.11, and I 1.14)
1.22.5    Require that industrial areas developed as research and development and office-oriented
                   business parks be designed to convey a unified character by consideration of
                   Policy 1.22.4 and the following:
          a.       inclusion of pedestrian walkways, arcades, an/or other visual elements to
                   interconnect individual buildings;
          b.       differentiation of building facades by materials, color, architectural details and
                   modulation of building volumes;
          c.       incorporation of extensive landscape in parking areas, along building frontages,
                   and other public areas;
          d.       use of consistent and well-designed public and informational signage; and
          e.       installation of elements that define the key entries to the industrial district.
                   (I 1.1, I 1.4 - I 1.7, I 1.11, and I 1.14)
1.22.6    Prohibit the establishment of contractor storage yards and other outside industrial uses
          within areas where the principal industrial uses are located within buildings or outside
          storage is ancillary to a principal use within a building. (I 1.1, 1I .4, I 1.5, and I 1.8)
1.22.7    Require that truck access be controlled so that it is safe and efficient and minimizes
          exposure to adjacent residential neighborhoods. (I 1.1, I 1.4, I 1.5, and I 1.11-I 1.13)
1.22.8    Require, where industrial uses are located adjacent to residential neighborhoods, that
          their operations be controlled to prevent adverse impacts on adjacent property (e.g.,
          noise, light and glare, and odors) and appropriate measures implemented to buffer these
          uses (e.g., setbacks, landscape, and earthen berms). (I 1.1, I 1.4, I 1.5, I 1.8, I 1.11, and I 1.12)
1.22.9    Control, through the permit process, the development of industrial uses that use, store,
          produce, or transport hazardous materials in threshold planning quantities, generate
          unacceptable levels of noise or air emissions, or result in other impacts that adversely
          impact American Canyon. (I 1.1, I 1.4, I 1.5, I 1.8, I 1.11, and I 1.12)
                           THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                                                        1-35
                                                                                      1.0 LAND USE ELEMENT
PUBLIC   AND INSTITUTIONAL LAND USES
Goal
1J         Accommodate public and institutional uses that serve the needs of the residents of
           American Canyon.
Objective
1.23       Provide for the continuation of existing and expansion of governmental administrative,
           recreation, public safety, human service, cultural and educational, infrastructure, utility
           infrastructure, and other public land uses and facilities to support the existing and future
           population and development of the City.
Policies
Permitted Uses
1.23.1     Accommodate governmental administrative and maintenance facilities, police, fire,
           educational (schools), cultural (libraries, museums, performing and visual arts, etc.),
           human health, human services, parks, public utility and infrastructure, and other public
           uses in areas designated as “Public (P)” on the Land Use Plan Map (Figure 1-1) and
           any other land use designation, provided that the use is compatible with adjacent uses. (I
           1.1, I 1.2, I 1.4, I 1.5, and I 1.8)
1.23.2     Limit the development of uses within electrical transmission corridors to ensure
           adequate public health and safety and adherence to Policies 1.29.1 and 1.30.1 through
           1.30.3. (I 1.1, I 1.2, I 1.4, I 1.5, I 1.8, I 1.11, and I 1.12)
1.23.3     Allow for the reuse of surplus public and utility properties and facilities for private use,
           with the type and density/intensity of use to be permitted on the site determined by:
           a.        their compatibility with the type, character, and density/intensity of adjacent
                     uses;
           b.        objectives for the area defined by this Plan;
           c.        contribution of public benefits; and
           d.        revenue contribution to the City. (I 1.4, I 1.5, I 1.11, I 1.12, and I 1.22)
1.23.4     Accommodate religious facilities in any land use designation, provided that they are
           compatible in function, scale, and character with adjacent uses, are consistent with
           citywide and site-specific policies, and subject to City review and approval of a
           Conditional Use Permit. (I 1.1, I 1.4, I 1.5, I 1.8, and I 1.11)
1.23.5     Allow for the continuation of existing and development of new child and senior
           daycare, residential congregate care, and similar facilities provided that they are
           compatible with adjacent uses and subject to City review and approval. (I 1.1, I 1.4, I 1.5, I
           1.8, and I 1.11)
                              THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                                                           1-36

                                                                                     1.0 LAND USE ELEMENT
1.23.6     Establish the development of a center providing social and recreational services for
           American Canyon’s senior citizens as a high priority. (I 1.26)
Design and Development Principles
1.23.7     Establish standards for the City and coordinate with other public agencies to ensure that
           public buildings and sites are designed to be compatible in scale, mass, character, and
           architecture with the existing buildings and pertinent design characteristics prescribed
           by this General Plan for the district or neighborhood in which they are located. (I 1.6, I
           1.7, and I 1.22)
1.23.8     Work with Pacific Gas and Electric Company to ensure that electrical energy systems
           do not adversely impact land uses and population in the City of American Canyon. (I
           1.22)
1.23.9     Work with Pacific Gas and Electric Company to facilitate landscaping of their site and
           facilities at the intersection of Highway 29 and American Canyon Road. (I 1.22)
OPEN SPACES
Goal
1K         Maintain adequate open spaces to protect environmental resources, provide
           recreational opportunities, and contribute “relief” from urban and suburban
           activities.
Objective
1.24       Preserve the important environmental resources of the City including significant
           wildlife habitats and vegetation, hillsides and canyons, creeks, rivers, and wetlands.
Policies
Permitted Uses
1.24.1     Accommodate passive recreation, hiking and equestrian activities, nature observation
           and education, and similar uses in areas designated as “Open Space (OS)” on the
           Land Use Plan Map (Figure 1-1). (I 1.1, I 1.2, I 1.4, I 1.5, and I 1.8)
1.24.2     Preclude development or activities in wetlands and significant habitats identified by the
           Natural and Historic/Cultural Resources Element that may adversely impact their
           integrity or conflict with federal, state, or local laws. (I 1.1, I 1.2, I 1.4, I 1.5, I 1.8, and I 1.12)
General
1.24.3     Cooperate with appropriate agencies and property owners in the establishment of a
           regional park in the eastern foothills and canyons of the City and establish open space
           linkages. (I 1.22)
                            THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                                                  1-37

                                                                           1.0 LAND USE ELEMENT
1.24.4     Participate in the acquisition and development of additional open spaces in accordance
           with the Natural and Historic/Cultural Resources Element. (I 1.1, I 1.4, I 1.5, I 1.8, I
           1.15, and I 1.22)
SPECIAL STUDY ZONE
Goal
1L         Provide flexibility for the study and potential development of lands between
           Newell Drive and the City Urban Limit Line, which will provide a transition from
           urban development on the west side of Newell Drive and the long-term
           agricultural and open space lands to the east.
Objective
1.25       Designate certain parcels as “special study” areas that may be needed for future urban
           growth, but for which appropriate land use designations have yet to be determined.
Policies
Permitted Uses
1.25.1     Allow for interim uses as open space and agriculture in accordance with Policies 1.6.1
           through 1.6.9 in areas designated as “Special Study (SS)” on the Land Use Plan Map
           (Figure 1-1). (I 1.1, I 1.4, I 1.5, and I 1.8)
General
1.25.2     Conduct a planning study to determine the appropriate long term use and development
           of areas designated for Special Study when market demand and City priorities so
           determine, subject to public input and comment, which may encompass a revision of the
           General Plan Land Use Plan Map and pertinent goals, objectives, and policies and
           environmental review in accordance with the requirements of the California
           Environmental Quality Act. (I 1.20)
1.25.3     Ensure that future development, if any, within the Special Study Area, is required to
           provide:
           a. View corridors from Newell Drive to the agricultural and open space lands to the
               east.
           b. Points of public access from Newell Drive through the Special Study Area to any
               abutting public open space or public park land to the east.
                           THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                                                       1-38

                                                                              1.0 LAND USE ELEMENT
DEVELOPMENT POLICY: COMMUNITY SUBAREAS
Goal
1M        Provide for the development of distinct neighborhoods, boulevards, and centers.
Objective
1.26      Provide for the differentiation of the neighborhoods, boulevards, and districts of the
          City by their functional role, uses, form, scale, and character of development.
Policies
1.26.1    Accommodate development of the City’s neighborhoods, boulevards, and districts
          according to the Community Districts and Subareas Schedule (below) for areas
          depicted on Figure 1-2. (I 1.1, I 1.2-I 1.8, and I 1.11-I 1.16)
          Community District and Subarea Schedule
          The Community District and Subarea Schedule describes the intended functional
          role of each of the City’s principal subareas (as depicted in Figure 1-2) and references
          the applicable permitted uses, densities, and pertinent overlays (as listed in the Land
          Use Schedule) defined by Policy 1.1.1). Development shall adhere to the policies for
          permitted use and design and development prescribed for each land use category in the
          preceding section of this Element and any additional specific design and development
          standards listed in this Schedule.
                        THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                                                 1-39

                                         1.0 LAND USE ELEMENT
THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                   1-40
                                                                        1.0 LAND USE ELEMENT
Subarea      Characteristic    Standards and Principles
A            Uses/Density   • Residential Low-2 (RL-2)
Residential
                            • Residential High (RH-1) on ten (10) acres (required condition of
“Core”
                               development); must be designated on master or specific plan.
                            • Residential High (RH-2) on twelve (12) acres.
                            • Accessory residential units: to be determined by Master or
                               Specific Plan
                            • Neighborhood-serving uses (daycare, community meeting
                               rooms, and recreation facilities, religious facilities, and small
                               scale commercial): maximum of 20,000 square feet
                            • Park on a minimum of ten (10) acres (required condition of
                               development); must be designated on master or specific plan
                            • School Site (minimum 10 acre area) to be designated on
                               Community or Specific Plan
                            • Hiking, biking, and equestrian trails
             Design and     • Master or Specific Plan required prior to development of any
             Development       portion of the site (including land use and parcel plan, circulation
                               plan, infrastructure plan, public facility plan, landscaping plan,
                               and similar elements)
                            • Development Agreement may be utilized for the dedication of
                               public facilities
                            • Minimum of 40 percent of the multi-family units must be
                               constructed by completion of 40 percent of the single family units
                            • Adherence to single family and multi-family design policies (1.7.4
                               and 1.8.4), mixed density policies (1.9.5), and new subdivision
                               policies (1.11.3-1.11.8)
                            • Multi-family residential shall be integrated with single family units
                               to establish a cohesive neighborhood; units should be dispersed to
                               more than one location
                            • Pedestrian and bicycle paths required as linkages to Town Center
                            • Entry monument, landscape, or other design feature shall be
                               incorporated at the site’s southeast corner (American Canyon and
                               Flosden intersection)
                            • Incorporate appropriate techniques to buffer impacts of railroad
                               along western property boundary (landscape, setbacks, etc.);
                               walls should not be used unless there is no feasible alternative
                            • Preserve American Canyon Creek as a natural riparian area and
                               incorporate a creekside pedestrian/hiking trail
B
Deleted                     Deleted by Resolution 2008-R105
            THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                                   1-41

                                                                         1.0 LAND USE ELEMENT
Subarea         Characteristic    Standards and Principles
C               Uses/Density   • Residential Low-1 (RL-1)
Southern                       • Accessory dwelling units: as determined by Master or Specific
Residential                       Plan
“Core”                         • Neighborhood-serving uses (daycare, community meeting
                                  rooms, and recreation facilities, religious facilities, and small
                                  scale commercial): maximum of 20,000 square feet
                               • Park on a minimum of five (5) acres (required condition of
                                  development); must be designated on master or specific plan
                               • Hiking, biking, and equestrian trails
                Design and     • Master or Specific Plan required prior to development of any
                Development       portion of the site (including land use and parcel plan,
                                  circulation plan, infrastructure plan, public facility and park
                                  plan, landscaping plan, and similar elements)
                               • Adherence to single family and multi-family design policies
                                  (1.7.4 and 1.8.4), mixed density policies (1.9.5), and new
                                  subdivision policies (1.11.3-1.11.8)
                               • Residential units can be clustered to preserve open space and
                                  reduced grading (single family semi-detached, townhomes, etc.)
                               • Multi-family residential shall be integrated with single family
                                  units to establish a cohesive neighborhood
                               • Entry monument, landscape, or other design features shall be
                                  incorporated at the site´s southeast and southwest corners
                               • Design elements shall be incorporated which establish a clear
                                  visual separation from the City of Vallejo along the site’s
                                  southern boundary (reduced densities, setback, greenbelt, park,
                                  other)
D               Uses/Density   • Residential Low (RL)
Foothills Site                 • Accessory dwelling units: as determined by Master or Specific
                                  Plan
                               • Neighborhood-serving uses (daycare, community meeting
                                  rooms, and recreation facilities, and religious facilities)
                               • Park on a minimum of five (5) acres (required condition of
                                  development); must be designated on master or specific plan
                               • School
                               • Hiking, biking, and equestrian trails
D               Design and     • Master or Specific Plan required prior to development of any
                Development       portion of the site (including land use and parcel plan,
                                  circulation plan, infrastructure plan, public facility and park
                                  plan, landscaping plan, and similar elements)
                               • Adherence to single family design policy (1.7.4) and new
                                  subdivision policies (1.11.3-1.11.8)
                               • Cluster development away from hillside areas
                               • Incorporate a meandering bicycle/pedestrian off-street trail
                                  system along Flosden Road
                               • Avoid the use of traditional subdivision walls along Flosden
                                  Road
               THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                                      1-42

                                                                       1.0 LAND USE ELEMENT
Subarea      Characteristic    Standards and Principles
D                           • Establish trail linkages to the foothills
                            • Entry monument, landscape, or other design features shall be
                               incorporated at the site’s southwest and northwest corners
                            • Maintain view corridors to the foothills from Flosden Road
                            • Design elements shall be incorporated which establish a clear
                               visual separation from the City of Vallejo along the site’s
                               southern boundary (reduced densities, setback, greenbelt, park,
                               other)
E            Uses/Density   • Commercial Recreation-1 (CR-1) (golf course, and ancillary
Golf Course                    facilities)
Community
                            • Residential Estate (RE)
                            • Neighborhood-serving uses (daycare, community meeting
                               rooms, and recreation facilities, religious facilities, and small
                               scale commercial): maximum of 20,000 square feet
                            • Hiking, biking, and equestrian
     trails
             Design and     • Master or Specific Plan required prior to development of any
             Development       portion of the site (including land use and parcel plan,
                               circulation plan, infrastructure plan, public facility and park
                               plan, landscaping plan, and similar elements)
                            • Adherence to single family and multi-family design policies
                               (1.7.4 and 1.8.4), mixed density policies (1.9.5), and new
                               subdivision policies (1.11.3-1.11.8)
                            • Residential units can be clustered to preserve open space
                               (single family semi-detached, townhomes, etc.)
                            • Multi-family dwellings shall be integrated with single family
                               units to establish a cohesive neighborhood
                            • Housing and supporting uses shall be sited to maximize their
                               relationships to the golf course and open space resources,
                               including the provision of view corridors
                            • Incorporate a meandering bicycle/pedestrian off-street trail
                               system along Flosden Road
                            • Entry monument, landscape, or other design features shall be
                               incorporated at the site’s southwest corner
            THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                                   1-43

                                                                         1.0 LAND USE ELEMENT
Subarea         Characteristic   Standards and Principles
F               Uses/Density   • Residential Estate (RE)
Regional Park
                               • Residential Low (RL), if project incorporates extraordinary
“Gateway”
                                  public amenities and achieves extraordinary level of site
                                  planning and design
                               • Accessory dwelling units: as determined by Master or Specific
                                  Plan
                               • Neighborhood-serving uses (daycare, community meeting
                                  rooms, recreation, and religious facilities)
                               • Hiking, biking, and equestrian trails
                               • “Staging” area (parking, information, etc.) for access to
                                  regional park trails and recreational uses
                               • Open space, parks, and/or recreational uses
                Design and     • Master or Specific Plan required prior to development of any
                Development       portion of the site (including land use and parcel plan,
                                  circulation plan, infrastructure plan, public facility and park
                                  plan, landscaping plan, and similar elements)
                               • Development Agreement may be utilized for the dedication
                                  of open space
                               • Adherence to single family design policy (1.7.4) and new
                                  subdivision policies (1.11.3-1.11.8)
                               • Residential units can be clustered to preserve open space
                               • Incorporate a meandering bicycle/pedestrian off-street trail
                                  system along Flosden Road
                               • Establish trail linkages to the regional park and foothills
                               • Maintain view corridors to foothills from Flosden Road
G               Uses/Density   • Residential Medium (RM)
Flosden Infill
                               • Hiking, biking, and equestrian trails
                Design and     • Adherence to multi-family design policy (1.8.4) and new
                Development       subdivision policies (1.11.3-1.11.8)
H               Uses/Density   • Residential Low (RL)
Westside
                               • Neighborhood-serving uses (daycare, community meeting
Residential
                                  rooms, recreation, and/or religious facilities)
                               • Park (expansion of Donaldson, Kimberly, or linear)
                               • Hiking, biking, and equestrian trails
                Design and     • Require a thorough wetlands study for properties located
                Development       adjacent to the wetlands and prohibit development
                                  encroachment.
                               • Adherence to single family design policy (1.7.4) and new
                                  subdivision policies. (1.11.3-1.11.8)
                               • Residential units can be clustered to preserve open space
                                  (“Zero-lot line” development).
               THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                                      1-44

                                                                          1.0 LAND USE ELEMENT
Subarea          Characteristic   Standards and Principles
H                               • Orient residential units on the east of the “edge” road towards
                                   the wetlands; considering possible rear alley access to preserve
                                   unique streetscape.
                                • Incorporate a meandering bicycle/pedestrian off-street trail
                                  system and linear park along the west side of the wetlands edge
                                  road.
I Deleted by Resolution 2000-07
J                Uses/Density   • Residential Medium (RM)
Napa Junction
                 Design and     • Adherence to multi-family design policy (1.8.4)
                 Development
K                Uses/Density   • Residential Estate (RE)
Northern
Transitional
Residential
                 Design and     • Adherence to single family design policy (1.7.4) and new
                 Development       subdivision policies (1.11.3-1.11.8)
L                Uses/Density   • Agriculture (A)
Agriculture
                 Design and     • Adherence to design policies 1.6.3-1.6.5
                 Development
M                Uses/Density   • Location and types of land uses, residential densities and non-
Town Center                        residential intensities shall be determined through approval of
                                   subsequent Specific Plan(s).
                 Design and     • Specific Plan required prior to development of any portion of
                 Development       the site (including land use plan, circulation plan, infrastructure
                                   plan, public facility plan, conceptual landscape plan, and similar
                                   elements)
                                • Adherence to Town Center Design and Development Principles
                                   1.19.10-1.19.14
                                • Create a “main street” design in the commercial portion of the
                                   Town Center Core Area with such items as on-street parking,
                                   town square/plaza and buildings constructed to the right-of-way
                                   line
                                • Incorporate pedestrian and bicycle circulation linkages to the
                                   Community Commercial Center along South Napa Junction
                                   Road
                                • Provide view corridors to the Napa River, valley, and foothills
                                • Encourage the retention and integration of existing structures
                                   previously used for the basalt plant operations
                                • Town Center Core Area will be centered around the basalt
                                   industrial ruins and quarry lake; this mixed-use area will have
                                   higher residential densities and higher intensity of non-
                                   residential uses; Residential Neighborhoods will surround the
                                   Core Area and will generally have lower residential densities
                                   and will include community facilities such as a park.
               THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                                        1-45

                                                                          1.0 LAND USE ELEMENT
Subarea          Characteristic    Standards and Principles
N                Uses/Density   • Community Commercial (CC) in accordance with Policies
Community                         1.15.1-1.15.2
Commercial
                                • Minimum of one major business establishment whose individual
Center
                                   building “footprint” exceeds 50,000 square feet
                                • Residential High (RH-2) may be permitted on a maximum of
                                   twenty five (25) percent of the site except on selected parcels
                                   consistent with Appendix D of Housing Element (see policies
                                   1.15.1 & 1.15.2.)
                                • Public parking facility and intermodal transit facility
                 Design and     • Master or Specific Plan required prior to development of any
                 Development       portion of the site (including land use and parcel plan,
                                   circulation plan, infrastructure plan, public facility plan,
                                   landscaping plan, and similar elements)
                                • Adherence to Community Commercial design Policies 1.15.3
                                   and 1.18.1-1.18.4
                                • Adherence to multi-family design policy (1.8.4)
                                • Require integration of commercial and housing uses into a
                                   unified and cohesive development
                                • Establish a well-defined access corridor from Highway 29 linked
                                   to the Town Center, which functions as a “monumental” entry
                                   using extensive landscape, such as a double row of trees,
                                   lighting, and other elements
                                • Locate a portion of the buildings in proximity to the principal
                                   street access
                                • Locate and scale buildings to ensure that the visual prominence
                                   of the Town Center is maintained
                                • Incorporate pedestrian linkages to the Town Center
O                Uses/Density   Neighborhood Commercial (CN) in accordance with Policies
Neighborhood                    1.14.1 and 1.14.2
Center
                 Design and     • May participate in a comprehensive Master or Specific Plan for
                 Development       the Highway 29 corridor
                                • Adherence to Neighborhood Commercial design Policies 1.14.3
                                   and 1.18.1-1.18.4
                                • Locate and design development to minimize access from
                                   Highway 29
P Deleted by Resolution 2000-07
               THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                                        1-46

                                         1.0 LAND USE ELEMENT
THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                   1-47
                                                                              1.0 LAND USE ELEMENT
Subarea           Characteristic    Standards and Principles
Q Deleted by Resolution 2000-07
R                 Uses/Density   • Specialty Commercial (CS) in accordance with Policies 1.17.1 and
Oat Hill                            1.17.2
                                 • Industrial (I) in accordance with Policies 1.22.1 and 1.22.2
                  Design and     • Adherence to Specialty Commercial design Policies 1.17.3 and
                  Development       1.18.1-1.18.5 (where applicable)
                                 • Adherence to Industrial design Policies 1.22.4-1.22.9 (where
                                    applicable)
                                 • Locate and design development to maximize views of the Napa River,
                                    valley, and foothills
                                 • Site and design commercial uses to be compatible with surrounding
                                    industrial development
S                 Uses/Density   • Industrial (I) in accordance with Policies 1.22.1 and 1.22.2
Industrial Parks
                  Design and     • Adherence to Industrial design Policies 1.22.4-1.22.10
                  Development
                                 • Incorporate extensive site landscape along Highway 29
                                 • Minimize individual parcel access from Highway 29
T                 Uses/Density   • Commercial Recreation (CR) in accordance with Policies 1.21.1,
Eucalyptus Grove                    1.21.2, and 1.21.4
Recreation Area
                  Design and     • Master or Specific Plan required prior to development
                  Development    • Adherence to Policies 1.21.6 and 1.21.7
                                 • Incorporate hiking, biking, and equestrian trails linked to the wetlands
                                    and surrounding residential communities
U                 Uses/Density   • Agricultural uses in accordance with Policies 1.6.1, 1.6.2, 1.6.6, and
Special Study                       1.6.7
Area                             • Other uses determined by future planning analyses (Policy 1.25.2)
                  Design and     • In accordance with Policies 1.4.3 and 1.4.5
                  Development
                 THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                                         1-48

                                                                            1.0 LAND USE ELEMENT
CITYWIDE LAND USE POLICY: KEY ISSUES
The following prescribes goals, objectives, and policies applicable to development in general,
regardless of type, density, or location. Pertinent policies must be considered for any land use or
development activity.
AIRPORT COMPATIBILITY
Goal
1N         Ensure the compatibility of development within American Canyon with the Napa
           County Airport.
Objective
1.27       Ensure that lands in American Canyon are developed in a manner which protects them
           from the noise and operational impacts of, and does not adversely constrain, the Napa
           County Airport.
Policies
1.27.1     Require that development comply with the land use and development conditions
           stipulated in Tables 1-1 and 1-2 for areas depicted on Figure 1-3. (I 1.1, I 1.4, I 1.5, I 1.8,
           and I 1.11)
1.27.2     Review all applications for new development, expansion of existing uses, and re-use
           within Napa County Airport Compatibility Zones “A” through “E” for compliance
           with the appropriate use and development conditions. (I 1.11)
1.27.3     Work with the Napa County Airport Authority to ensure that onsite ground activities of
           the Airport do not adversely impact (e.g., noise, vibration, air emissions, or other
           pollution) the City of American Canyon. (I 1.22)
1.27.4     Work with the Napa County Airport Authority to ensure that airport vehicular access
           does not adversely impact the City of American Canyon. (I 1.22)
1.27.5     Work with the Napa County Airport Authority to ensure that any expanded operations
           of the Airport do not adversely impact existing land uses and development in the City of
           American Canyon. (I 1.22)
1.27.6     Work with the Napa County Airport Authority and other appropriate agencies to ensure
           that emergency preparedness plans are maintained to protect American Canyon
           residents and development. (I 1.22)
1.27.7     Recognize the importance of the Napa County Airport to City residents, including the
           economic, transportation and recreational benefits, and ensure that land use decisions
           rendered for this area do not negatively impact Airport operations (I 1.22).
                         THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                                                1-49

                                                        1.0 LAND USE ELEMENT
Napa County Airport
Land Use Compatibility Zones                                  FIGURE 1-3
               THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                                  1-50
                                                                             1.0 LAND USE ELEMENT
                                         TABLE 1-1
                             Compatibility Zone Definitions
ZONE A Runway Protection Zone: Dimensioned to encompass the current and future Runway
       Protection Zones for the runways of the Napa County Airport, as defined under FAA
       regulations and shown on Figure 3. The zones also include areas lateral to the runway. These
       areas are regularly overflown by aircraft below 50 feet above the ground. For this reason,
       these areas are considered high risk with regard to accident potential and any structures,
       buildings, trees or obstacles may create a flight hazard. These areas are also affected by high
       noise levels.
ZONE B Approach/Departure Zone: This zone is defined as the areas where aircraft will be below 100
       feet above ground level as determined by the type of approach anticipated for that runway.
       Approach slopes are designated on the Airport Compatibility Zones map, Figure 1-3. These
       areas are affected by substantial risk of accident potential due to the frequency of overflights
       at low altitudes. Noise levels are generally high with frequent loud single-events.
ZONE C Extended Approach/Departure Zone: This zone is defined as the area where aircraft will be
       below 300 feet above ground level as determined by the type of approach. The low altitude
       of aircraft in these areas indicates moderate to high risk of accident potential. Properties in
       this zone will be affected by substantial noise.
ZONE D Common Traffic Pattern: This area is defined by the flight pattern for the Napa County
       Airport as illustrated on Figure 1-3. These areas are routinely overflown by aircraft operating
       to and from the airport with frequent single-event noise intrusion. Overflights in these areas
       can range from near the traffic pattern altitude (about 1,000 feet above the ground) to as low
       as 300 above the ground. Accident risk varies from low to moderate. Areas where aircraft are
       near pattern altitude (e.g., downwind leg) have the lowest risk. In areas where aircraft are at
       lower altitudes (especially on circle-to-land instrument approaches) a moderate level of risk
       exists.
ZONE E Other Airport Environs: An airport’s influence area often extends beyond the typically
       defined compatibility zones during busy traffic hours and when larger aircraft are in the
       pattern. Aircraft overflights can occur anywhere in these areas when aircraft are departing or
       approaching an airport. Overflight annoyance is the primary impact element in these areas.
       The risk of accident is very low.
                    THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                                             1-51

                                                                                                       1.0 LAND USE ELEMENT
                                                           TABLE 1-2
                                     Airport Vicinity Land Use Compatibility Criteria
                                                                                             MAXIMUM DENSITIES8
 ZONE           LOCATION                     IMPACT ELEMENTS                                           Other Users (people/ac)2
                                                                                                  In Structures    Total in and out
                                                                                Residential 1
                                                                                                                     of Structures
    A9      Runway Protection        • High Risk
            Zone and Primary         • High noise levels                              0                 0                  10
            Surface                  • Low overflights below 50’ AGL
    B       Inner Approach/          • Substantial risk
            Departure Zone           • High noise levels                               0                10                 25
                                     • Low overflights below 100’ AGL
    C       Approach/Departure       • Moderate risk
            Zone                     • Substantial noise                               0               50                  75
                                     • Low overflights below 300’ AGL
    D       Common Traffic           • Moderate risk
            Pattern                  • Frequent noise intrusion                        0                100               150
                                     • Routine overflights below 1000’ AGL
    E       Other Airport            • Low risk
            Environs                 • Overflight annoyance                                           See Note 7
1. Residential land use and zoning designations are                  6. NLR = Noise Level Reduction; i.e., the attenuation of
considered incompatible uses within the traffic pattern area         sound level from outside to inside provided by the structure.
(Zones A, B, C, and D) where aircraft overflights are frequent        Noise Level Reduction; i.e., the attenuation of sound level
and at low altitude. The residential restrictions do not apply       from outside to inside provided by the structure. Noise level
to residential uses allowable under agricultural land use and        reduction measures may be required in areas with high
zoning designations.                                                 single-event noise levels and where noise-sensitive uses
                                                                     (schools, libraries, etc.) are proposed. Refer to Appendix C
2. The use should not attract more than the indicated number
                                                                     for criteria and noise attenuation measures.
of persons per net acre. Net acreage is the total site area
inclusive of parking areas and landscaping, less the area            7. Maximum residential densities in accordance with local
dedicated for streets. These densities are intended as general       adopted General Plans and zoning designations.
planning guidelines to aid in determining the acceptability of       Consideration should be given to the proximity of flight
proposed land uses. Clustering of development within the             patterns, frequency of overflight, terrain conditions, and type
density parameters should be encouraged to protect and               of aircraft in determining acceptable locations of residential
provide open land/safety areas. However, in Zones A, B, and          uses. Referral to the ALUC for review of development plans
C the density on any one acre of a parcel should not exceed          prior to approval is recommended.
twice the indicated number of people per acre.
                                                                     8. The purpose of these criteria is to provide a basis for
3. Dedication of an avigation or overflight easement or deed         determining those land uses which are compatible with
notice is required as a condition for new development within         airport activities. Specific land uses will be allowed only if
all zones. Also, height limit restrictions are applicable to         they are also consistent with applicable General Plan policies
structures and trees in all zones in accordance with Federal         and zoning ordinances.
Aviation Regulation Part 77 and local ordinances. Uses
                                                                     9. All lands in Zone A are either within the Airport’s
which may be hazardous to flight are prohibited in all zones.
                                                                     boundaries or are designated for acquisition in the Airport
4. These uses typically can be designed to meet the density          Master Plan.
requirements and other development conditions listed.
                                                                     10. Includes objects that penetrate FAR Part && surfaces,
5. These uses typically do not meet the density requirements         uses that would attract large numbers of birds (e.g. landfills),
and other development conditions listed. They should be              and uses that would create smoke, glare, distracting lights, or
allowed only if a major community objective is served by their       electronic interference.
location in this zone and if mitigation measures (i.e., noise
                                                                     11. Avigation easements will be required in lieu of overflight
attenuation) are incorporated that will minimize potential
                                                                     easements or deed notices where there is an appropriate
conflicts.
                                                                     public agency to review them.
                                 THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                                                                1-52

                                                                                              1.0 LAND USE ELEMENT
                                               TABLE 1-2 (cont.)
Zone      Prohibited Uses         Other Development Conditions3              Examples of           Examples of Uses not
                                                                        Normally Acceptable        Normally Acceptable5
                                                                                 Uses4
 A    • All residential uses    • Avigation easement required          • Pasture, open space       • Heavy poles, signs,
      • Any assemblage of                                              • Aircraft tiedowns            large trees, etc.
        people                                                         • Auto parking              • Ponds
      • Any new structure
                                                                       • Most agricultural uses
        which exceeds height
        limits
      • Noise-sensitive uses
      • Uses hazardous to
        flight10
 B    • All residential uses    • Avigation easement required          • All uses from Zone A     • Retail uses
      • Any noise-sensitive     • Structures to be as far as possible • Parks with low-           • Office uses (except as
        uses                      from extended runway centerline        intensity uses, golf        accessory uses)
      •Schools, libraries,      • Clustering is encouraged to            courses                  • Hotels, motels,
        hospitals, nursing        maximize open land areas             • Nurseries                   resorts
        homes, daycare          • Minimum NLR of 25 dBA in office • Mini-storage                  • Theaters, assembly
        centers                   buildings6                                                         halls, and conference
      • Uses hazardous to       • Building envelopes and approach                                    centers
        flight10                  surfaces required on all subdivision                            • Ponds
                                  maps and development plans
 C    • All residential uses    • Avigation easement required          • All uses from Zone B     • Large retail buildings
      • Schools, libraries,     • Structures to be set back as far as  • Warehousing and low- • Hotels, motels,
        hospitals, nursing        possible form extended centerline      intensity light             resorts, health clubs
        homes, daycare          • Clustering is encouraged to            industrial
                                                                                                  • Restaurants, bars
        centers                   maximize open land areas             • Small retail uses
                                                                                                  • Multi-story buildings
      • Uses hazardous to       • Building envelopes and approach      • Outdoor recreation
        flight10                                                                                  • Theaters, assembly
                                  surfaces required on all               uses; marina, ballpark
      • Landfills                 subdivision maps                     • Office uses
                                                                                                     halls, and conference
                                                                                                     centers
                                • NLR measures may be required
                                  for noise-sensitive uses (offices)                              • Ponds
 D   • All residential uses    • Overflight easement or deed notice    • All uses from Zone C     • Schools, libraries,
     • Uses hazardous to         required11                            • Most nonresidential        hospitals, nursing
       flight10                • Building envelopes and approach         uses                       homes
                                 surfaces required on all              • Accessory daycare        • Large shopping malls
                                 development plans within 100 feet       centers                  • Amphitheaters
                                 of approach zones
                                                                                                  • Ponds
                               • Clustering is encouraged to
                                 maximize open land areas
                               • NLR measures may be required for
                                 noise-sensitive uses6
 E   • Noise-sensitive outdoor • Overflight easement or deed notice    • Any permitted use        • Amphitheaters
       uses                      required11                                                       • Landfills
                                                                                                  • Ponds
                             THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                                                          1-53

                                                                              1.0 LAND USE ELEMENT
NONCONFORMING USES
Goal
1O        Ensure that land use development conforms to the provisions of the Land Use
          Element of the General Plan.
Objective
1.28      Provide for the compliance of existing uses which do not conform with the provisions
          of the Land Use Element to its requirements and standards.
Policy
1.28.1    Establish parameters in the zoning ordinance for land uses which do not conform with
          the development standards stipulated in the General Plan for their continued use or
          subsequent compliance with appropriate standards. (I 1.1)
LAND USE COMPATIBILITY WITH ELECTROMAGNETIC ENERGY SOURCES
Goal
1P        Promote public awareness of potential health issues associated with and minimize
          involuntary public exposure to extremely low frequency magnetic fields.
Objective
1.29      Locate the development of new residences and school to avoid elevated extremely low
          frequency magnetic fields (ELFs) resulting from overhead or buried electrical energy
          transmission systems.
Policy
1.29.1    Require that new residential development and public and private school facilities be
          sited to avoid exposure to levels of ELFs which are elevated above normal ambient
          background levels. (I 1.1, I 1.2, I 1.4, I 1.6, I 1.11, and I 1.12)
Objective
1.30      Establish a standard for the appropriate level of public exposure to ELFs which shall be
          used as the threshold of significance for environmental review of development projects.
Policies
1.30.1    Require full disclosure of the existence of elevated levels of ELFs for new residential
          development and public and private school facilities in environmental review
          documents required by the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) and National
          Environmental Protection Act (NEPA). (I 1.12)
1.30.2    Restrict uses within powerline easement to “passive” uses such as open space,
          community gardens, vacant space, and commercial storage. (I 1.1)
                        THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                                                     1-54

                                                                               1.0 LAND USE ELEMENT
1.30.3    Establish the following setback standards for the placement of residences and schools
          adjacent to transmission corridor rights-of-way and monitor continuing scientific
          research and data regarding potential health risks and hazards and modify them as
          necessary:
          •     within 100 feet from the edge of the right-of-way for 100-110 kV lines;
          •     150 feet from 220-230 kV lines or establish a building setback to the 1mG magnetic
                field level, whichever is greater. (I 1.1)
1.30.4    Require PG&E, when line improvements are necessary, to implement new industry
          accepted technologies to reduce the exposure and emissions of EMFs. (I 1.22)
EXPANSION OF CITY SERVICES AND JURISDICTION
Goal
1Q        Ensure the logical and orderly expansion of the City’s services and jurisdictional
          limits.
Objective
1.31      Expand American Canyon’s jurisdictional boundaries to establish a logical pattern of
          growth and services, while also providing for the long term retention of agricultural and
          open space uses.
Policies
1.31.1    Set priorities for the provision of urban services; with service expansion within the City
          and its Sphere of Influence receiving the highest priority. (I 1.15)
1.31.2    Utilize the City’s responsibilities for planning utility extension and annexation to
          support City and County policies for city/urban-centered development and long term
          retention of agriculture and open space uses outside of areas designated for urban
          development. (I 1.2 and I 1.15)
1.31.3    Work cooperatively with the Local Agency Formation Commission (LAFCO) to
          expand the City’s Sphere of Influence to include all areas that are or will be provided
          urban type services by the City. (I 1.22 and I 1.15)
1.31.4    Pursue the annexation of lands on both sides of significant arterials (i.e., Highway 29,
          Green Island Road, American Canyon Road, and Flosden Road) to ensure cohesive and
          compatible design, planning, and future development. (I 1.25)
1.31.5    Proceed immediately on adoption of the General Plan, if property owners concur, with
          pre-zoning, master planning, and annexation of all areas within the existing Sphere of
          Influence to establish jurisdiction over what is planned to be a primary City growth area.
           (I 1.25)
1.31.6    Negotiate an equitable property tax transfer with the County that offsets the costs
          incurred by both jurisdictions in providing services to the area to be annexed. (I 1.22 and I
          1.25)
                          THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                                                  1-55

                                                                                     1.0 LAND USE ELEMENT
1.31.7    Proceed with the annexation of land in a manner that ensures the logical expansion of
          City boundaries, provides for the planned, orderly, and efficient pattern of urban
          development, and reflects property owner desires. (I 1.25)
1.31.8    Work with the County and adjoining jurisdictions in establishing a permanent green belt
          outside of areas designated for urban development. (I 1.22)
1.31.9    Work with LAFCO and the American Canyon Fire District to ensure that all City
          annexations of areas outside of the existing Fire District boundaries are also annexed to
          the Fire District to reflect the District’s ability to provide urban type fire services. (I 1.22
          and I 1.25)
1.31.10   Work with LAFCO to establish ultimate City boundaries that are logical and orderly and
          provide for future balanced growth between the east and west sides of Highway 29. (I
          1.22 and I 1.25)
1.31.11   Conduct a fiscal analysis in processing annexation requests to fully evaluate the fiscal
          impacts of annexation and ultimate development. (I 1.25)
1.31.12   Work cooperatively with Napa County towards an agreement to establish compatible
          land use standards for areas within the Sphere of Influence and other lands immediately
          adjacent to the City to ensure consistent land use designations. (I 1.22)
QUALITY OF THE BUILT ENVIRONMENT
Goal
1R        Ensure a high quality of the City’s built environment, architecture, landscape, and
          public open spaces.
Objective
1.32      Attain residential, commercial, industrial, and public buildings and sites which convey a
          high quality visual image and character.
Policies
1.32.1    Require adherence to the Design and Development Principles prescribed in this Plan
          and the City’s Design Review Guidelines which shall be updated periodically. (I 1.1, 1I
          .4-I 1.7, 1I .8, 1I .11, and I 1.14)
1.32.2    Require that development projects subject to discretionary review submit and
          implement a landscaping plan. (I 1.1, I 1.2, I 1.4, 1I .5, I 1.7, and I 1.11)
1.32.3    Require that properties be properly maintained to ensure neighborhood quality;
          including weed abatement, proper storage and screening of recreational vehicles,
          minimization of unsightly or hazardous storage of junk and debris on portions of the
          property visible from the street, and other appropriate measures. (I 1.1, 1.3, and I 1.21)
1.32.4    Require developers to incorporate mature and specimen trees and other significant
                            THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                                                  1-56

                                                                               1.0 LAND USE ELEMENT
          vegetation which may exist on a site into the design of a development project for that
          site. (I 1.1, I 1.2, 1I .4, 1I .5, 1I .7, and I 1.8)
1.32.5    Require the use of drought-tolerant species in landscape design in accordance with the
          provisions of the Water Conservation and Landscape Act. (I 1.1, I 1.2, I 1.4, I 1.5, I 1.7, and I
          1.8)
1.32.6    Require that commercial, industrial, and multi-family residential development
          incorporate adequate drought-conscious irrigation systems and maintain the health of
          the landscape. (I 1.1, I 1.2, I 1.4, I 1.5, I 1.7, and I 1.8)
1.32.7    Require that all commercial, industrial, multi-family, and common area landscape be
          adequately irrigated with automatic irrigation systems. (I 1.1, I 1.2, I 1.4, I 1.5, I 1.7, and I 1.8)
1.32.8    Promote the use of reclaimed water for the irrigation of public and private landscape, as
          available. (I 1.24)
Objective
1.33      Ensure that structures and sites are designed and constructed to maintain their long-term
          quality and provide for the needs of their occupants.
Policies
1.33.1    Require that all structures be constructed in accordance with the requirements of the
          City’s building and other pertinent codes and regulations; including new, adaptively-
          reused, and renovated buildings. (I 1.3 and I 1.21)
1.33.2    Periodically review and update the City’s building and development codes and
          regulations to ensure that they incorporate professionally accepted state-of-the-art
          standards. (I 1.3)
1.33.3    Require that all development be designed to provide adequate space for access, parking,
          supporting functions, open space, and other pertinent elements. (I 1.3 and I 1.11)
1.33.4    Require that all commercial, industrial, and public development incorporate appropriate
          design elements to facilitate access for and use by the physically challenged. (I 1.1 and I
          1.3)
1.33.5    Periodically monitor the conditions of buildings in the City and enforce pertinent
          building and zoning codes, when necessary. (I 1.21)
1.33.6    Promote programs and work with local service organizations and educational
          institutions to inform residential, commercial, and industrial property owners and
          tenants regarding methods for the maintenance and upkeep of their property. (I 1.24)
1.33.7    Promote and support community-and neighborhood-based efforts for the maintenance,
          upkeep, and renovation of structures and sites. (I 1.23 and I 1.24)
1.33.8    Provide economic assistance, as funds are available, for the improvement of physically
                            THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                                                            1-57

                                                                            1.0 LAND USE ELEMENT
          deteriorated and blighted structures in the City. (I 1.18)
1.33.9    Consider the use of the authorities of California Redevelopment Law as a mechanism to
          precipitate revitalization of deteriorated and blighted buildings, properties, and uses. (I
          1.17)
GENERAL PLAN MAINTENANCE
Goal
1S        Ensure that the General Plan is updated and maintained.
Objective
1.34      Review the General Plan on an annual basis to ensure internal constancy and
          consistency with other Federal, State, and local regulations and policies.
Policies
1.34.1    Consider the collection of an impact fee from new development to fund the maintenance
          of the General Plan on an ongoing basis. (I 1.20)
1.34.2    Prepare an annual report appraising the Planning Commission and City Council
          regarding the status of the General Plan. (I 1.20)
1.34.3    Allow a maximum of four General Plan amendments annually, except for those
          pertaining to affordable housing which may occur without restriction, consistent with
          State legislation. (I 1.20)
1.34.4    Permit the adjustment of land use classification boundaries depicted on the Land Use
          Plan Map to coincide with legal parcel boundaries, provided that land use compatibility
          is maintained, the integrity of each land use district is maintained, and there will be no
          adverse impacts of such boundary adjustment. (I 1.20)
1.34.5    Allow the determination of the appropriate mix and density of development on parcels
          which are divided into two or more land use classifications by the Planning
          Commission. (I 1.20)
1.34.6    Allow for the reconfiguration of land use classification boundaries depicted on the
          Land Use Plan Map through the formulation of a specific plan where the intent is to
          achieve a unified, planned development project, provided that the cumulative yield of
          development for all parcels encompassed by the specific plan does not exceed that
          permitted by the Land Use Plan Map. (I 1.20)
CITY URBAN LIMIT LINE
Goal
1T        Establish a City Urban Limit Line for the City of American Canyon which
          describes its future geographic boundary until January 1, 2030.
                         THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                                                1-58
                                                                           1.0 LAND USE ELEMENT
Objective
1.35      Ensure that the incorporated City boundary expands to be conterminous with the City
          Urban Limit Line, providing for effective “home rule” of the City’s destiny.
1.35.1    Take all appropriate action with LAFCO (“Napa County Local Agency Formation
          Commission”) to ensure that the area outside of the current city limits and within the
          City Urban Limit Line is:
          a. Included within the Sphere of Influence of the City and American Canyon Fire
              Protection District.
          b. Annexed to the City and the American Canyon Fire Protection District.
1.35.2    Ensure that annexations within the City Urban Limit Line are accomplished in a
          planned and orderly manner, consistent with the City’s ability to provide necessary
          municipal services and facilities.
1.35.3    Ensure that lands outside of the City Urban Limit Line shall not be developed until
          January 1, 2030 or later, except as provided by policy 1.35.4 below.
1.35.4    Acquire lands for public uses and construct and operate public facilities outside of the
          City Urban Limit Line, if necessary and appropriate, provided that those facilities are
          designed to serve development within the City Urban Limit Line.
Objective
1.36      Define the limits of urban development of the City, preserving agricultural and open
          space outside of the City Urban Limit Line on a long-term basis.
                       THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                                               1-59

                                                                              1.0 LAND USE ELEMENT
IMPLEMENTATION PROGRAMS
The following indicates the programs which shall be carried out by the City of American Canyon to
implement the goals, objectives, policies, and standards of the Land Use Element. Each program is
preceded by the letter “I” and a number which is referenced by the pertinent policy which it
implements in the preceding section. These are noted in parentheses (#) at the close of each policy.
CODES, ORDINANCES, AND GUIDELINES
I 1.1      Revise the Zoning Ordinance
           The principal method for the implementation of a General Plan Land Use Map is the
           zoning ordinance. Policies and standards which prescribe the types of use permitted,
           their density/intensity, and design and development characteristics (design, property
           setbacks, etc.) are codified as precise requirements in the ordinance. The authority to
           zone is inherent in the police power delegated to cities by the State of California
           Constitution. The zoning ordinance consists of two basic elements:
               (a) a map which delineates the boundaries of districts, or “land use zones,” in
               which similar and compatible uses developed at similar and compatible standards
               are to be permitted and
               (b) text which explains the purpose of the zoning district, lists the permitted uses (as
               a “right” and under special conditions), and defines the standards for development
               (e.g., minimum lot size, density, height, property setbacks, lot coverage, parking
               requirements, sign design, and so on).
           On incorporation, American Canyon adopted the zoning ordinance of the County of
           Napa. The existing mapped depiction of land use zones is referred to as the “City of
           American Canyon Current Zoning Designations” and the textual codification of
           requirements is incorporated in the American Canyon Municipal Code.
           The City has initiated a revision of the zoning ordinance to reflect the policies contained
           within this General Plan which will be finalized subsequent to this Plan’s adoption by
           the City Council. Integrated with the Ordinance will be a description of the process of
           retention and/or amortization of uses which are made nonconforming due to the General
           Plan.
           Responsibility: City of American Canyon, Planning Department
           Funding:           City of American Canyon General Fund (currently appropriated)
           Schedule:          Within six months of the General Plan’s adoption
I 1.2      Revise Subdivision Regulations
           Subdivision regulation is an exercise of the police power of a city authorized by the
           State to control the manner in which land is divided. Like the zoning ordinance, it must
           be consistent with the General Plan. It will be necessary to review the City’s
           subdivision ordinance and amend it as necessary to reflect the land use goals, objectives,
           policies, and standards.
                         THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                                                 1-60

                                                                         1.0 LAND USE ELEMENT
      Responsibility: City of American Canyon Planning Department
      Funding:           City of American Canyon General Fund
      Schedule:          Revised Ordinance, within six months of the General Plan’s adoption
I 1.3 Revise/Update the Building Code
      The City shall continue to use the Building code as the set of rules and regulations by
      which new construction, adaptive re-use, and renovations shall occur. The Code shall
      be reviewed to ensure its consistency with the provisions of the General Plan. It shall
      also be updated periodically to reflect changes in the Uniform Building Code and State
      legislation. Periodically, the City shall review the Code and update it as necessary to
      reflect conditions which are unique to the City.
      Responsibility: City of American Canyon Planning Department
      Funding:            City of American Canyon General Fund
      Schedule:           Within 12 months of the General Plan’s adoption
I 1.4 Prepare and Implement Specific Plans
      State law (Government Code Section 63450) authorizes cities to adopt Specific Plans
      for implementing their general plans in designated areas. They are intended to provide
      more finite specification of the types of uses to be permitted, development standards
      (setbacks, heights, landscape, architecture, etc.), and circulation and infrastructure
      improvements. They are most often used to ensure that multiple property owners and
      developers adhere to a common development plan or ensure that the individual phases
      of a long-term multi-phased development project are integrated and cohesive.
      Specific Plans are adopted by resolution (as a document of policies and standards) or as
      an ordinance. In the latter case, which is most frequently used by cities, their
      specifications normally amend or are additive to the zoning regulations for the property.
      Specific Plans can be initiated by the City or developers. Costs for City-initiated
      Specific Plans are, most often, reimbursed by pro-rata allocation of fees to developers
      applying for development permits in the Specific Plan area. Costs for developer-
      initiated Plans are usually borne in their entirety by the developer.
      Specific Plans may be used by the City as a mechanism to provide more thorough and
      definitive planning standards for the following areas:
      •      Town Center
      •      Community Commercial Center
      •      Highway 29 Corridor
      •      Planned Residential Communities
      •      Golf Course Community
      •      Industrial Parks
      •      Special Study Area
                     THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                                            1-61

                                                                         1.0 LAND USE ELEMENT
      Responsibility:      City of American Canyon Planning Department and private
                           developers
      Funding:             City-initiated Specific Plans:      General Fund, with potential
                           reimbursement from developments processed in accordance with the
                           Specific Plan (based on pro-rata share of the costs of preparation and
                           processing)
                           Developer-initiated Specific Plans: by the developer/applicant
      Schedule:            To be determined as initiated
I 1.5 Prepare and Implement Community Master Plans
      “Master” Plans are formulated to guide large-scale, multi-phase development projects.
      Most often they are prepared for land under ownership by a single entity and involve
      one or a limited number of parcels. In many respects, they are defined to the same or
      finer level of detail as the Specific Plans. These include a precise list of the uses to be
      accommodated, building sizes (and, in some cases, footprints), amount of development,
      building heights, architectural design standards, signage standards, landscape plans,
      infrastructure and circulation plans, grading plans, and similar components. They differ
      from Specific Plans in that their content is not guided by state law and they are not
      enacted as formal policy of the city. These are processed through the City’s
      discretionary review procedures and necessitate public input.                 Adoption of
      Development/Master Plans provides the City with some flexibility for revision of the
      Plan as implementation proceeds, which can be inhibited by Specific Plans.
      Development/Master Plans may be used for the same areas identified above for Specific
      Plan application. Subdivision of land or individual development applications may not
      be approved or processed in areas designated under the General Plan for a Community
      or Specific Plan, until the Community Master Plan or Specific Plan has been adopted by
      the City.
      Responsibility:      City of American Canyon Planning Department
      Funding:             Publicly-initiated Development/Master Plans: City of American
                           Canyon General Fund; with possible reimbursement with affected
                           property owners and developers.
                           Privately-initiated Development/Master Plans: private developers
      Schedule:            Ongoing
I 1.6 Adopt and Implement Architecture, Site, and Landscape Design Guidelines and
      Standards
      The City’s Design Guidelines shall be updated to reflect the Design and Development
      Principles specified by this Plan. Specific visual examples of projects which meet these
      requirements should be documented and made available to project applicants. These
      should be reviewed on initial contacts of applicants with the City, enabling the City to
      be pro-active in design, rather than the normally reactive stance of the development
      review process.
                    THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                                             1-62

                                                                        1.0 LAND USE ELEMENT
      Responsibility:      City of American Canyon, Planning Department
      Funding:             City of American Canyon General Fund
      Schedule:            Ongoing
I 1.7 Street Tree Master Plan
      The City shall formulate a comprehensive master plan which shall list the permitted
      trees in the public rights-of-way along all streets in American Canyon. It will specify
      species, minimum size, spacing, and irrigation requirements. It is intended that the plan
      identify consistent species for blocks, streets, neighborhood, or districts which provide
      distinctive identities for these areas.
      Responsibility:      City of American Canyon
      Funding:             City of American Canyon General Fund
      Schedule:            Within two (2) years of the General Plan’s adoption, as funding is
                           available
I 1.8 Consider the use of Development Agreements
      Development agreements are authorized by State law to enable a city to enter into a
      binding contract with a developer which assures the city as to the type, character, and
      quality of development and additional “benefits” which may be contributed and
      assures the developer that the necessary development permits will be issued regardless
      of changes in regulations.
      This ensures that a developer of a multi-phased project who has established financing
      on conditions negotiated with the city would not be adversely affected by subsequent,
      more restrictive regulations. This, in turn, enables the city to exact a higher level of
      performance, quality, and contributions than would normally accrue through the
      entitlement process.
      It may be desired by the City that these be applied to large-scale, multi-phased projects,
      which may include any of the applications listed above for Specific Plans.
      Responsibility:      City of American Canyon Planning Department and private
                           developers
      Funding:             Costs for the preparation and execution of a Development
                           Agreement are normally passed on to the developer
      Schedule:            As requested by the City or private developers
I 1.9 Adopt and Implement Growth Management Ordinance
      The amount of development which would result if each parcel in the City was to be
      developed to its maximum density permitted by the Land Use Plan (or “theoretical
      buildout”) would considerably exceed the capacity limits of transportation and utility
      infrastructure and public services (refer to Draft City of American Canyon General
      Plan Environmental Impact Report). Consequently it will be necessary to adopt and
                    THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                                              1-63

                                                                           1.0 LAND USE ELEMENT
        implement an ordinance which restricts the amount of development to a specified limit,
        determined by the capacity of these resources, below the “theoretical plan capacity,”
        The most critical limitation, at the time of the writing of the General Plan, is
        transportation. Policy has been defined by this Plan which would limit the increment of
        growth to the level imposed by the Circulation Element’s specified Levels of Service
        standards and associated traffic capacity.
        Structurally, the ordinance should incorporate:
        a.    A development limit determined by the capacity of infrastructure and services
              (note: while traffic represents the most critical limit, it may be appropriate to
              define capacity limits related to other infrastructure and services, which in the
              opinion of the City, bear an important relationship to development).
        b.    A method to allocate new development within the stipulated limit (e.g.,
              “first-come, first-served” or priority for “desired” economic uses, affordable
              housing, or “good” architectural design).
        c.    A mechanism to modify the prescribed development limit based on actual levels
              of demand and service, based on data provided by a development monitoring
              system (I 1.10, below).
        d.    A mechanism to increase the development limit by providing additional
              infrastructure or service capacity or mitigation (e.g., new roadway or sewer). This
              should incorporate a “triggering” mechanism which would initiate the planning
              and funding for the provision of additional resource capacity or other mitigation
              when the existing capacity is exhausted (practically, this should occur at some
              level below the existing capacity, for example, 80 percent).
        Procedurally, such a growth management system should be updated on an annual or
        biannual basis.
        Responsibility:     City of American Canyon Planning Department
        Funding:            City of American Canyon General Fund
        Schedule:           Within 18 months of the General Plan=s adoption
DEVELOPMENT REVIEW AND APPROVAL PROCEDURES
I 1.10  Implement Growth Monitoring Program
        The City should establish and implement a program to monitor the quantity and impacts
        of growth. Annually, this should include a tabulation of the amount of growth (by type,
        density, and location), levels of utilization of infrastructure and services (e.g., traffic
        volumes and school enrollments), and capacity of infrastructure and services to
        accommodate additional growth (e.g., quantity of additional trips and additional school
        children).
                      THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                                             1-64

                                                                        1.0 LAND USE ELEMENT
       This data should be used as input, where necessary, for a Growth Management
       Ordinance (described above), the County of Napa Congestion Management Plan, and
       for planning purposes for the various infrastructure and service departments and
       agencies serving the City.
       Responsibility:     City of American Canyon Planning Department
       Funding:            City of American Canyon General Fund
       Schedule:           Within 18 months of the adoption of the General Plan
I 1.11 Development Review
       New development and enlargement of existing structures, except single-family
       residences, are subject to review according to their adherence with City of American
       Canyon standards and regulations and General Plan policy. All site plans for new
       development located within the City and existing Sphere of Influence shall also be
       required to submit plans to the Napa County Sheriff’s Department for review. The
       plans shall be reviewed to determine whether they incorporate adequate amounts of
       defensible space, which would aid the Sheriff’s Department in providing the greatest
       level of protection possible. Certain projects, consistent with zoning, are considered as
       “ministerial” and are subject to approval by the Director of Planning. Others are
       subject to discretionary review, including those which must receive Conditional Use
       Permits or variances and are subject to review by the Planning Commission and formal
       public hearings. In particular, development review is essential for the following:
       a.    Review of subdivisions, multi-family development, commercial, and industrial
             projects for consistency with applicable standards.
       b.    Review of projects for which more restrictive design and development standards
             are imposed to maintain or achieve a special quality or character and/or whose
             scale and function could conflict with adjacent land uses (e.g., Town Center,
             Highway 29 corridor, and planned residential communities).
       c.    Review of projects characterized by activities and intensity of use (large number
             of customers, high traffic volumes, noise, etc.) which could adversely impact
             adjacent residential or other “sensitive” uses (e.g., gasoline stations, fast food
             establishments, game arcades, and nightclubs).
       d.    Review of mixed-use development projects (integrating residential and
             commercial horizontally or vertically on the same site).
       e.    Review of certain industrial uses.
       f.    Review of projects located in areas containing sensitive environmental habitats,
             environmental hazards, and/or significant visual resources (as designated in the
             Natural and Historic/Cultural Resources, Flood Hazards, and Noise
             Elements).
                     THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                                            1-65

                                                                         1.0 LAND USE ELEMENT
       g.     Review of projects located in areas of high traffic volume and degraded level of
              service.
       Responsibility:      City of American Canyon Planning Department
       Funding:             City of American Canyon General Fund and fees for development
                            applications
       Schedule:            Review and modification of development review requirements: in
                            concert with the preparation of the revised zoning ordinance, within
                            six months of the adoption of the General Plan
I 1.12 Environmental Review
       The California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) requires that the environmental
       effects of a project must be taken into account when reviewing that project. This
       involves the review of all projects submitted by an applicant or initiated by the City and
       determination of their potential for significantly affecting the City’s and region’s
       environmental resources (by an “Initial Study”). If it is found that significant impacts
       may occur, an Environmental Impact Report (EIR) must be prepared.
       The EIR presents an overview of the environmental setting of the project, assesses how
       that environment will change on introduction of the project, prescribes changes to the
       project which must be made to mitigate any impacts found to be significant, and
       identifies and evaluates the impacts of any alternatives. The “environment” of
       American Canyon to be evaluated consists of the composite of existing physical
       elements; including natural environmental components (air quality, geology/seismicity,
       groundwater, etc.) and human-related components (circulation and traffic, infrastructure,
       public services, etc.). Economic impacts are not considered part of the environment,
       according to CEQA. This does not preclude the preparation of separate “Fiscal” or
       “Economic” impact analyses. However, they are not part of an EIR.
       On completion of an EIR, it is made available for public review and comment. At least
       one public hearing must be conducted by the Planning Commission on the draft EIR.
       Comments received must be responded to and addressed in the Final EIR.
       Environmental review occurs in concert with the Development Permit process. No
       discretionary permit can be approved without, first, satisfactory completion of the
       environmental review process. This may involve the preparation of a complete EIR,
       “Focused” EIR if found that only a limited number of resources may be impacted,
       “Supplemental” EIR if the project is a revision of an earlier project or time has passed
       and conditions have changed, or “Negative Declaration” if the project is determined
       by the City to have no significant effects.
       Where mitigation actions are specified during environmental review, a plan
       (“Mitigation Monitoring Plan”) must be prepared which specifies the manner in which
       the development project will be monitored to determine whether these actions were
       implemented and effective. This plan must be approved by the City in concert with the
       certification of the EIR.
                      THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                                             1-66

                                                                            1.0 LAND USE ELEMENT
       American Canyon’s project environmental review is conducted by staff of the Planning
       Department in accordance with procedures specified in the CEQA Guidelines and
       Municipal Code. As state legislation regarding the procedures, substance, and
       applications of environmental review change frequently, it is essential that the City
       annually review pertinent legislation and update its procedures and regulations
       accordingly.
       New development shall also be required to utilize appropriate BAAQMD Best
       Available Control Technology (BACT) air quality mitigation measures and thresholds
       from BAAQMD’s Air Quality and Urban Development document titled, Guidelines for
       Assessing Impacts of Projects and Plans.
       Responsibility:     City of American Canyon Planning Department
       Funding:            Environmental documents (EIRs, Negative Declarations, etc.):
                           applicant fees (full costs)
       Schedule:           Annual update to reflect state legislation. Environmental review
                           documents: on a case-by-case basis
I 1.13 Traffic Report
       As a component of the environmental review process, or separately, the City shall
       require the conduct of an analysis defining the traffic impacts and mitigation measures
       for new development and the adaptive re-use of existing structures. A threshold (i.e.,
       number of trips) should be established above which such analyses would be required.
       These should be reviewed according to:
       a.    level of service standards stipulated for major network street segments and
             intersections in the Circulation Element of the General Plan;
       b.    specific-site characteristics (e.g., access and egress, level of service at peripheral
             intersections, traffic intrusion into adjacent residential neighborhoods;
       c.    compliance with the County of Napa Congestion Management Plan and other
             requirements stipulated in the Circulation Element,
       d.    improvements required to mitigate the impacts of new development;
       e.    timing of new development; and
       f.    funding of improvements.
       As necessary, traffic mitigation measures shall be identified and incorporated as
       conditions of project approval.
       Public review and comment is solicited during the traffic review process.
                     THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                                              1-67

                                                                           1.0 LAND USE ELEMENT
        Responsibility:    City of American Canyon Planning Department and Public Works
                           Department
        Funding:           Project-related: development applicant fees (full costs)
        Schedule:          Ongoing as project applications are submitted
I 1.14  Architectural Design Review
        The goals, objectives, policies, and standards contained in the Land Use Element
        mandate a high level of architectural and site design performance in the City of
        American Canyon. Development applications shall be reviewed for their consistency
        with these.
        Responsibility:    City of American Canyon Planning Department
        Funding:           General Fund and development application fees
        Schedule:          Ongoing with project application submittals
ECONOMIC AND CAPITAL
I 1.15  Capital Improvements Program
        The City of American Canyon is in the process (as of the date of the date of this Plan) of
        preparing a Capital Improvements Program (CIP) which provides for the construction
        and upgrade of streets, storm drains, municipal buildings, and other public physical
        facilities. It defines the specific improvements to be accomplished annually and
        allocates budget for these. Normally, the CIP is revised no less often than every five
        years and is subject to approval by the City Council. The determination of consistency
        of a CIP with the General Plan is required by the Planning Commission and City
        Council prior to approval.
        Responsibility:    City of American Canyon
        Funding:           City of American Canyon General Fund
        Schedule:          Program: in progress, update every five years Implementation:
                           each year, as funding is available
I 1.16  Implement Urban Design Improvements Program
        The Land Use Element provides for the implementation of streetscape and other urban
        design elements throughout the City. Among these are street trees, pedestrian-oriented
        amenities (lighting, street furniture, etc.), unifying public signage, decorative sidewalk
        and cross walk paving, and similar elements. A number will be implemented and
        privately financed as a condition of development of key projects (e.g., Town Center and
        Neighborhood Center). Others which involve multiple parcels, such as the Highway 29
        corridor, may necessitate public expenditures which may be financed through general
        revenue, bonding, or the establishment of an assessment district.
        It is recommended that a comprehensive urban design and streetscape plan be
        formulated by the City to guide the specific improvement projects.
                      THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                                              1-68
                                                                             1.0 LAND USE ELEMENT
         Responsibility:     City of American Canyon
         Funding:            City of American Canyon General Fund, bonding, and/or assessment
                             district
         Schedule:           Urban design plan: within two (2) years of the General Plan’s
                             adoption, as funding is available. Improvements: to be determined
I 1.17   Initiate and Implement Redevelopment Plans
         Deleted
I 1.18   Financial Assistance Programs
         The City shall assess the feasibility of expanding financial incentive programs to assist
         low-income tenants and property owners in the maintenance and upgrade of their
         properties. Potential funding sources should be investigated. These may include State
         and County programs, low interest private bank loans, and/or developer fees.
         Responsibility:     City of American Canyon
         Funding:            State of California, local financial institutions, and/or developer fees
         Schedule:           Within two (2) years of the adoption of the General Plan, as funding
                             is available
I 1.19   Formulate and Implement Economic Marketing Strategy
         The City shall establish a strategy to attract the development and investment of key
         industries and commercial establishments which will contribute jobs and revenue to the
         City. Policies and programs are elaborated in the Economic Development Element.
         Responsibility:     City of American Canyon Planning Department and City Manager=s
                             Office
         Funding:            City of American Canyon General Fund
         Schedule:           Within two (2) years of the adoption of the General Plan, as funding
                             is available
ADMINISTRATIVE
I 1.20   Monitor and Update the General Plan Land Use Element
         As required by State statute, the City shall review and report on the status of the General
         Plan annually. In addition, the Plan should be revised and updated periodically. This
         shall include:
             (a) an update of baseline data, analyses, and issues to account for current conditions;
             (b) evaluation of the policies and programs contained in this Plan to determine their
             effectiveness in achieving the Plan’s goals and objectives; and
             (c) revision of the policies and programs to increase their effectiveness, where
             necessary, and account for current issues and legislation.
                       THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                                               1-69

                                                                           1.0 LAND USE ELEMENT
       Public input shall be actively solicited in the update. Because of the changing dynamics
       of land use and development it is suggested that the Land Use Element be updated
       each five to ten years.
       In accordance with State law, Plan amendments may be adopted a maximum of four
       times a year. Those related to the provision of affordable housing may be updated
       without limit.
       Responsibility:       City of American Canyon Planning Department
       Funding:              City of American Canyon General Fund and potential General Plan
                             “maintenance fee” to be assessed for all development applications
       Schedule:             Report on General Plan status: annually. General Plan updates:
                             every five years, or as needed
I 1.21 Enforce Codes
       City of American Canyon codes and ordinances that implement the General Plan shall
       be enforced. The City may wish to expand pro-active code enforcement efforts to
       include periodic City-initiated surveys of buildings and site conditions, and, where
       problems are found, require code compliance.
       Responsibility:       City of American Canyon
       Funding:              City of American Canyon General Fund
       Schedule:             Ongoing program
I 1.22 Inter-Agency Coordination
       Development in the City of American Canyon impacts and is impacted by the actions of
       adjacent municipal jurisdictions, utility districts, school districts, service providers, and
       higher level governmental agencies (e.g., County of Napa and the California
       Department of Transportation). As a consequence, it is essential that the jurisdiction,
       closely coordinate those actions that impact other government entities. Agreements and
       procedures for coordination need to be continued or established where they do not
       currently exist. This will become increasingly important as the State of California
       continues to consider statewide and regional policy and administrative mechanisms to
       address the issues of growth (e.g., congestion management, air quality, solid waste, and
       traffic) which may impact the City’s local decision making authorities over time.
       Among the many and diverse concerns which should be addressed are the following:
       a. Land use compatibility on the City’s periphery and the interface of streets and
            traffic; with the County of Napa and City of Vallejo.
       b. Regional transportation (Highway 29, other state highways, railroad, and Napa
            County Airport); with the California Department of Transportation and Napa
            Airport Authority.
                      THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                                               1-70

                                                                          1.0 LAND USE ELEMENT
       c. Provision and maintenance of other public and quasi-public utilities: Pacific Gas
           and Electric Company, City of American Canyon Department of Public Works,
           Viacom, and Pacific Bell.
       d. Provision of schools; with the Napa Unified School District.
       e. Regional air quality; with the Bay Area Air Quality Management District.
       f. “Fair share” provision of affordable housing units; with the Association of Bay
           Area Governments and State of California Department of Housing and Community
           Development.
       g. Provision of social services; County of Napa.
       h. Maintenance of the Napa River wetlands with pertinent State and Federal agencies.
       Responsibility:      City of American Canyon
       Funding:             Costs for maintaining liaison: City of American Canyon General
                            Fund
       Schedule:            Ongoing
I 1.23 Interface with Property Owners and Developers for Property and Neighborhood
       Maintenance
       The City shall administer programs to encourage property owners to maintain and
       upgrade, as necessary, the quality of existing buildings and neighborhoods in the City.
       Existing and potential programs include:
       a. The City shall allocate redevelopment housing              “set-aside” funds for the
           rehabilitation of residential units.
       b. The City shall examine the availability of federal or state funds and/or potential
           participation of local financial institutions to support maintenance and rehabilitation
           efforts.
       c. The City shall consider the implementation of an ordinance addressing
           neighborhood quality issues. This program is directed at the improvement of
           deteriorated residential neighborhoods and encompasses a broad range of self-help
           actions and code enforcement.
       d. The City may encourage and provide technical assistance to local groups to plant
           street trees in commercial districts and/or residential neighborhoods where they are
           not present.
       Other maintenance and rehabilitation actions which may be pursued by the City include:
       a. periodic visual surveys of the conditions of the City’s districts and neighborhoods,
           identifying sites which exhibit substantial inadequate maintenance;
                      THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                                              1-71

                                                                        1.0 LAND USE ELEMENT
       b. contact of the owners or tenants of substandard properties to encourage their
           remedial actions;
       c. provision of technical assistance (at City Hall) to the property owners and tenants
           regarding the techniques by which properties can be maintained and upgraded; and
       d. assistance in the solicitation of low-interest loans for the upgrade of substandard
           properties.
       Responsibility:     City of American Canyon Planning and Building Departments and
                           City Manager’s Office
       Funding:            City of American Canyon General Fund, redevelopment housing
                           twenty percent housing “set-aside” funds, and/or financial
                           institution low-interest loan programs
       Schedule:           Ongoing, as funding is available
I 1.24 Educational Programs
       The City shall initiate programs to educate the public regarding the techniques which
       may be employed to maintain and upgrade properties. These may be structured as
       classes presented to local homeowners, business, and/or community organizations, and
       on/or cable television.
       Examples of educational programs which may be conducted include:
       a.    Seminars conducted by the City’s Building Official regarding building design and
             maintenance requirements, landscape design and maintenance, and related topics.
       b.    Informational brochures and seminars regarding water and waste conservation
             practices to be published and distributed at City offices.
       c.    The City may work with local educational institutions to conduct classes which
             provide American Canyon resident’s technical skills regarding property and
             landscape maintenance and upgrade.
       d.    The City may work with the local cable television franchise to broadcast programs
             providing technical information regarding property and landscape maintenance
             and improvements.
       Responsibility:     City of American Canyon Planning Department
       Funding:            City of American Canyon General Fund, conditions of cable
                           television franchise, and/or financial grants from corporations or
                           other private organizations
       Schedule:           Ongoing, as funding is available
                     THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                                             1-72

                                                                          1.0 LAND USE ELEMENT
I 1.25 Expand the City’s Sphere of Influence and Incorporated Boundaries
       The Land Use Element projects a long-term vision for the City as a compact urban area
       surrounded by agriculture and open space. To create a “balanced” city which contains
       the diversity of uses necessary to support existing and future residents and sustain fiscal
       viability it will be necessary to consider expansion of the City’s jurisdictional limits into
       those areas depicted within the City Urban Limit Line. These encompass lands which
       may appropriately be a part of the City’s contiguous urban area and for which
       infrastructure and public services are to be provided by the City. The boundary
       proposed in this Plan represents a logical and orderly progression of the City’s ultimate
       form and function in southern Napa County.
       The process of annexation will involve a cooperative process between the Local Agency
       Formation Commission (LAFCO), property owners, the City of American Canyon, and
       pertinent service agencies. At the outset, it is suggested that the City conduct a
       feasibility study to ensure that the proposed annexation can be adequately served by the
       City, costs can be adequately covered without adverse fiscal impacts, and that
       development intentions are consistent with the General Plan. It will be necessary to
       formulate a comprehensive fiscal strategy which accounts for equitable property and
       other tax transfers.
       Priorities for annexation should be placed on those lands which ensure a cohesive
       pattern of development. For example, lands on both sides of principal arterial
       highways, such as Highway 29, should be under a single service and jurisdiction.
       Responsibility:       City of American Canyon Planning Department and City Manager’s
                             Office
       Funding:              City of American Canyon General Fund
       Schedule:             Ongoing, as appropriate
I 1.26 Conduct a study to determine an appropriate location and funding mechanism for the
       establishment of a senior center. This study shall also explore various ways to develop
       and manage the center such as through a public/private partnership, solely through a
       private organization, or strictly as a public venture.
       Responsibility:       City of American Canyon Planning Department
       Funding:              City of American Canyon General Fund
       Schedule:             18 months after General Plan adoption or when funding is available
                      THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                                              1-73

                                              11.0 NOISE ELEMENT
NOISE ELEMENT
     THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                        11-1
                                                                              11.0 NOISE ELEMENT
STATUTORY REQUIREMENTS
Government Code Section 65302(f) states the following:
        The General Plan shall include a noise element which shall identify and appraise noise
        problems in the community. The noise element shall recognize the guidelines adopted by
        the Office of Noise Control in the State Department of Health Services and shall analyze
        and quantify to the extent practicable, as determined by the legislative body, current and
        projected noise levels for all of the following sources:
        1)      Highways and freeways
        2)      Primary arterials and major local streets
        3)      Passenger and freight on-line railroad operations and ground rapid transit systems
        4)      Aviation and airport related operations
        5)      Local industrial plants
        6)      Other ground stationary noise sources contributing to community noise
        environment
A local noise element should accurately reflect the noise environment, the stationary sources of
noise, and the impacts of noise on local residents.
                         THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                                                   11-2
                                                                                11.0 NOISE ELEMENT
OPPORTUNITIES AND CONSTRAINTS (ISSUES)
1. Some residential, commercial, and institutional land uses in the City of American Canyon,
   particularly along Highway 29, are impacted by vehicular noise levels that exceed the Napa
   County noise standards currently used by the City.
2. Increased development within the City of American Canyon and Napa and Solano Counties will
   subsequently increase the number of vehicle trips along State Route 29 (SR 29). This will
   likely result in increased noise exposure to the properties along this major highway.
3. New development within American Canyon’s Planning Area will increase traffic, and thus
   noise, along the existing road network.
4. Napa County Airport may be used for additional jet flight operations in the future. If residential
   development occurs within Airport Compatibility Zone E (see Figure 11-1) without noise
   attenuation requirements, proposed projects may be exposed to elevated noise levels.
5. Continued development in the region will likely lead to additional freight operations and
   possibly passenger rail service traveling through American Canyon. As a result of increased rail
   traffic, development along the two rail branches may be exposed to unacceptable noise levels.
                          THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                                                 11-3

                                         11.0 NOISE ELEMENT
                Figure 11-1
THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                   11-4
                                         11.0 NOISE ELEMENT
THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                   11-5
                                                                             11.0 NOISE ELEMENT
OVERVIEW OF NOISE POLICIES
The policies found within this element of American Canyon’s General Plan address the following
topics:
1. Adopting and enforcing legally adequate noise regulations and guidelines.
2. Preventing and mitigating excessive noise exposure impacts on the community.
3. Minimizing noise impacts in mixed-use structures.
4. Minimizing construction noise on adjacent uses.
5. Ensuring that adverse noise impacts among differing uses or tenants are prevented.
6. Minimizing spillover noise impacts from entertainment and restaurant/bar establishments onto
    “noise-sensitive” uses.
7. Ensuring that the noise impacts of rail and air transport services on sensitive land uses are
    minimized.
8. Ensuring that a proper acoustical analysis of any potentially significant noise generator is
    conducted.
                         THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                                              11-6

                                                                               11.0 NOISE ELEMENT
GOALS, OBJECTIVES AND POLICIES
The following section presents the goals, objectives, and policies related to both overall (ambient)
and stationary (fixed-source) source noise conditions and impacts in the City of American Canyon.
Implementing programs are referenced at the conclusion of each policy by an “I” and a number in
parentheses and are described in the last subsection of the element.
Goal
11         Ensure that American Canyon’s existing and future residents, employees and
           employers, as well as visitors to the City, are protected from the adverse human
           health and environmental impacts of excessive noise levels created by stationary
           and ambient (intrusive) noise sources and conditions. Take all necessary and
           appropriate action to avoid or mitigate the detrimental affects of such excessive
           noise on the community.
NOISE ORDINANCES, REGULATIONS, AND GUIDELINES
Objective
11.1       Control both ambient and stationary (intrusive) noise conditions and impacts that may
           occur in American Canyon. Maintain base line information regarding ambient and
           stationary noise sources within the community.
Policies
11.1.1     Promote noise compatible land use relationships by implementing the noise standards
           identified in Figure 11-2, to be utilized for design purposes in new development and for
           establishing a program to attenuate existing noise problems. (I 11.14 and I 11.15)
11.1.2     Monitor and update available data regarding the community’s ambient and stationary
           noise levels (see Figures 11-3, 11-4, 11-4A and 11-5). (I 11.2)
11.1.3     Modify and update all local noise ordinances, regulations and guidelines as required by
           new state standards and guidelines. (I 11.1)
AMBIENT NOISE IMPACTS ON THE COMMUNITY
Objective
11.2       Protect residents, employees, and visitors to the community from excessive noise
           exposure. If possible, mitigate the adverse impacts of existing or unavoidable excessive
           noise on these same groups.
                         THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                                                 11-7

                                         11.0 NOISE ELEMENT
                Figure 11-2
THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                   11-8
                                         11.0 NOISE ELEMENT
THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                   11-9
                                         11.0 NOISE ELEMENT
                Figure 11-3
THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                   11-10
                                         11.0 NOISE ELEMENT
                Figure 11-4
THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                   11-11
                                         11.0 NOISE ELEMENT
               Figure 11-4A
THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                  11-12
                                         11.0 NOISE ELEMENT
                Figure 11-5
THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                   11-13
                                                                                11.0 NOISE ELEMENT
Policies
11.2.1   Require that new development for locations in which the exterior or interior noise levels
         indicated in Figure 11-2 are likely to be exceeded, submit a noise attenuation study
         prepared by a qualified acoustical engineer in order to determine appropriate mitigation
         measures. (I 11.3, I 11.14, and I 11.15)
11.2.2   Enforce the California Noise Insulation Standards (Title 25, California Administrative
         Code) that apply to new multiple family, hotel, motel, dormitory, and long-term care
         developments with a Ldn of 60 dB(A) noise contour adjacent to roads, transit lines, and
         manufacturing areas to ensure that the units have been designed to limit interior noise
         levels in habitable rooms to a Ldn of 45 dB(A) with doors and windows closed. (I 11.3, I
         11.14, and I 11.15)
11.2.3   Require that air conditioning units and pool equipment within residential areas be
         designed and sited in a manner that does not intrude upon the peace and quiet of
         adjacent noise-sensitive uses. (I 11.14 and I 11.15)
11.2.4   Require that new industrial, commercial and related land uses, or the expansion of these
         existing land uses, demonstrate that they would not directly cause ambient noise levels
         to exceed an exterior Ldn of 65 dB(A) in areas containing housing, schools, health care
         facilities, or other “noise-sensitive” land uses. Additionally, require that potentially
         significant noise generators, including uses such as night clubs that cause sporadic noise
         intensities, submit noise analyses prepared by an acoustical expert that include specific
         recommendations for mitigation when: a) the project is located in close proximity to
         noise-sensitive land uses or land that is planned for noise-sensitive land uses, or b) the
         proposed noise source could violate the noise provisions of the General Plan or City
         Noise ordinance. (I 11.3, I 11.4, I 11.14, and I 11.15)
11.2.5   Require that new commercial structures located adjacent to existing residential areas
         shield their HVAC units so as to limit the units adverse noise impacts to the greatest
         extent possible. (I 11.14 and I 11.15)
11.2.6   Require that parking lots associated with new commercial structures be designed so as
         to buffer adjacent residential uses from vehicular noise. (I 11.14 and I 11.15)
11.2.7   Encourage “noise-sensitive” uses, including schools, libraries, health care facilities, and
         residential developments, to incorporate fences, walls, landscaping, and/or other noise
         buffers and barriers to mitigate noise impacts where appropriate and feasible. (I 11.3 and I
         11.14)
11.2.8   Consider alternate land uses or mitigation measures if large walls or other physical
         barriers are required to mitigate noise impacts that will affect or be caused by a
         proposed development project. (I 11.4, I 11.14, and I 11.15)
                         THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                                                  11-14

                                                                                11.0 NOISE ELEMENT
11.2.9    Require the utilization of site and architectural design features in conjunction with noise
          barriers to mitigate impacts on sensitive land uses. Design techniques capable of
          mitigating potential noise impacts include:
          a. Site Design
                  Using building setbacks and dedicating noise easements to increase the
                   distance between the noise source and receiver;
                  Locating uses and orienting buildings that are compatible with higher noise
                   levels adjacent to noise generators or in clusters to shield more noise-sensitive
                   areas and uses;
                  Placing noise tolerant land uses, such as parking areas, between noise sources
                   and receivers;
                  Using noise tolerant structures, such as garages or carports, to shield
                   noise-sensitive areas; and
                  Clustering office, commercial, or multiple family residential structures to
                   reduce interior open space noise levels.
          b. Architectural Design
                  Using dense building materials and tight fitting doors;
                  Employing double glazed and double pane windows;
                  Placing unopenable windows on the side of the structure facing a major
                   roadway and entry doors on the side of the building facing away from the major
                   roadway; and
                  Avoiding balconies and patio areas facing major transportation routes. (I 11.1, I
                   11.16, and I 11.17)
TRAFFIC-RELATED NOISE IMPACTS
Objective
11.3      Minimize the adverse impacts of traffic-generated noise on residential and other “noise-
          sensitive” uses as depicted on Figure 11-5.
Policies
11.3.1    Minimize motor vehicle noise impacts from streets and highways through proper route
          location and sensitive roadway design by employing the following strategies:
          a. Consider the impacts of truck routes, the effects of a variety of truck traffic, and
              future motor vehicle volumes on noise levels adjacent to master planned roadways
              when improvements to the circulation system are planned.
          b. Mitigate traffic volumes and vehicle speed through residential neighborhoods.
                        THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                                               11-15

                                                                               11.0 NOISE ELEMENT
          c. Work closely with the State of California Department of Transportation (Caltrans)
              in the early stages of highway improvements and design modifications to ensure that
              proper consideration is given to potential noise impacts on the City. (I 11.4, I 11.15 and
              I 11.16)
11.3.2    Require that all new nonresidential development design and configure onsite ingress
          and egress points to divert traffic (and its resultant noise) away from “noise-sensitive”
          land uses to the greatest degree practicable. (I 11.16)
11.3.3    Actively enforce existing applicable sections of the California Vehicle Code related to
          vehicle or equipment mufflers and modified exhaust systems. (I 11.22)
11.3.4    Require that any municipal vehicles or noise-generating mechanical equipment
          purchased or used by the City of American Canyon comply with noise performance
          standards consistent with the best available noise reduction technology. (I 11.25)
11.3.5    Encourage local and regional public transit providers to ensure that the equipment they
          use and operate does not create excessive noise impacts on the community. (I 11.19)
11.3.6    Encourage Caltrans to install and maintain mitigation and/or landscaping elements
          along highways under their jurisdiction that are adjacent to existing residential
          subdivisions or noise-sensitive uses in order to reduce their adverse noise impacts. (I
          11.18)
11.3.7    Provide for the development of alternate transportation modes, such as bicycle paths and
          pedestrian walkways, to minimize the number of noise generating automobile trips. (I
          11.5)
11.3.8    Reduce noise impacts of vehicular travel by implementing Transportation Management
          Policies 4.6.1 through 4.6.5. (I 4.8, I 4.10, I 4.11, and I 4.13)
AIRCRAFT-RELATED NOISE IMPACTS
Objective
11.4      Minimize the adverse impacts of aircraft generated noise on residential and other
          “noise-sensitive” uses.
Policies
11.4.1    Restrict the development of uses located within the 65 CNEL contour of Napa Airport
          to industrial, agricultural, or other open space uses (see Figure 11-5). (I 11.23)
11.4.2    Require that development in the vicinity of Napa Airport comply with the noise
          standards contained in the Airport Land Use Compatibility Plan (ALUP). (I 11.24)
11.4.3    Work closely with the Napa County Airport to ensure that the airport’s operations do
          not generate adverse noise conditions in the City of American Canyon. (I 11.21)
                         THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                                                 11-16

                                                                              11.0 NOISE ELEMENT
NOISE IMPACTS OF COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL LAND USES
Objective
11.5      Minimize noise spillover or encroachment from commercial and industrial land uses
          into adjoining residential neighborhoods or “noise-sensitive” uses.
Policies
11.5.1    Require that automobile and truck access to commercial or industrial land uses abutting
          residential parcels be located at the maximum practical distance from the residential
          parcels. (I 11.4)
11.5.2    Prohibit the siting of loading and shipping facilities for commercial and industrial land
          uses adjacent to residential parcels, thereby minimizing the potential noise impacts upon
          those parcels to the greatest degree practicable. (I 11.4)
11.5.3    Require that parking areas for commercial and industrial land uses be set back from
          adjacent residential areas to the maximum extent feasible or be buffered and shielded by
          walls, fences, berms, and/or adequate landscaping. (I 11.4)
11.5.4    Require that parking structures serving commercial or industrial land uses be designed
          to minimize the potential noise impacts of vehicles using these facilities both on site and
          on adjacent land uses or properties. The design measures may include: (a) the use of
          materials that mitigate sound transmission; and (b) the configuration of interior spaces
          to minimize sound amplification and transmission. (I 11.4)
11.5.5    Limit the hours of operation and/or the use of leaf blowers, parking lot sweepers, or
          other high noise-generating commercial/industrial equipment to reduce the potentially
          adverse noise impacts of such equipment upon adjacent residential areas. (I 11.6)
11.5.6    Require that the hours of truck deliveries to commercial or industrial land uses abutting
          residential uses be limited (within a reasonable period) unless there are no feasible
          alternatives or there are overriding transportation benefits by scheduling deliveries at
          other hours. (I 11.6)
NOISE IMPACTS OF MIXED-USE STRUCTURES
Objective
11.6      Minimize the potentially adverse noise impacts associated with the development of
          mixed-use structures in which residential units are located above ground floor
          commercial uses.
Policies
11.6.1    Require that the commercial component of a mixed-use project not generate excessive
          noise. (I 11.9)
                          THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                                               11-17

                                                                              11.0 NOISE ELEMENT
11.6.2    Require that mixed-use structures incorporating both commercial and residential land
          uses minimize to the greatest degree practicable (through design and construction
          techniques) the transfer or transmission of noise and vibration from the commercial land
          use to the residential land use. (I 11.9)
CONSTRUCTION NOISE IMPACTS
Objective
11.7      Minimize the impacts of construction noise on adjacent uses.
Policies
11.7.1    Limit non-emergency construction activities adjacent to existing noise-sensitive uses to
          daylight hours between 6:30 AM and 8:00 PM. (I 11.7)
11.7.2    Require construction activities to employ practical techniques and practices that
          minimize the generation of adverse and/or excessive noise impacts on adjacent land
          uses. (I 11.7)
NOISE IMPACTS/ENCROACHMENT WITHIN MULTI-OCCUPANT STRUCTURES
Objective
11.8      Ensure that buildings are constructed soundly to prevent adverse noise transmission
          between differing uses or tenants located in the same commercial structure, and
          individual dwelling units in multi-family residential structures.
Policy
11.8.1    Rigorously enforce the applicable provisions of the Uniform Building Code and City of
          American Canyon Municipal Code, which prevent the transmission of excessive and
          unacceptable noise levels between individual tenants and businesses in commercial
          structures and between individual dwelling units in multi-family residential structures.
          (I 11.10)
NOISE IMPACTS OF ENTERTAINMENT AND RESTAURANT/BAR LAND USES
Objective
11.9      Minimize excessive noise generated by entertainment and restaurant/bar establishments
          and limit noise spillover from these uses into adjacent residential or other “noise-
          sensitive” land uses.
Policies
11.9.1    Require that entertainment and restaurant/bar uses take appropriate steps to control the
          activities of their patrons onsite, as well as within a reasonable and legally justified
          distance from the place of business, to minimize potential noise-related impacts on
          adjacent residential neighborhoods. (I 11.11)
                         THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                                                 11-18

                                                                                 11.0 NOISE ELEMENT
11.9.2    Discourage the development of new nightclubs, discotheques, and other high noise-
          generating entertainment uses directly adjacent to any residential neighborhoods,
          residential dwelling units, schools, health care facilities, or other “noise-sensitive” land
          uses, unless it is demonstrated that adequate measures can be installed and employed by
          these establishments to adequately mitigate the potential impacts of onsite operations
          and/or offsite customer activities upon these areas. (I 11.8)
11.9.3    Prohibit the location of uses characterized by excessive noise, such as fast food
          restaurants with drive-through speakers, adjacent to residential neighborhoods. (I 11.6)
NOISE IMPACTS OF RAILROAD USES
Objective
11.10     Minimize the noise impacts created by railroad transit (freight and passenger) on
          residential uses and other “noise-sensitive” land uses.
Policy
11.10.1   Work with railroad operators using facilities that cross through the City of American
          Canyon to install noise mitigation features where operations impact existing adjacent
          residential or other “noise-sensitive” uses. (I 11.20)
ANALYSIS AND MITIGATION OF CITYWIDE STATIONARY (FIXED-SOURCE) NOISE IMPACTS
Objective
11.11     Ensure that the noise impacts of stationary sources are adequately mitigated.
Policies
11.11.1   Require the completion of detailed and independent acoustical analyses on any new or
          renovated land uses or structures determined by the City to be potential major stationary
          noise sources. Such studies will be completed and reviewed, with recommended
          mitigation measures successfully implemented and tested, prior to the issuance of a
          Certificate of Occupancy for said land use or structure. (I 11.12)
11.11.2   Encourage major stationary noise generating sources throughout the City of American
          Canyon to voluntarily install additional noise buffering or reduction mechanisms within
          their facilities to reduce noise generation levels to the lowest extent practicable. (I 11.13)
11.11.3   Require the installation of noise buffering or reduction mechanisms within major
          stationary noise generating sources located throughout the City prior to the renewal of
          Conditional Use Permits or prior to the approval and/or issuance of new Conditional
          Use Permits for said facilities, in order to reduce their noise generation levels to the
          lowest extent practicable. (I 11.13)
                         THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                                                11-19

                                                                               11.0 NOISE ELEMENT
IMPLEMENTATION PROGRAMS
The following programs implement the noise policies contained in the preceding subsection of the
Plan. The capital “I” and number preceding each program are referenced by the policies that they
implement.
NOISE ORDINANCES, REGULATIONS, AND GUIDELINES
I 11.1     Continue to enforce an appropriate and legally adequate local Noise Ordinance to
           comply with the State’s Noise Insulation Standards. Said ordinance shall contain
           policies and regulations addressing both overall (ambient) and stationary source
           (intrusive) noise impacts.
           Responsibility: City of American Canyon Planning Department
           Funding Source: City of American Canyon General Fund and/or penalty fees collected
                               from code violations
           Schedule:           As necessary or as funding permits
I 11.2     Record changes that occur in the community’s noise environment by reviewing
           available technical and acoustical data and studies conducted for proposed projects. The
           existing local noise map shall be updated as new information about the community’s
           noise environment becomes available, to ensure accuracy in land use compatibility
           planning and the mitigation of noise impacts.
           Responsibility: City of American Canyon Planning Department
           Funding Source: City of American Canyon General Fund, development application
                               fees, and/or available funding sources approved by the City
           Schedule:           Document changes in the City=s noise environment as they occur
                               and update the noise map annually or as funding permits
I 11.3     Include provisions within the American Canyon local Noise Ordinance which require
           that, prior to the issuance of Certificates of Occupancy and/or Certification of
           Completion, habitable areas in “noise-sensitive” uses exhibiting noise levels of 60
           dB(A) Ldn or greater demonstrate that interior noise levels will not exceed a Ldn of 45
           dB(A). Facilities failing to meet this requirement shall be required to install mitigation
           measures that reduce interior noise levels to within a 45 dB(A) Ldn level, prior to the
           issuance of any certificates.
           Responsibility: City of American Canyon Planning Department
           Funding Source: Administration: City of American Canyon General Fund and/or
                               development application fees
                               Technical Report: Development applicant.
           Schedule:           As development projects are submitted or as funding permits
                         THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                                                11-20

                                                                           11.0 NOISE ELEMENT
I 11.4 Modify the City’s industrial and commercial zoning development standards to require
       that proposed projects be designed in a sensitive manner to minimize potential noise
       impacts on adjacent residential and “noise-sensitive” uses. Zoning modifications should
       include:
                The requirement that vehicle access points be located and oriented away from
                 residential and/or noise-sensitive parcels.
                The requirement that loading and shipping facilities be located and oriented
                 away from adjacent noise-sensitive uses.
                The requirement that fences, walls, landscaping and other noise buffers and
                 barriers be incorporated between incompatible uses.
                The requirement that structural building materials, which mitigate sound
                 transmission, be incorporated into new commercial and industrial
                 developments.
                The requirement that interior spaces be configured to minimize sound
                 amplification and transmission.
       Responsibility: City of American Canyon Planning Department
       Funding Source: City of American Canyon General Fund and/or development
                           application fees
       Schedule:           Within 18 months of the General Plan’s adoption in concert with the
                           preparation of the revised zoning ordinance, or as funding permits
I 11.5 Implement policies and programs of the General Plan’s Land Use and Circulation
       Elements relating to the further development and use of alternative modes of travel,
       such as bicycles and walking, to reduce noise producing auto trips generated by new
       development projects in American Canyon.
       Responsibility: City of American Canyon Planning Department
       Funding Source: City of American Canyon General Fund and/or development
                           application fees
       Schedule:           As development projects are submitted or as funding permits
I 11.6 Revise the City of American Canyon’s Noise Ordinance so that it contains provisions
       that specifically address and sufficiently regulate or limit:
                the use of leaf blowers, parking lot sweepers, and other high noise generating
                 equipment.
                the hours of truck deliveries to commercial or industrial land uses abutting
                 residential and other “noise-sensitive” uses.
       Responsibility: City of American Canyon Planning Department
       Funding Source: City of American Canyon General Fund and/or development
                           application fees
                     THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                                            11-21

                                                                              11.0 NOISE ELEMENT
        Schedule:           Within 18 months of the General Plan’s adoption in concert with the
                            preparation of the revised zoning ordinance, or as funding permits
I 11.7  Revise the American Canyon Noise Ordinance so that it specifically addresses the
        following:
                 the regulation and limitation of the hours of construction activities
                  (particularly those occurring near residences).
                 the requirement that construction contractors and their employees utilize
                  operational techniques and practices that minimize the generation of adverse
                  and/or excessive noise on adjacent land uses.
        Responsibility: City of American Canyon Planning Department
        Funding Source: City of American Canyon General Fund and/or development
                            application fees
        Schedule:           Within 18 months of the General Plan=s adoption in concert with the
                            preparation of the revised zoning ordinance, or as funding permits
I 11.8  Revise the American Canyon Noise Ordinance so that it contains provisions that
        specifically require all new and existing entertainment and restaurant/bar land uses to
        either go through a discretionary development approval process or a renewal of
        conditional use permit process. The ordinance will include measures that require said
        land uses to limit ambient noise levels emanating from the establishment at a distance of
        50 feet, or within ten feet of any dwelling unit (whichever is more restrictive). Through
        these processes, locating such facilities adjacent to “noise-sensitive” land uses shall be
        discouraged or prohibited, unless it can be demonstrated that the potential noise-related
        impacts of the project can be mitigated to a level of insignificance.
        Responsibility: City of American Canyon Planning Department
        Funding Source: City of American Canyon General Fund and/or development
                            application fees
        Schedule:           Within 18 months of the General Plan’s adoption in concert with the
                            preparation of the revised zoning ordinance, or as funding permits
DEVELOPMENT REVIEW
I 11.9  Utilize the local planning, design and environmental review process to ensure that
        proposed commercial land uses are located below residential uses within mixed-use
        structures and are not overly noise-intensive. Additionally, require that the transfer of
        noise and vibration from the commercial uses to residential uses are minimized to the
        greatest extent practicable through innovative design and construction measures.
        Responsibility: City of American Canyon Planning Department
        Funding Source: City of American Canyon General Fund and/or development
                            application fees
        Schedule:           As development projects are submitted or as funding permits
                      THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                                             11-22

                                                                             11.0 NOISE ELEMENT
I 11.10 Utilize the local planning, design, and environmental review process as well as the
        existing local building inspection process to ensure that all applicable provisions of the
        Uniform Building Code and the American Canyon Municipal Code, which prevent and
        mitigate the transmission of excessive and unacceptable noise levels between tenants
        and businesses in commercial structures and between individual dwelling units within
        multi-family residential structures, are adequately enforced.
        Responsibility: City of American Canyon Planning Department
        Funding Source: City of American Canyon General Fund and/or development
                             application fees
        Schedule:            As development projects are submitted
I 11.11 Utilize the discretionary review process through conditions of approval and police
        enforcement to require that all local entertainment and restaurant/bar land uses
        appropriately control and limit the activities and noise of patrons in and around their
        facilities to reduce potential noise-related impacts on surrounding local residences.
        Responsibility: City of American Canyon Planning Department
        Funding Source: City of American Canyon General Fund development application
                             fees and/or penalty fees collected from code violators
        Schedule:            As development projects are submitted
I 11.12 New and expanded projects that are determined to be a potential major stationary noise
        source (based on the results of the local initial study and environmental checklist) shall
        fund and complete a specific acoustical analysis to identify, determine, and analyze
        potential impacts and propose appropriate mitigation measures. Said mitigation
        measures must be installed and tested prior to the issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy
        for the structure (such an analysis shall be similar to the environmental review process
        to assure the independence and objectivity of the findings).
        Responsibility: City of American Canyon Planning Department
        Funding Source: Administration: City of American Canyon General Fund and/or
                             development application fees
                             Technical Report: Development applicant funds
        Schedule:            As development projects are submitted or as funding permits
I 11.13 Utilize the local planning, design and environmental review process and existing
        building inspection process to encourage major stationary noise generators to install
        additional noise buffering or reduction techniques that reduce noise generation levels in
        and around their facilities. Installation of such measures shall be required prior to the
        renewal or issuance of a Conditional Use Permit.
        Responsibility: City of American Canyon Planning Department
        Funding Source: City of American Canyon General Fund, development application
                        THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                                              11-23
                                                                             11.0 NOISE ELEMENT
                             fees, and/or available funding sources approved by the City
        Schedule:            Ongoing, as funding permits
I 11.14 Utilize the development and environmental review process to ensure that noise impacts
        are adequately addressed and sufficiently mitigated and that adverse conditions will not
        arise as a result of new development (in accordance with the California insulation
        standards of the State Building Code and the policies set forth in the Noise Element of
        the General Plan).
        Responsibility: City of American Canyon Planning Department
        Funding Source: City of American Canyon General Fund and/or development
                             application fees
        Schedule:            As development projects are submitted or as funding permits
I 11.15 Require a noise evaluation for all projects as part of the planning and environmental
        review process to determine if unacceptable noise levels will be created or experienced.
         Should noise abatement be necessary, a required technical report containing a detailed
        evaluation of existing and/or projected noise impacts and effective mitigation measures
        shall be submitted. This report shall also propose alternate land uses if it is determined
        that the mitigation measures required to address the project’s excessive noise levels
        necessarily entail the construction of unusually large physical barriers.
        Responsibility: City of American Canyon Planning Department
        Funding Source: Administration: City of American Canyon General Fund and/or
                             development application fees.
                             Technical Report: Development applicant
        Schedule:            As development projects are submitted or as funding permits
I 11.16 Utilize the development review process to ensure that nonresidential developments
        design and configure their street grids and access points in such a way as to avoid
        impacting adjacent residential or “noise-sensitive” uses.
        Responsibility: City of American Canyon Planning Department
        Funding Source: Administration: City of American Canyon General Fund and/or
                             development application fees.
                             Technical Report: Development applicant funds
        Schedule:            As development projects are submitted or as funding permits
I 11.17 Utilize the development review process to ensure that new projects in American Canyon
        incorporate site and architectural design features that mitigate noise impacts on sensitive
        land uses.
        Responsibility: City of American Canyon Planning Department
        Funding Source: City of American Canyon General Fund
        Schedule:            As necessary and as funding permits
                      THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                                              11-24

                                                                            11.0 NOISE ELEMENT
AGENCY COORDINATION
I 11.18 Coordinate meetings with the California Department of Transportation (Caltrans) to
        encourage the State agency to operate in a manner consistent with community noise
        standards and implement measures to reduce excessive noise impacts on the
        community.
        Responsibility:     City of American Canyon Public Works Department in coordination
                            with Caltrans
        Funding Source: City of American Canyon General Fund and/or any other funding
                            sources approved by the City
        Schedule:           As necessary or as funding permits
I 11.19 Meet with representatives of the Napa County Transit District, the Napa County Airport
        Authority, and other local and regional transportation providers to discuss their vehicles’
        impacts on local noise conditions as well as feasible mitigation measures, which shall
        be implemented to reduce such impacts.
        Responsibility: City of American Canyon Planning Department
        Funding Source: City of American Canyon General Fund and/or any other funding
                            sources approved by the City
        Schedule:           Meetings shall occur annually or more frequently if the need arises
                            and funding permits
I 11.20 Review local railroad procedures and operations to determine their potential
        noise-related impacts on the community. As necessary, staff shall meet with railroad
        officials to discuss and/or suggest noise mitigation measures that could reduce railroad
        noise-related impacts on the community.
        Responsibility: City of American Canyon Public Works Department
        Funding Source: City of American Canyon General Fund and/or any other funding
                            sources approved by the City
        Schedule:           Ongoing, as funding permits
I 11.21 Coordinate with the Napa County Airport to ensure that the routing of aircraft do not
        adversely affect residential areas of the City.
        Responsibility:     City of American Canyon Community Development Department in
                            cooperation with the Napa County Airport
        Funding Source: City of American Canyon General Fund and/or any other funding
                            sources approved by the City
        Schedule:           Ongoing, as funding permits
                      THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                                             11-25

                                                                           11.0 NOISE ELEMENT
CODE ENFORCEMENT
I 11.22  Enforce a City Noise Ordinance that supports applicable sections of the California
         Vehicle Code related to vehicle or equipment mufflers and modified exhaust systems
         and provides for the regulation and limitation of high noise-generating vehicles,
         equipment and construction activities to reduce their potential impacts on local
         “noise-sensitive” uses.
         Responsibility: City of American Canyon Community Development Department
         Funding Source: City of American Canyon General Fund and/or penalty fees collected
                            from code violations
         Schedule:          As necessary and as funding permits
I 11.23  Enforce the City’s zoning codes that only allow industrial, agricultural, or other open
         space uses within the 65 CNEL contour of the Napa Airport.
         Responsibility: City of American Canyon Community Development Department
         Funding Source: City of American Canyon General Fund
         Schedule:          As necessary and as funding permits
I 11.24  Enforce the noise standards contained in the Airport Land Use Compatibility Plan
         (ALUP) for development located in the vicinity of Napa Airport.
         Responsibility: City of American Canyon Community Development Department
         Funding Source: City of American Canyon General Fund
         Schedule:          As necessary and as funding permits
CITY VEHICLE/EQUIPMENT NOISE PROGRAM
I 11.25  Purchase vehicles and other noise generating mechanical equipment that comply with
         and conform to the latest available noise standards and requirements. Existing City
         owned vehicles and noise generating equipment shall be upgraded/retrofitted to achieve
         the same goal.
         Responsibility: City of American Canyon Public Works
         Funding Source: City of American Canyon General Fund and/or any other funding
                            sources approved by the City
         Schedule:          As budgetary and operational conditions permit
                      THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                                            11-26

   -¡
"'
                                           .,G~CM       dt~
                                              E ,N ERA L ' P 7~'
              'E¡çQti0
                             ,';
                                    iiiic' Devtlopirên.t-
                                   , , '; 'Eléínent              "
                                                                           I,
     __1
                       --
                                                                       ',"
                                                                    .-'"
                                                                 i¡
         ., ,
                          ,.
                                 I

-
                                                 3.0 ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT ELEMENT
"
   STATUORY REOUIREMENTS
  In addition to the seven mandatory elements, other optional elements may
  be included in a City's General Plan. The California Government Code
  Section 65303 states:
         The General Plan may include any other elements or address any other
         subjects which, in the judgment of the legislative body, relate to the physical
         development of the county or city.
  American Canyon's Economic Development Element is just such an optional
  chapter. It is specifically concerned with the identification of a strategy to address
  development potentials that wil broaden and stabilize the City's economic base, and
  its goals and policies are formulated to provide new policy direction for the City and
  the planng area.
  Once adopted, ths element wil have the same legal status as any of the mandatory
  elements. Additionally, other state requirements pertaining to the mandatory
  elements, such as internal consistency, also apply to the optional element.
         THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                                           3-1
                                               3.0 ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT ELEMENT
OPPORTUITIES AND CONSTRAINTS (iSSUES)
POPULTION GROWT AND RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT
The population of the City is projected to increase steadily from approxiately 8,900
in 1995 to 15,300 by 2010, or at an annual average rate of growth of 3.7 percent over
the fifteen year period. Between 1995 and 2010, the Association of Bay Area
Governments (ABAG) projects that the number of households in the City wil             , ,
increase at an annual average of 161 households or 3.9 percent. Generally,
residential development represents a net drain on City funds in that the cost of
services such as police, fire, and city administration is more than the revenue from
residents' property and transfer taxes and fees. To ensure that the cost of muncipal
services does not outpace revenue generation, the City must phase and balance
residential development with industral and commercial development.                    ,,
The City wil remain a small-sized city in terms of population through year 2010.
Ths presents both an opportunty and a constraint: the City can preserve its small
town atmosphere but it also has to continue to rely on neighboring cities for certain
retail commercial services until it gains enough population to support a resident-
serving shopping center. For instance, 'a major grocery store anchor generally
requires at least 15,000 people within a defined area, generally within six miutes
driving distance. Such a population does not exist withn City boundaries, although
the City's population combined with the immediately adjacent Vallejo
neighborhoods does exceed this threshold and may be an important factor in
locating a shopping center withn the City.
LIMITED MARKET POTENTIAL FOR REGIONAL RETAiiJCOMMERCIAL DEVLOPMENT
Over the next few years, market conditions are not likely to be suitable for the
development of large retail complexes in the City. Besides insufficient population
support, the City faces stiff competition from new retail centers immediately south
on Highway 29, in Vallejo. In addition, Highway 29 traffc counts are higher north
of the Highway 12 intersection than they are in American Canyon. For these
reasons, it wil be more challenging for the City to attract value-oriented, big box
retailers, as well as factory outlets.
HIGHWAY-ORIENTED, LOCAL-SERVING RETAIL DEVELOPMENT
The current constraints on locating a major retail development in the City does not
preclude the immediate possibilty of small scale commercial development along
Highway 29. The existing commercial uses are predominantly auto-oriented, sited
 to attract commuter traffc on Highway 29. The City would benefit from additional
uses which would take advantage of tourism or commuter traffic. These retail uses
would also serve local residents. Needless to say, the types of uses the City allows
 along this commercial corridor should be consistent with the image it wants to
 create. The more flexible the zoning, the more opportunities for varying types of
 commercial development, which the City mayor may not want to encourage.
         THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                                          3-2
'1
                                                     3.0 ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT ELEMENT
 "
      BUSINESS PARK AND INDUSTRIAL MARKET SHARE
      The industrial economic base is very important to American Canyon. The City's
     proxity to the Napa County Airport and the existing rail line provide further
     opportunities to expand the City's industrial base. Projections of continued demand
 "   for industrial space in the next decade, particularly for land with less restrictive
     zoning, such as the Green Island Industrial Park area, present an ongoing
     opportuty for the City. The availabilty of land at reasonable prices positions the
.,   City to captue a portion of tl1e regional demand for industrial space.
     For the next few years, regional demand is projected to average a modest 150,000 to
 .I
     200,000 square feet per year. Demand should increase to 300,000 to 500,000 square
     feet per year once the national and regional economy improves. South County is
     projected to capture at least 75 percent of this regional demand. American Canyon
     could captue up to half of South County industrial growth if the City upgrades
     infrastructure in the Green Island Industrial Park and annexes and provides services
     to the undeveloped sites on the north side of Green Island Road,
     The demand projections stated above do not include the eventual closure of the
     Mare Island Naval Shipyard, which wil decidedly impact the supply ¡demand
     dynamics of industrial land in the region. The City wil need to monitor the reuse
     alternatives under consideration.
    Over the long run, while the Green Island Industrial Park area is only 50 percent
    developed with approximately 100 acres remaining, the City needs to consider
    acquiring more industrial land to participate in the growth projected for South
    County in the next two decades. The area north of the current City boundary, which
    could easily be served by Green Island Road, is a logical expansion area and should
    be proposed to the Local Area Formation Commission (LAFCOM) as part of a
    comprehensive revision to the City's Sphere of Influence and boundaries.
    VARYING TYPES OF HOUSING DEVELOPMENT
    American Canyon enjoys an ongoing demand for housing, particularly for
    relatively affordable housing as compared to housing in the region. With
    annexation eastward and northward within the water service area, American
    Canyon could also incorporate development parcels for higher income housing,
    perhaps including golf-oriented communities.
    TOWN CENTER DEVELOPMENT
    Thè City currently does not have a Town Center. Designation of the basalt plant
    area to be a government center and a commercial core wil provide at least one
    stimulus for further development in the long term.
            THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                                              3-3

                                               3.0 ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT ELEMENT
SMALL BUSINESS OPPORTUNITIES                                                         . !
Economic vitality is not necessarily linked only with larger businesses and big box  , 1
retail. The City is establishing a base of diverse small businesses. The City should
adopt policies and programs to continue and reinforce this trend.
                                                                                     ~ )
         THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                                          3-4
                                                 3.0 ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT ELEMENT
OVERVI OF ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT POLICY
It is the intent of this section of the Economic Development Element to define a set
of policies that wil guide the City's elected leadership and management in the
formation of deliberate initiatives for the maintenance and enhancement of the
community's economic development. Policies stated in ths section contain a diect
relationship to the desired goals of the communty as well as the identiied issues in
the preceding subsection. These policies are the legislative tools that the City can
utilize to acleve American Canyon's vision for the future.
The economic development policies address the following issues:
     1. Maximzing the City's market potential and provide opportunities for new
        jobs.
    2. Generating cumulative growth which provides net fiscal gains.
    3. Generating ongoing industrial growth and maintaining current activity to
        provide ample employment opportuties for residents.
    4. Creating a Town' Center as a commercial and government area which wil
        establish the City's identity and image.
    5. Increasing tourist-supported commercial activity that would also serve
        residents to capture potential expenditues and tax revenue.
    6. Creating a proactive and efficiently run City government that is responsive to
        the needs of targeted businesses.
    7. Promoting commercial recreation activities that provide for sustainable and
        environmentally positive economic activity,
         THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                                            3-5
                                                                    3.0 ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT ELEMENT
  GOALS, OBJECTS AND POLICIS
, The following lists the goals, objectives, and policies for economic development in
  the City of American Canyon. Implementing programs are referenced at the
  conclusion of each policy by a capital "I" and a number in parentheses and are
  described in the last subsection of the Element.
  ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT OVERVIE
  Goal
  3         Provide for the economic needs of American Canyon residents by
            capitalizing on the marketabilty of the City's industrial land and
            promoting a mix of uses which create quality jobs and foster fiscal stabilty.            , ,
  Objective
  3.1 Maximize the City's market potential in terms of industrial/business park
            and community-serving commercial activity. Increased industrial activity
            can be a catalyst for broadening the City's economic base by
            providing quality jobs and tax revenues, as well as, stimulating
            infrastructure improvements.
  Policies
  3.1.1     Adopt a Land Use Map which designates acreage for heavy industrial, light
            industrial/business park, commerciaL, and recreational commercial
            activities. (I          3.1)
  3.1.2     Intiate strategies to market for, attract, and/or accommodate new activity
            as defined in the Economic Development policies under Objectives 3.3
            though 3.9. (I              3.1 through I 3.6, and 13,8)
  3.1.3     Seek to expand the City's economic base and development opportunities
            through planned annexation program that is linked to the General Plan
            and Land Use Plan. (I                     3.2)
  Objective
  3.2 Promote growth that generates net positive fiscal impacts to the City to
            ensure that muncipal services keep up with growing demand.
  Policies
  3.2.1     Evaluate the need for, and implement as necessary, a fiscal impact analysis
             as part of the Project Development Review process for certain types of
             projects. The purpose is to provide input into assessment of Citywide
             impact of development activities and to determine what costs to the City,
             if any, may be subject to mitigation. (I 3.4 and I
                                                                             3.5)
   3.2.2     Monitor the fiscal impact of the mix of development proposals and
             activity on an annual basis to determine the optimal phasing of new
           THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                                                                3-6
                                                                                 3.0 ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT ELEMENT
,
              development, according to its net positive or negative fiscal impact. In
              addition to monitoring the fiscal impact by type of development, the fiscal
              impact of development in different locations should be monitored. The
              purpose of such monitoring efforts is to ensure that the costs of services
              are balanced with revenues generated on a recuring basis. (I 3.4 and I                        3,5)
   3.2.3 Periodically assess the structue of utiity rates, business license taxes, and
              user fees to ensure that such rates and fees cover the true cost to the City.
              (I 3.4 and I     3,5)
   Objective
   3.3 Expedite the growth of job-generatig, quality businesses by streamlig
              City application procedures.
   Policies
   3.3.1     Establish a standard performance base for new uses. If a proposed use
             conforms to established standards, eliminate or reduce the level of
             discretionary review process. (I 3.4 and 13.8)
   3.3.2     Eliminate the use permit requiements for occupancy of existing buildings,
             except in cases where the proposed use is more intensive than what was
             permitted previously. (I 3.4 and 13,8)
  3.3.3     Maintain occupancy permit requirements for new and existing buildings
             to monitor zoning compliance and business activity within the City. (I
                                                                                                                 3.4
            and 13.8)
  3.3.4     Create a one stop permit processing system for high priority development
            applications. (I              3.8)
  3.3.5     Prepare and print brochures that clearly define the development review
            process to the public. (I                    3.7)
  INDUSTRIAL ACTIVI
  Goal
  3A Generate new industrial growth through diversifcation of the industrial
            base and maintenance of current activity to provide employment
            opportunities for residents and generate fiscal revenues for the City.
  Objective
  3.4 Increase the number of firms within the industries now represented in the
            City and capture new, clean, nonpolluting industries that are stable and
            compatible with City needs in terms of traffic, air quality, and
            employment.
          THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                                                                     3-7
                                                                                            ,~
                                                                                              I
                                                  3.0 ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT ELEMENT
                                                                                            , 1
                                                                                               ,
Policies
3.4.1     Establish a marketig program to identify desired industrial activity that
          may include the development of promotional brochures that explain
          positive aspects of living/working in American Canyon and discuss the
          availabilty of City assistance programs; direct marketing to firms in
          targeted industries, and; advertising in trade journals. (13.4, I 3.6, and I 3,7)
3.4.2 Establish design and FAR standards for industrial buildings which wil
          create and maintain an attractive image for American Canyon's industrial
          areas without imposing overly restrictive reguations. (13.1)
3.4.3 In partnership with land owners and tenants, improve the infastructue
          (particularly access across the North Slough drainage channel and the
          railroad) in the Green Island Industrial Park and Annexes and expand
          infastructue services to the undeveloped sites on the north side of Green
          Island Road to link the two industrial areas and provide land use and
          design continuity to both sides of Green Island Road. (13.4)
3.4.4 Pursue available state grants that would assist the City and private
          property owners in enhancing inrastructue in the industrial areas. (13.4)
3.4.5 In the future, consider amendments to the General Plan that designate
          new lands for a higher quality corporate park development. (l3.1 and I3.2)
Objective
3.5 Make available sufficient acreage in order to capture the City's fair share of
          regional industrial growth through the year 2010.
Policies
3.5.1     Designate a sufficient amount of land to accommodate the projected
          growth in demand for industrial space by 2010. (13,1)
3.5.2     Work with the County and LAFCOM towards modifying the City's sphere
          to include areas on the north side of Green Island Road and south of the
          airport for futue industrial development within the City. (13.2)
3.5.3     Consider the viability of designating a portion of the area shown as
          "Special Study" for higher quality industrial and business park uses. (13.1
          and 13,2)
RETAIL AND OFFICE COMMERCIAL ACTIVITY
Goal
3B Improve the appearance and functionality of the Highway 29 corridor and
          establish a Town Center to provide for economically sound local-serving
          commercial development, for both shopping and tax
          revenue opportunities.
        THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                                           3-8
                                                                              3.0 ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT ELEMENT
 CITE
 Objective
 3.6 Attract new retail development to meet the needs of the current and
            projected population, as well as to retain potential sales tax revenue in the
            City, Encourage the development of local-serving office space,
 Policies
 3.6.1      Designate a sufficient amount of land for local-serving retail commercial
            and professional offce development. (l3.1)
 3.6.2      Provide and promote opportunities for uses which capitalize on the City's
            proximity to tle wine country and the airport, as well as take advantage of
            the City's natural resources. Consider tourist-supported commercial
            activities, such as a wine train depot, winery outlets, hotel, and golf
            course. (1 3.6)
 3.6.3     Consider the use of redevelopment authority to consolidate land and
           create more developable parcels. (l3.4)
 3.6.4     Diversify by attracting, promoting, and retaining small businesses,
           establishig the City's niche as a provider of specialty stores and a broad
           range of services, (13,6 and I                    3.7)
3.6.5      Establish an outreach program to encourage existing businesses that are in
           conformance with the General Plan to remain in or at their current
          locations. Maintenance of the retail opportunities now available is key to
          retaining the economic viabilty of the Highway 29 commercial
           corridor. (I         3.7)
3.6.6     Modify existing zoning regulations as necessary to encourage long-term
          retention of high sales tax generating uses, such as lumber yards. (13.1)
3.6.7     Increase the flexibility of industrial zoning regulations to allow for certain
          types of specialty retail uses tlat are compatible with industrial uses. (I                     3,1)
HIGHWAY29 CORRIOR
Objective
3.7 Enhance the City's existing tax base through the improvement and
          maintenance of the Highway 29 commercial corridor,
Policies
3.7.1     Adopt a Specific Plan for tle Highway 29 commercial corridor and Town
          Center to guide future developments. Provide for a cohesive urban design
          which creates and maintains an attractive image to ensure that the City
          captures its full potential share of market demand. (I                            3.1)
        THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                                                                   3-9
                                                                                3.0 ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT ELEMENT
                                                                                                                 , .¡
                                                                                                                    ¡
 3.7.2      Provide for small scale commercial development that would serve                                       . J
            residents as well as take advantage of tourism or commuter traffic. (I                          3.6) ,,
 3.7.3      Encourage the clustering of commercial activities along Highway 29 in
           .conformance with the Land Use Element to provide more attractive and                                 . ,
            cohesive facilities whie minmiing potential circulation conflcts. (13,1)                                ,
 3.7.4      Encourage small business startups and specialty retail uses by mizing
                                                                                                                 . ,
            regulatory barriers, such as unnecessary use permit procedures,
            (I 3,6 and 13.8)
 CRETION OF A TOWN CENTER
 Objective                                                                                                       - ,
3.8 In the long term, improve and strengthen the City's identity though the                                      - i
            creation of a Town Center as a principal government and
            commercial center.                                                                                   . ,
Policies
3.8.1       Designate an area as the principal government and commercial center,
           Designate a sufficient amount of land to accommodate future demand for
           neighborhood and community-serving retail and commercial
           development. (I 3.1)
3.8.2      Adopt a Specific Plan for the designated Town Center (in conjunction with
           the Highway 29 Plan) to serve as a guide for future developments.
           Provide for a cohesive urban design which reflects the image and identity
           the City would like to project. (I                           3.1)
3.8.3 Encourage the development of small specialty stores in the designated
           Town Center to promote a small communty atmosphere. Assist in
           identifying sources of financing for small business. (I 3.4 and I3.6)
3.8.4 Periodically assess market conditions, including population growth in the
           City and neighboring Vallejo and when appropriate, establish an
           aggressive marketing program to effectively compete with neighboring
           cities to attract desired commercial uses. The marketing program shall
          involve direct solicitation of developers and headquarters of chain stores,
          explanation of potential assistance programs, and explanation of market
          support (I            3,6)
3.8.5 Encourage the development of uses in the designated Town Center area
           (e.g., theater complex, auditorium, cultural entertainment, dining, retail,
          or other) that would draw residents, promote foot traffic and provide
          evening activity. (I                  3,6)
        THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                                                                   3-10

                                                 3.0 ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT ELEMENT
COMMERCIAL RECREATION ACTVI
Goal
3C Generate new economic activity by linking the City's physical resources
          with commercial recreational opportunities.
Objective
3.9 Increase the number of economic activities related to commercial
          recreation.
Policy
3.9.1     Encourage the development of commercial recreation opportunities that
          capitalize on the City's physical resources and provide positive
          community economic multipliers. Establish land use strategies that
          encourage the development of a golf course, including the annexation of
          the American Canyon Country Club site; wetland center; river access; use
          of the area between the Eucalyptus Grove and Oat Hil for overnight
         lodgig and other recreational related uses; foothils access; and recreation
         vehicle/tent camping facilities. (13,6)
       THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                                        3-11
                                                           3,0 ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT ELEMENT
                                                                                            .i
IMPLEMENTATION PROGRAMS
The following lists the programs which implement the economic development
implement. . i
policies contained in the preceding subsection of the plan. The capital "I" and
number preceding each program are referenced by the policies which they
SECURE SUFFICIENT ACREAGE AND GUIDELINES FOR PHYSICAL DEVELOPMENT
13.1 Adopt the Land Use Plan Map and revise the Zoning Ordinance to be
         consistent with the General Plan, as detailed in the Land Use
         Implementation Programs. This ensures that a sufficient amount of land
         is designated to accommodate projected economic activity though 2010.
13.2 Anex urbanized and urbanizing areas adjacent to the City's boundaries in
         an orderly progressive sequence.
13.3 Establish Zoning regulations that set forth expedited review procedures for
         uses primarily permitted in a commercial or industrial zone district. For
         example, eliminate use permit requirements for certain types of
         commercial uses in the commercial zone districts,
         Responsibilty: American Canyon City Council/Planng Department
         Funding Source: City of American Canyon General Fund and/or other
                                        available fundig sources approved by the City
         Schedule:                      Within 18 months of General Plan adoption per state
                                        law or as funding permits
COORDINATE CITY ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT EFFORTS
13.4 Designate a position within the City to function as an economic
         development manager. Place this position within a department/office
         that allows for focused economic development activities, and formalize
         the goals of this position, which shall include the following:
         a. The preparation and promotion of marketing programs to solicit new
             industrial firms, retail outlets, hotels and similar uses desired by City
             residents,
         b. The preparation and implementation of a business retention program
             to keep retail and industrial businesses in the City and, where
             appropriate, in their current general             location.
         c. The preparation of procedures for expediting the development review
             process in response to specific development requests, to effectuate the
             City's interest in attracting new business.
         d. The preparation of procedures for maintaining the flow of relevant
             information to all active city agencies, departments and organizations.
       THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                                                     3-12
                                                3.0 ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT ELEMENT
           e. The preparation of periodic reports to the City Council for
              informational purposes.
          f. The preparation of evaluations of the fiscal impacts of development.
          g. The identification and coordination of sources of financing for
              infrastructure improvements.
          h. The preparation of procedures for implementing redevelopment tools
              to acquie land or develop properties in Redevelopment Areas.
          Responsibilty: American Canyon City Council/City Manager
          Funding Source: City of American Canyon General Fund and/or other
                             available fuding sources approved by the City
          Schedule: Within 24 months of General Plan adoption or as
                             funding permits
 MONITOR AND ADJUST FOR FISCAL IMPACTS OF ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
 13.5 The City shall determine a threshold project size for new development,
          above which a fiscal impact analysis is required. The City shall use the
          computer model developed for the General Plan to analyze the potential
         project-specific fiscal impacts and determine what costs to the City, if any,
         may be subject to mitigation. The cumulative impacts of development
         over time, i.e., the sum of all project-specific outputs, shall also be
         monitored. Based on the results of such monitoring efforts, the City shall
         determine which or what kind of activities, if any, should be encouraged
         or delayed (according to their net positive or negative fiscal impact) over
         the next time period. The purpose of ongoing fiscal evaluations is to
         ensure that the recurring costs of municipal services are balance with
         recurring revenues generated.
         In order to reflect the actual one-tie costs of permit issuance, the City
         shall periodically adjust development project permit fees.
         Responsibilty: Plannng Department
         Funding Source: Privately initiated: Development application fees
                            City Intiated: General Fund
         Schedule: Adminstration: Ongoing, as projects are submitted and
                            as funding permits
                            Permit Fee Adjustments: Periodically as needed or as
                            funding permits
NEW BUSINESS MARKETING PROGRAM
13.6 A marketing program shall be developed by the economic development
        manager described in I 3.4, aimed at capturing new retail facilities and
        industrial activity. The program wil involve the following steps:
      THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                                        3-13
                                         3.0 ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT ELEMENT
 a. Identiy target industries, Le., stable, clean, nonpollutig, sustainable,
     growth industries that are compatible with City needs in terms of traffic
     and air quality requiements.
 b. Focus on industries that capitalize on the City's proximity to the wine
     country, the airport, and the rail lines, as well as industries which
     value the natural resources the City has to offer.
 c. Actively include small business startups and specialty retail businesses
     in the recruitment program.
 d. Develop promotional brochure and materials in coordination with
     other active agencies and organizations.
 e. Develop a regional/national/international master list of firms within
     the target industries to contact through the marketing campaign and
     update list on an annual basis.
 £. Undertake mailngs to, and personal contact with, firms in the targeted
     industries to establish and maintain an awareness of available
     opportunities in American Canyon; advertise in relevant trade
     journals and publications.
 g. Maintain liaisons with real estate brokers, industrial and retail
     associates, etc., as sources of news of interest on the part of speciic
     firms, as well as to maintain an awareness of the City's general
     interests. Convey the City's specific interest in particular areas such as
     the South County industrial area, Highway 29 and Highway 12
     commercial corridors.
 h. Solicit developers with experience in mixed-use and/or specialty
     development projects in established areas of small cities. Contact other
     cities to obtain contacts.
 L When market conditions are favorable, pursue an aggressive
     marketing campaign involving mailings to, and personal contact with,
     targeted retail outlets and community-serving commercial developers
     to establish and maintain an awareness of available opportunties in
     American Canyon. Opportunities to focus on include growth in
     demand, income level and available sites.
 j, Prioritize target development activities for which incentive programs
     wil be offered/ utilized.
 Responsibilty: City Manager/Plannng Department
 Funding Source: City of American Canyon General Funds, tax increment
                      revenue generated by corresponding redevelopment
                      projects and/ or any other funding
 Schedule: Ongoing in concert with the designation of a City staff
                      member as an Economic Development Manager or as
                      funding permits
THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                                   3-14

~
                                                             3.0 ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT ELEMENT
   BUSINESS RETENTION PROGRA
   13.7 The economic development manager shall develop a business retention
            program aimed at maintaining the existing and future retail and
            industrial base though the following steps:
            a. Develop a list of industrial firms currently located in the City through a
                door-to-door survey, and update list on an annual basis. (Since it is
                usually not possible to determine exactly what a particular fim does
                from business license listings, conducting a door-to-door survey is a
                more effective method of ascertainig a company's line of business.)
            b. Provide for an ongoing relationship with existing firms and retail
                outlets to monitor their needs and concerns and to determine which
                needs and concerns can be addressed              by the City. This can be achieved
                through regular, informal meetigs between City representatives and
                local firms and a proactive relationship with the Chamber of
                Commerce.
           c. Establish a liaison with the local merchants' associations and Chamber
                of Commerce, to identify issues of concern, if any, withi the retail
                community.
           d. Through the local merchants' associations and/or the Chamber of
                Commerce, maintain and enhance a series of coordinated, promotional
                annual calendar of events, such as open air markets, runnng races,
                Kid's Day, etc., that wil draw Cityide attention to commercial areas.
           e. Implement an outreach program to retain existing businesses and
                promote the addition of new businesses.
           Responsibilty: American Canyon City Council and Planning
                                          Department (Economic Development Manager)
           Funding Source: City of American Canyon General Fund and/or other
                                          available fuding sources approved by the City
           Schedule: Within 18 months of designating an Economic
                                          Development Manager or as funding permits
  COORDINATED PERMIT PROCESSING/STREAMLINED REGULATIONS
  13.8 The City shall coordinate permit processing and streamline its regulatory
           procedures to promote the development of its commercial and industrial
           areas. This includes the following actions:
           a. Create a one stop review permit processing system that assures
               proactive review of priority development applications in desired areas.
          b. Assign a specific staff member to coordinate the permit process for high
               priority development applications.
           Co Prepare brochures that clearly define the development review process
               to the public.
         THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                                                      3-15
                                  3.0 ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT ELEMENT
 Responsibilty: City Manager/Department Heads
 Funding Source: City of American Canyon General Fund/Development
                 Fees
 Schedule:       Within one year of the General Plan's Adoption
                                                                   i J
                                                                   .j
                                                                   . ;
                                                                   , I
                                                                   , ,
                                                                     !
THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                             3-16
                                    3.0 ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT ELEMENT
                        GLOSSARY
 Neighborhood Retail      Provides for the sale of conveiuence goods
                          (foods, drugs, and sundries) and personal
                          services (laundry, dry cleaner, barber, shoe
                          repair, etc.) for the day-to-day living needs
                          of the immediate neighborhood. It is buit
                          around a supermarket as a principal tenant.
                          In theory, the neighborhood center has a
                          typical gross leasable area of 50,000 square
                         feet but may actually range from 30,000 to
                          100,000 square feet.
 Community Retail        Provides a wider range of facilties for the
                         sale of apparel, hadware, and appliances. It
                         is buil around a junior department store,
                         variety store, or discount department center
                         as the major tenant, in addition to a
                         supermarket. Its typical size may range
                         from 100,000 to 400,000 square feet of gross
                         leasable area.
Regional Retail          Commercial uses which cater to more than
                        just the local community. It provides for
                         general merchandise, apparel, furniture,
                         and home furnshigs in depth and variety,
                         as well as a range of services and
                        recreational facities. i t is built around one
                         or two full-line department stores of
                        generally not less than 100,000 square feet.
                        Its typical size range from 300,000 to 850,000
                        gross leasable area. These retail uses wil
                        draw from the "region" and commonly
                        have greater visibilty (i.e., seen from the
                        fr'eeway).
Gross Leasable Area     Is the total gross floor area designed for
(GLA)                   tenants' occupancy and exclusive use. It is
                        the area for which tenants pay rent and the
                        area the produces income.
Floor Area Ratio (FAR)  Is the total gross area of a building floor
                        space, excluding basements, balconies and
                        stair bulkheads on a lot divided by the total
                        area of that lot.
      THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                            3-17
                                                              City of American Canyon
CIty of
                                                                   AMERICAN
                                                                          CANYON
                                                                      CIRCULATION
                                                                               ELEMENT
VISION
The City of American Canyon (City) is a community that embraces mobility through the use of
all transportation modes. This Element is correlated to land uses in the General Plan Land Use
Element and also contemplates the extension, where feasible, of water, sewer, and recycled water
services consistent with the 2011 Urban Water Management Plan which requires coordination of
land use authorizations with available water supplies.
The core value of this Circulation Element is to provide safe and easy travel within and through
the City for pedestrians, bicyclists and motor vehicles correlated with the Land Use Element.
This community mobility value is based on creating “a sense of place” with a strong City center.
Preserving the local environment, remaining mindful of the City’s fiscal responsibilities, and
utilizing the City’s strategic location within the San Francisco Bay Area region are distinct
advantages to promoting mobility.
Circulation Element                                                                           Page 1

                                                               City of American Canyon
INTRODUCTION
The Circulation Element presents a set of policies correlated with the Land Use Element of the
General Plan to guide the City’s transportation related infrastructure growth over the next twenty
(20) years. A safe and efficient transportation system is an important contributor to a
community’s quality of life and economic vitality. The circulation system provides access to
homes, employment and educational opportunities, public services, commercial and recreational
centers, and regional destinations. It accommodates travel by automobile, transit, walking, and
cycling; and it integrates the needs of railway and truck transport as well as aviation.
State law recognizes the close relationship between transportation and land use and requires that
policies be established creating a mutually beneficial relationship. California Government Code
§65302(b)(1) requires the Circulation Element to be correlated to the General Plan Land Use
Element. Integrating transportation policies with land use, the General Plan ensures adequate
roadway capacity to accommodate travel demands generated by future planned development.
This integration helps to promote walking, cycling and transit use for shorter trips thereby
reducing the air quality impacts and greenhouse gas emissions associated with automobile use.
The Circulation Element also complies with Government Code §65302(b)(2) in planning for a
balanced, multimodal transportation network that meets the needs of all users of streets, roads,
and highways, which includes bicyclists, pedestrians, children, motorists, persons with
disabilities, the elderly, users of public transportation, and commercial goods movers. This
requirement is sometimes referred to in this Element as “Complete Streets”.
Local transportation planning is a coordinated effort involving multiple agencies. The goals and
policies set forth in this document are intended to not only promote local planning, but also
foster cooperation between jurisdictional partners such as the Napa County Transportation &
Planning Agency (NCTPA), the Metropolitan Transportation Commission (MTC) and the
California Department of Transportation (Caltrans).
The transportation planning and policy set forth in the Circulation Element is also a critical
Circulation Element                                                                            Page 2

                                                             City of American Canyon
component of the City’s responsibility towards meeting the requirements of Senate Bill 375, the
Sustainable Communities and Climate Protection Act of 2008. SB 375 requires that metropolitan
planning organizations in California prepare a Sustainable Communities Strategy (SCS) for
meeting their greenhouse gas reduction targets, through coordinating planning for land use,
transportation, and housing. A portion of the Planning Area – the SR 29 corridor – has been
designated by MTC and the Association of Bay Area Governments as a Priority Development
Area (PDA), meaning that it is recognized as an area with substantial opportunity for infill
development near transit. PDAs play a critical role in accommodating future growth in the
regional agencies’ SCS plans. The PDA designation also makes the SR 29 corridor eligible for
OneBayArea Grant (OBAG) funding. OBAG is a four-year $320 million program that provides
a new funding approach that supports the vision, goals, and priorities set forth in MTC’s SCS.
The program specifically sets aside $40 million towards development of PDAs such as the one
recognized on the SR 29 corridor.
LOCAL SETTING
The City is located in southern Napa County, about 35 miles northeast of San Francisco.
Adjacent and south of the City limits is the City of Vallejo in Solano County. North of the City
limits, a succession of cities in Napa County are located along State Route 29 (SR 29) which is a
main route to wine country destinations. These cities include Napa, Yountville, St. Helena, and
Calistoga. As with American Canyon, these cities are bisected by SR 29. Based on the data
provided by Census 2010, population in the City has doubled in the last ten years, increasing by
nearly 10,000 from 9,774 in 2000 to 19,454. It is currently the second most populated City in the
County after the City of Napa.
The City lies generally northwest of the Interstate 80 (I-80)/State Route (SR) 37 interchange. The
City’s southernmost boundary abuts the City of Vallejo’s northernmost boundary in Solano
County. The Napa River roughly borders the western edge of the City and to the north are the
City of Napa and unincorporated areas of Napa County, including the Napa County airport.
Traffic to and from the I-80 corridor is served by American Canyon Road and Jameson Canyon
Road (SR 12). Access to and from Vallejo and the East Bay, including the Counties of Contra
Circulation Element                                                                          Page 3

                                                               City of American Canyon
Costa and Alameda, is provided via Flosden Road or SR 29. To and from the north, access is
provided via SR 29 and SR 12, which also collects traffic from the rest of Napa County. The
Counties of Marin and Sonoma to the west and northwest may also access the City using SR 29
via SR 37.
Rail transportation in the City is currently limited to freight service only. No commuter rail
service exists in the City or County. The main rail line in the City is owned by Union Pacific
Railroad Company and enters the City parallel to and on the east side of SR 29 at the Solano
County line.
LOCAL TRAVEL TRENDS
The U.S. Census Bureau provides data on the “Journey to Work” in its decennial census and
American Community Survey databases. Using the most current available travel-related statistics
available from the U.S. Census Bureau, Table 1 presents the various means of transportation
reported in the City in 1990, 2000, and 2010.
                                                TABLE 1:
      MEANS OF TRANSPORTATION AND CARPOOLING STATISTICS
       Means of Transportation and           1990 1              2000 2              2010 3
               Carpooling              Number    Percent   Number    Percent   Number    Percent
     Workers 16 and over                  3,564    100.0%     4,164    100.0%     8,105    100.0%
     Car, Truck, or Van
          Drove Alone                     2,634     73.9%     3,054     73.3%     6,342     78.2%
          Carpooled                         762     21.4%       858     20.6%     1,114     13.7%
     Public Transportation (all types)       29      0.8%        62      1.5%       166      2.0%
     Motorcycle or Other means               30      0.8%         7      0.2%        58      0.7%
     Bicycle                                 16      0.4%        17      0.4%         0      0.0%
     Walked                                  38      1.1%        29      0.7%       119      1.5%
     Worked at home                          55      1.5%       137      3.3%       306      3.8%
     Sources:
     1. U.S. Census Bureau; 1990 Summary Tape File 3
     2. U.S. Census Bureau; Census 2000 Summary File 3
     3. U.S. Census Bureau; 2006-2010 American Community Survey
The number of workers in the City nearly doubled in the last ten years, increasing from 4,164 in
2000 to 8,105 in 2010. This is consistent with the general population increase in that time
period. Although the number of carpoolers increased over time, the total share of commuters
Circulation Element                                                                              Page 4

                                                               City of American Canyon
carpooling has decreased as more commuters chose to drive alone. The use of public
transportation has also more than doubled, yet the small overall percentage of commuters using
public transit to get to and from work indicates that the commuter population is still largely
dependent on automobiles. No bicycle commuters were reported in the 2010 American
Community Survey 5-year estimates. The percentage of people who worked from home
increased slightly as a percentage of workers but more than doubled in real numbers.
                                                TABLE 2:
                                   TRAVEL TIME TO WORK
                                             1990 1              2000 2             2010 3
     Travel Time to Work              Number      Percent Number      Percent Number     Percent
     Did not work at home:                3,564    100.0%     4,164    100.0%    7,799    100.0%
     Less than 10 minutes                   276      7.7%       363      8.7%      682      8.7%
          10 to 14 minutes                  374     10.5%       444     10.7%      782     10.0%
          15 to 19 minutes                  570     16.0%       485     11.6%      784     10.1%
          20 to 24 minutes                  440     12.3%       597     14.3%      978     12.5%
          25 to 29 minutes                  131      3.7%       263      6.3%      378      4.8%
          30 to 34 minutes                  434     12.2%       446     10.7%    1,152     14.8%
          35 to 44 minutes                  230      6.5%       323      7.8%      822     10.5%
          45 to 59 minutes                  487     13.7%       521     12.5%      782     10.0%
          60 or more minutes                567     15.9%       585     14.0%    1,429     18.3%
     Mean Travel Time (minutes)               31.0                31.5               32.6
     Sources:
     1. U.S. Census Bureau; 1990 Summary Tape File 3
     2. U.S. Census Bureau; Census 2000 Summary File 3
     3. U.S. Census Bureau; 2006-2010 American Community Survey
Table 2 presents the reported travel times for commuters in 1990, 2000, and 2010. From the data
presented in Table 2, one can observe a modest increase in average travel time to work every ten
years. The distribution of commute times in total numbers of workers is presented in Figure 1.
Circulation Element                                                                              Page 5
                                                               City of American Canyon
                                            FIGURE 1:
                                TRAVEL TIME TO WORK
                                                                                                 1990
                                                                                                 2000
                                                                                                 2010
While commute travel times did not vary significantly between 1990 and 2000, between 2000
and 2010, commute times changed along with increases in population and changes in
demographics. In terms of total number of commuters, travel times increased most significantly
in the 30-34 minute and 60+ minute categories. The significant increase in commutes over 60
minutes may indicate that residents are travelling further to get to work, but may also be
indicative of increasing congestion and delay on SR 29 due to increased local and regional
traffic.
STREET AND HIGHWAYS
A hierarchy of streets provides access to and from residential, commercial, and industrial uses
throughout the City and beyond. A route’s design, including number of lanes needed, is
determined by its classification, and its projected traffic levels, in order to achieve safe and
convenient movement at the development intensity planned for in the Land Use Element. The
Circulation Element                                                                               Page 6

                                                               City of American Canyon
existing roadway system by functional classification is presented in Figure 2.
Freeways
Freeways provide high speed intra- and inter-regional mobility. Access is typically restricted to
primary arterials via interchanges, with grade-separated crossings. Typically, the maximum speed
limit on freeways range from 50 to 65 mph with usually one mile or greater spacing between
interchanges. I-80 is the only freeway that directly serves the City, although the closest
interchange is about 2 ¼ miles east of the City limits.
Highways
Highways are controlled access facilities whose junctions with cross streets are characterized by
at-grade intersections rather than interchanges. Highways can be divided or undivided roadways,
with speed limits usually ranging from 40 to 55 mph. State Route 29 bisects the City and
provides interregional access to the City of Vallejo in the south, and the rest of Napa County.
State Route 29 serves a dual purpose of providing local cross-town circulation as well as serving
significant regional traffic. The regional traffic contains two components – regional “through”
traffic that does not originate or terminate in the City, and regional-local “commute” traffic that
originates in the City but terminates outside, or vice-versa. Other nearby highways include State
Route 12 and State Route 37. These highways also provide access to and from I-80, north and
south of the City respectively. State Route 37 continues west towards Sonoma County and the
City of Novato.
Regional Corridors
On Figure 2, Regional Corridors are highlighted that include both highways and arterials that
include a significant regional traffic component. Specifically, these include State Route 29,
American Canyon Road east of State Route 29, and Flosden Road.
Circulation Element                                                                            Page 7

                                        City of American Canyon
                              FIGURE 2:
                    EXISTING CIRCULATION SYSTEM
Circulation Element                                         Page 8
                                                               City of American Canyon
Arterial Streets
Arterial facilities serve to connect areas of major activity within the urban area and function
primarily to distribute cross-town traffic from freeways / highways to collector streets. Within
the City, arterial streets are four lane facilities with maximum operating speeds ranging from 30
to 45 mph, including American Canyon Road, Flosden Road, and Newell Drive.
Collectors
Collectors function as connector routes between local and arterial streets and provide access to
residential, commercial, and industrial property. Collector streets within the City are typically
two-lane facilities with maximum operating speeds of 30 mph and include Broadway Street,
Eucalyptus Drive, Green Island Road, Rio Del Mar, and Donaldson Way, Commerce Boulevard,
among others.
Local Streets
Local streets provide direct access to abutting properties and allow for localized movement of
traffic. Local streets are characterized by low daily traffic volumes and operating speeds of 25 to
30 mph. All roadways not identified in the 1994 General Plan circulation system map (Figure 2)
as freeways, highways, arterials, or collectors are designated local streets.
EXISTING TRAFFIC CONDITIONS
The City roadway facilities were evaluated on a PM peak hour basis using traffic counts taken in
May 2011 in addition to available Caltrans counts on SR 29. Intersection facilities were
evaluated on an AM and PM peak-hour basis using peak-hour turning movement counts also
taken in May 2011. Conditions were identified by generating a Level of Service (LOS)
determination. LOS is a description of a facility’s operation, ranging from LOS A (indicating
free-flow traffic conditions with little or no delay) to LOS F (representing congested conditions
where traffic flows exceed design capacity resulting in long queues and delay).
Circulation Element                                                                            Page 9

                                                             City of American Canyon
Most roadway facilities and intersections were found to be operating at LOS D or better. The
only roadway segments and intersections not currently operating at LOS D or better are located
on State Route 29 and include the following facilities:
Roadways (PM Peak Hour Only)
SR 29, north of South Kelly Road                              LOS E
SR 29, north of Green Island Road                             LOS E
SR 29, south of Green Island Road                             LOS E
SR 29, north of Napa Junction Road                            LOS F
SR 29, north of Donaldson Way                                 LOS F
SR 29, north of Crawford Way                                  LOS F
SR 29, north of American Canyon Road                          LOS F
Intersections
SR 29 @ South Napa Junction Road                              LOS F AM & PM
SR 29 @ Kimberly Drive                                        LOS F PM Only
PLANNED IMPROVEMENTS
In order to correlate existing and planned land uses within the City, traffic carrying capacity
improvements to the roadway network will be needed. New arterial and collector roads will
provide access to the residential, commercial, and industrial areas, connecting those areas with
the existing local and regional transportation system. Minor collector streets will include
residential frontage, whereas major collector streets will not. New local roads in neighborhoods
will serve those residents. The new roadways will continue to expand the existing network of
roadways that characterize the City’s circulation network.
Major street improvements planned for the City are listed in Table 3. Additionally, intersection
improvements will be required at major intersections along new roadways and improved
roadways, including but not limited to turn channelization, signalization, and/or construction of
roundabouts.
Circulation Element                                                                           Page 10

                                                            City of American Canyon
                                              TABLE 3:
                        MAJOR CIRCULATION IMPROVEMENTS
                                   From                      To
 Roadway                                                                        Classification
                               (South or East)        (North or West)
 State Route 29             Southern City Limits    Northern City Limits       6-Lane Arterial
 Newell Drive              S. Napa Junction Road  SR 29/Green Island Road      2-Lane Arterial
 Newell Drive                  Donaldson Way       S. Napa Junction Road       4-Lane Arterial
 Green Island Road           Western Terminus         Easter Terminus          4-Lane Arterial
 Commerce Boulevard          Southern Terminus        Eucalyptus Drive      2-Lane Major Collector
 Devlin Road                 Southern Terminus       Green Island Road    2-Lane Industrial Collector
 Eucalyptus Drive              Theresa Avenue              SR 29            2-Lane Major Collector
 South Napa Junction Road          SR 29                Newell Drive        2-Lane Major Collector
 (includes new at-grade
 railroad crossing)
 Napa Junction Road          Western Terminus         Theresa Avenue       2-Lane Minor Collector
 Napa Junction Road            Theresa Avenue              SR 29            2-Lane Major Collector
 Paoli Loop Road             Green Island Road     Newell Drive Extension   2-Lane Major Collector
 Poco Way                        Melvin Road               SR 29            2-Lane Major Collector
 Newell Drive Railroad        South of Railroad       North of Railroad     2-Lane Arterial Bridge
 Overcrossing                                                                      Structure
 American Canyon Road           East of SR 29          West of SR 29      Pedestrian Grade Separated
 Pedestrian Crossing                                                               Crossing
 Donaldson Way Pedestrian       East of SR 29          West of SR 29      Pedestrian Grade Separated
 Crossing                                                                          Crossing
 Napa Junction Road             East of SR 29          West of SR 29      Pedestrian Grade Separated
 Pedestrian Crossing                                                               Crossing
Circulation Element                                                                            Page 11
                                                                            City of American Canyon
Even after widening to a six lane arterial standard, SR 29 is forecasted to operate at worse than
LOS D conditions. While widening the facility further to eight lanes is technically possible,
potentially significant social, neighborhood, and environmental impacts would likely be
associated with such roadway widening. Table 4 provides additional improvement options that
can be considered along SR 29 beyond simply widening to eight lanes. These improvements are
conceptual options, not specifically planned improvements. In some cases, the improvements
would increase capacity more than widening to eight lanes. Such improvements may be
considered on the SR 29 corridor through the City and beyond to augment capacity. However, in
that SR 29 is a State facility, implementation of any additional alternative improvements as set
forth in Table 4 will also be subject to the exercise of discretion of Caltrans, a responsible
agency, whom may or may not, have formulated any standards for their implementation.
                                                      TABLE 4:
            CORRIDOR CAPACITY-AUGMENTING IMPROVEMENTS
                                                                                                   Capacity
       Improvement                                                                            Augmentation*
       Signal timing/coordination                                                       Up to 10%
       Additional right or left turn lanes                                              10% to 33%
       Additional through lanes at intersection                                         20% to 35%
       Auxiliary lanes                                                                  20% to 35%
       Eight lane cross section                                                         33%
       Roundabout corridor                                                              20% to 50%
       Increased Access Control                                                         15 % to 20%
       Intersection grade separation                                                    100%
       *Effective operational capacity augmentation will vary with variations in intersection traffic flow patterns
The future circulation system is illustrated in Figure 3. The proposed road alignments are
conceptual, subject to further engineering and environmental review. Street designs for the
proposed roads shall conform to the typical street widths and design elements defined in the
cross sections presented in Figure 4. All street designs are subject to review and approval by the
Public Works Department and the City Engineer.
Circulation Element                                                                                                 Page 12
                                    City of American Canyon
                        FIGURE 3:
                    CIRCULATION MAP
Circulation Element                      Page 13
                                     City of American Canyon
                           FIGURE 4:
                    STANDARD CROSS SECTIONS
Circulation Element                                      Page 14
                                                              City of American Canyon
STATE ROUTE 29 REGIONAL PLANNING
Planning for the State Route 29 (SR 29) corridor is an issue of significant importance not only
for the City, but for the entire region. Both Solano County to the south and Napa County to the
north rely on SR 29 for mobility-for work, school, shopping, and recreation. NCTPA, in mid
2012 began a regional, community-based planning effort entitled State Route 29 Gateway
Corridor Improvement Plan to study alternatives for multimodal improvements to the corridor
that extends from the City of Napa to Solano County. The study is being funded by a Caltrans
Community-Based Transportation Planning grant. The City will play a significant role in this
planning effort, as the corridor study segment within its jurisdiction is of particular import.
As a State facility, Caltrans also plays a part in planning for improvements to SR 29. State
funding for improvements is provided through Caltrans, and planning efforts require approval
from Caltrans prior to implementation. Caltrans prepared a draft SR 29 Corridor Study, but has
suspended its efforts until after the NCTPA community-based transportation study is completed.
Although Caltrans is required to provide funding for SR 29, that funding, which is set forth
annually in the State Transportation Implementation Plan, is subject to deferral and appropriation
for other purposes.
Local planning efforts have resulted in the development of some preliminary concepts for SR 29
that have been presented to the public through workshops for input and comment. Some of these
initial concepts will be evaluated in more detail through the regional NCTPA study and
subsequent public workshops. Options already discussed with the community include widening
SR 29 to six lanes, creative intersection capacity enhancements, reduced access to expressway
standards, constructing a freeway, and constructing grade-separated express lanes.
SR 29 is included in the Circulation Element and Map as a six-lane arterial. This improvement
will provide improved circulation and achieve an acceptable traffic LOS for an interim duration.
However, LOS deficiencies are still projected under buildout of the City General Plan,
commensurate with increases in regional traffic.
Circulation Element                                                                             Page 15
                                                              City of American Canyon
1.0 STREET SYSTEM POLICIES
GUIDING POLICIES
   1.1 Community Priorities. Safe and convenient access to activities in the community is
         provided by a well-designed local roadway system. That system serves the community’s
         primary need for mobility and includes a planned hierarchy of roadways to meet that
         need. The following Community Priorities relate most directly to this Element:
           Encourage and foster a strong sense of community and safety, as well as the “home
            town” feeling by creation of a town center through land use and circulation planning.
           Improve a hierarchy of roadway networks to achieve and maintain acceptable traffic
            LOS and provide a Citywide system of bicycle lanes and recreational trails that
            improve accessibility without the use of an automobile.
           Improve SR 29 so that it serves as a visually attractive gateway into the City while
            providing access to commercial businesses and serving intra and inter-regional traffic
            and goods movement.
   1.2 Implement planned roadway improvements. Use Figure 3: General Plan Circulation
         System, and Table 3: Major Circulation Improvements, to identify, schedule, and
         implement roadway and complimentary intersection improvements to support General
         Plan buildout conditions. Planned improvements may be phased as development occurs
         and need for increased capacity is identified.
   1.3 Design circulation system to focus regional travel on SR 29. SR 29 is important for
         both Citywide and north-south regional travel. As both City and regional travel grow,
         design the City circulation system to discourage regional traffic from bypassing SR 29
         and impacting City streets. Also, cooperatively work with regional partners, including
         Caltrans, NCTPA and others explore a complete streets approach that will expand the
         travel capacity of SR 29.
Circulation Element                                                                          Page 16

                                                                City of American Canyon
   1.4 Design circulation system to complement and enhance the General Plan Land Use
         Plan. Provide and maintain a City circulation system that is correlated with planned
         land uses in the City and surrounding areas in the region in compliance with
         Government Code §65302(b).
   1.5 Neighborhood Context. Support safe, complete and well-connected neighborhood
         street, bicycle, and pedestrian access and connections that balance circulation needs with
         the neighborhood context.
   1.6 Achieve and maintain a Multimodal LOS D or better for roadways and
         intersections during peak hours where possible and as long as possible. However,
         recognizing that LOS D may not be achievable or cannot be maintained upon full
         buildout of the General Plan, due to traffic generated from sources beyond the control of
         the City, the City Council shall have the discretion to only require feasible mitigation
         measures that may not achieve LOS D, but will reduce the impact of any development
         use or density planned for in the Land Use Element of the General Plan.
            The following locations that may not achieve or maintain LOS D are as follows and
            therefore will be exempt from the LOS D policy:
                   State Route 29 through the City
                   American Canyon Road from SR 29 to Flosden Road – Newell Drive
                   Flosden Road south of American Canyon Road
   1.7 Complete Streets. Maintain and update street standards that provide for the design,
         construction, and maintenance of “Complete Streets.” The City’s Complete Streets shall
         enable safe, comfortable, and attractive access for all users: pedestrians, motorists,
         bicyclists, and transit riders of all ages and abilities, in a form that is compatible with
         and complementary to adjacent land uses, and promotes connectivity between uses and
         areas.
Circulation Element                                                                              Page 17

                                                            City of American Canyon
         This policy, and Circulation Element as a whole, is consistent with the City’s adopted
         Resolution 2012-72, “Complete Streets Policy of the City of American Canyon” that set
         out Principles, Implementation Objectives, and Exemptions to achieving Complete
         Streets.
   1.8 Design for street improvements. The street facility classifications indicated on the
         General Plan Circulation Map shall be the standard to which roads needing
         improvements are built. The Circulation Map depicts the facility types that are necessary
         to support the traffic generated by General Plan Land Use Element buildout, and
         therefore represent the buildout standards to which a street segment or intersection shall
         be improved.
   1.9 Use of existing facilities. Make efficient use of existing transportation facilities, and
         improve these facilities as necessary in accordance with the Circulation Map.
   1.10 Coordination of local and regional actions. Coordinate local actions with State,
         regional, County, and neighboring agencies to ensure consistency between local and
         regional actions.
   1.11 Reduce Vehicle Miles Traveled. Through layout of land uses, improved alternate
         modes, and provision of more direct routes, strive to reduce the total vehicle miles
         traveled by City residents.
   1.12 Circulation System Enhancements. Achieve, maintain and/or improve mobility in the
         City by considering circulation system enhancements beyond improvements identified
         on the Circulation Map, where feasible and appropriate. Improve the circulation system,
         in accordance with the Circulation Map, at minimum, to support multimodal travel of all
         users and goods and where feasible, apply creative circulation system enhancements that
         increase system capacity and that are acceptable to the City and its residents and where
         applicable, Caltrans.
Circulation Element                                                                           Page 18

                                                              City of American Canyon
   1.13 Financing Program. Develop a transportation financing program that will fully fund the
         planned expansion of the existing transportation network consistent with the General
         Plan. The financing program will include an update to the existing transportation impact
         fee (TIF) program consistent with AB 1600.
IMPLEMENTING POLICIES
Regional Cooperation
   1.14 Work with Caltrans on highway improvements. Continue to work with the Caltrans
         to achieve timely context sensitive design solutions, funding and construction of
         programmed highway improvements.
   1.15 Coordinate standards. Continue to coordinate the City’s design standards for regional
         roadways with the standards of adjacent and overlapping agencies to provide smooth
         transitions for roadway users between jurisdictional boundaries.
   1.16 Use of Congestion Management Process. Utilize the NCTPA Congestion Management
         Program (CMP) to determine the timing and degree of regional roadway facility
         improvements in accordance with regionwide plans. Actively participate in the
         Community-Based SR 29 Gateway Corridor Improvement Plan process to identify a
         funded SR 29 travel capacity enhancement through the City.
   1.17 Regional fair-share fee program. Work with Caltrans, NCTPA, Napa County, and other
         jurisdictions to establish a fair-share fee program for improvements to routes of regional
         significance and State highways. This fee should reflect traffic generated by individual
         municipalities/ unincorporated communities as well as pass-through traffic.
Circulation Element                                                                          Page 19

                                                               City of American Canyon
Street Network
In general, policies pertaining to the street network in this section and others promote the
maintenance and development of a well-connected circulation system that is integrated with
adjacent land uses and facilitates reductions in vehicle miles traveled.
   1.18 Implement Circulation Map. Based on the design direction from Guiding Policies 1.1
         through 1.13, schedule and implement the circulation system identified in the
         Circulation Map (Figure 3) as development occurs. Variation from the depicted
         alignments for these facilities based on detailed engineering studies will not require a
         General Plan amendment.
   1.19 Complete Streets. When constructing or modifying transportation facilities, consistent
         with Resolution 2012-72, “Complete Streets Policy of the City of American Canyon”,
         strive to provide for the movement of vehicles, commercial trucks, alternative and low
         energy vehicles, transit, bicyclists and pedestrians appropriate for the road classification
         and adjacent land use.
           Update the Capital Improvement Program annually to incorporate necessary
            circulation system improvements.
            Evaluate projects to ensure that the safety, comfort, and convenience of pedestrians,
            bicyclists and transit users are given equal level of consideration to motor vehicle
            operators.
           Consider ways to increase and improve travel choices when reviewing development or
            transportation infrastructure projects.
           Consider roundabouts or other innovative designs as alternatives to stop signs and
            traffic signals when studying intersection configuration options.
Circulation Element                                                                            Page 20

                                                                 City of American Canyon
           Require sidewalks on all arterial and collector streets. Where feasible, separate
            sidewalks from streets on arterials and collectors with landscaping including a tree
            canopy to create shade.
           Improve the existing street network to minimize travel times and improve mobility for
            transit, bicycle, and walking trips between new projects and surrounding land uses to
            reduce vehicle trips.
           Initiate modification of the General Plan Land Use Element to clearly require new
            development to bear responsibility for their proportional impact on emergency
            services.
   1.20 Neighborhood Context. Plan for safe, complete, well connected neighborhood streets.
            Modify the existing street network, where possible, to enable direct physical
             connections within and between neighborhoods, neighborhood-commercial areas, and
             commercial-commercial areas, including connections accessible only by pedestrians
             and bicycles on existing cul-de-sac streets.
            Provide direct connection from residential areas to neighborhood parks and open
             space.
            Where feasible, provide pedestrian crosswalks on all intersection approaches.
            Implement an ADA Transition Plan that focuses on compliant sidewalk improvements
             that provide continuous pedestrian and wheelchair access where compatible with the
             surrounding area.
            Develop and implement a Pedestrian Master Plan (PMP) that indicates which streets
             in addition to arterials and collectors will install sidewalks and what other pedestrian
             facilities and amenities (such as ‘resting spots’) are needed to complete the pedestrian
Circulation Element                                                                             Page 21

                                                              City of American Canyon
             network. Sidewalk widths and shade coverage should also be addressed in the context
             of the adjacent land use, vehicle volumes, and vehicle speeds.
            Maintain and update the Bikeway Master Plan (BMP) and work to fund and complete
             the planned bikeway system.
            Maintain and complete implementation of the Safe Routes to School Plan. This effort
             should complement the ADA Transition Plan, the PMP, and the BMP.
   1.21 Follow adopted City standards. Build arterials, collector and local streets in
         accordance with adopted City standards. Improve existing facilities to conform to
         classification standards where possible. Exceptions to the standards may be allowed by
         the City Engineer where mitigation is infeasible or would conflict with other community
         values such as those listed below:
                 Impacts on general safety, particularly pedestrian, bicycle, and transit safety;
                 The right-of-way needs and the physical impacts on surrounding private or
                  public properties;
                 The visual aesthetics of the required improvement and its impact on community
                  identity and character;
                 Environmental impacts including air quality and noise impacts; and,
                 Impacts on quality of life as perceived by residents.
   1.22 Coordinated Traffic Control. Provide a coordinated traffic control system that moves
         traffic within and through the City in an efficient and orderly manner. Upgrade systems
         as technology evolves.
   1.23 Access Restriction. Minimize, where possible, the number of access points along
         arterial roadways, including by consolidating or relocating driveways to provide for
         more efficient traffic movement.
Circulation Element                                                                             Page 22

                                                             City of American Canyon
Roadway Operations and Monitoring
   1.24 Impacts of new development. Based upon the findings of a transportation impact
         analysis, consistent with Guiding Policy 1.26, new development will be responsible for
         mitigation of transportation related impacts.
   1.25 Traffic Calming. Traffic calming techniques may be employed to mitigate the traffic
         effects of new development on minor and major collector streets. Use the City adopted
         Traffic Calming Guidelines for application and design of traffic calming measures.
   1.26 Update and adopt Transportation Impact Analysis (TIA) guidelines. Update and
         adopt Transportation Impact Analysis guidelines and a Multimodal LOS assessment
         methodology for the evaluation of potential transportation impacts resulting from new
         development that is specific to the City and that will supersede existing LOS standards
         and guidelines.
   1.27 Traffic and accident monitoring and reduction. Establish and implement programs to
         help maintain satisfactory roadway performance at intersections and along roadway
         segments. This may include the following:
             o Collect and analyze traffic volume data on a regular basis, and monitor current
                intersection and roadway segment LOS on a regular basis. This information may
                be used to update and refine the City’s travel forecasting model to improve
                estimates of future conditions.
             o Consider ways to shift travel demand away from the peak period using
                Transportation Demand Management (TDM) strategies, especially in situations
                where peak traffic problems result from a few major generators (e.g. large retail
                developments on highway corridor). Strategies to consider include:
                       Encouraging employer-sponsored incentives for transit, bike, or carpool
                        use
Circulation Element                                                                         Page 23

                                                              City of American Canyon
                        Providing shuttle service to major events and destinations
                        Promoting shopping or entertainment events that are at off-peak hours
                        Coordinating centralized TDM programs that serve multiple tenants at
                         large shopping or office centers
                        Perform periodic evaluations of the City’s (and Caltrans) traffic control
                         system, with emphasis on traffic signal timing, phasing, and coordination
                         to optimize flow along SR 29 and arterial corridors.
Funding for Improvements
   1.28 Transportation Impact Fee (TIF) and Capital Improvement Program (CIP). As part
         of the 20-year TIF, annually update a five-year CIP of projects required to construct
         and/or update circulation facilities. The analysis should identify the type of facility,
         length of the project, right-of-way requirements, physical improvements required and
         preliminary estimates of cost.
   1.29 Utilize outside funding sources. Link improvement projects to the most current
         estimates of available funding from regional, State, and federal sources. Continue to
         participate in the effort to develop and coordinate a regional financing mechanism for
         major regional transportation improvements.
Right-of-Way Acquisition and Preservation
   1.30 Establish roadway alignments. Take appropriate action to establish precise alignments
         based on the Circulation Map and City Standards, and where appropriate, utilize
         Caltrans standards, for all existing and proposed highway, arterial and collector streets in
         order to identify future right-of-way needs. Plan Lines shall be adopted by the City
         Council.
   1.31 Plan Line Studies included in TIF. Plan Line Studies shall be included in TIF costs.
         Once Plan Lines are established, new preliminary cost estimates shall be prepared and
         the TIF updated to reflect the revised and finalized costs.
Circulation Element                                                                             Page 24

                                                                City of American Canyon
   1.32 Right-of-Way consistency. New roadways shall follow adopted Plan Lines and shall be
         designed to maintain a consistent street design and right-of-way width, regardless of
         adjacent land uses.
   1.33 Right-of-Way acquisition. Following the adopted plan lines, acquire public street right-
         of-way as opportunity for dedication and/or purchase arises. Attempt to obtain ultimate
         right of way and street improvements at the time of development, except when lesser
         right-of-way will avoid significant social, neighborhood or environmental impacts and
         perform the same traffic movement function.
   1.34 Rights-of-Way fully within master plan boundaries. Planning areas shall not use
         roadway centerlines as boundaries. Roadways shall be built to their full width within the
         annexed City limits. Part-width roads shall not be permitted where master plan areas
         abut unincorporated properties that are not expected to be annexed to the City within the
         time frame of this General Plan. Road rights-of-way that demarcate the edge of a
         planning area shall be fully contained within the development area boundary, and
         expanded only within that boundary.
Relationship between Modes
   1.35 General transit and pedestrian access. In reviewing designs of proposed
         developments, ensure that provision is made for access to current and future public
         transit services. In particular, pedestrian access to arterial and collector streets from
         subdivisions should not be impeded by continuous segments of sound walls.
   1.36 Bus access on arterials. Design considerations for arterial streets in newly developing
         areas should provide for bus loading and unloading without disruption of through-traffic.
   1.37 Standards for transit stops and headways. Coordinate with NCTPA and American
         Canyon Transit (ACT) to establish Citywide standards for bus stop locations and bus
Circulation Element                                                                               Page 25
                                                               City of American Canyon
         frequencies/headways. In industrial areas, standards may need to be adjusted to provide
         direct access to employee entrances.
PEDESTRIAN AND BICYCLE ROUTES
The City is ideally situated for recreational trail use, with scenic landscapes a short distance
away to the east, west, and north. The City adopted a Bicycle Plan in August 2012. The Bicycle
Plan was prepared in accordance with the California Bicycle Transportation Act as part of the
Napa Countywide Bicycle Plan and was coordinated with existing City and Regional Plans at the
time of its adoption including the 2005 South County SR 29 Corridor Study and the Draft Parks
and Community Services Master Plan. The Bicycle Plan adoption is one of several City actions
implementing SB 375, the Sustainable Communities Strategy Act.
The goal of this local and regional planning effort is to interconnect the surrounding
communities in the County with a seamless bicycle network for recreational and commuter use.
The plan includes proposed bicycle and pedestrian trails, as well as on-street bicycle facilities to
complete the partial network already in place in the City and County. The plan encourages the
use of walking and bicycling and recognizes three classes of bikeways:
    Class I Multi Use Path. Typically known as bike paths, Class I facilities are multi-use
    facilities that provide a completely separated right-of-way for the exclusive use of bicycles
    and pedestrians with cross flows of motorized traffic minimized.
    Class II Bike Lane. Known as bike lanes, Class II facilities provide a striped and signed lane
    for one-way bicycle travel on each side of a street or highway. The minimum width for bike
    lanes ranges between four and five feet depending upon the edge of roadway conditions
    (curbs). Bike lanes are demarcated by a six-inch white stripe, signage and pavement legends.
    Class III Bike Route. Known as bike routes, Class III facilities provide signs for shared use
    with motor vehicles within the same travel lane on a street or highway. Bike routes may be
    enhanced with warning or guide signs and shared lane marking pavement stencils. While
Circulation Element                                                                            Page 26
                                                              City of American Canyon
    Class III routes do not provide measures of separation, they have an important function in
    providing continuity to the bikeway network.
Currently, facilities separated from vehicular traffic in the City include a discontinuous network
of recreational pathways located throughout the community in City parks and on the American
Canyon Creek corridor, a north-south Class I facility along Flosden Road and Newell Drive, a
pathway on Wetlands Edge Road, and a segment of the Bay Trail which runs north-south on the
City’s west side. Class II bike lanes are provided on Elliot Drive, Broadway Street, Benton Way,
Donaldson Way, American Canyon Road, and Kimberly Drive. The City does not currently have
any Class III bike routes designated on City streets. Figure 5 illustrates the City’s Bicycle Plan
including existing and proposed bike routes.
Circulation Element                                                                            Page 27

                                        City of American Canyon
                              FIGURE 5:
                    AMERICAN CANYON BICYCLE PLAN
Circulation Element                                        Page 28
                                                               City of American Canyon
2. BICYCLE AND PEDESTRIAN POLICIES
GUIDING POLICIES
   2.1 Promote walking and bicycling. Promote walking and bike riding for transportation,
         recreation, and improvement of public and environmental health.
   2.2 Meet the needs of all users. Recognize and meet the mobility needs of persons using
         wheelchairs and those with other mobility limitations.
   2.3 Develop a safe and efficient non-motorized circulation system. Provide safe and
         direct pedestrian routes and bikeways between places.
IMPLEMENTING POLICIES
Complete Streets
   2.4 Integration of land use planning. Implement land use policies designed to create a
         pattern of activity that makes it easy to shop, play, visit friends, and conduct personal
         business without driving.
   2.5 Provision of bicycle facilities. Facilities for bicycle travel (Class I bike/multiuse paths;
         Class II bike lanes, and Class III bike routes) shall be provided to complete a continuous
         system of cyclists as shown on Figure 5.
         Bike lane width shall follow State standards. In cases where existing right of way
         constraints limit development of Class II facilities, Class III signage and demarcation
         may be permitted at the discretion of the City Engineer. Deviations from these standards
         and from the routing shown on the diagram shall be permitted with the approval of the
         City Engineer.
Circulation Element                                                                            Page 29
                                                             City of American Canyon
   2.6 Street trees for shade and comfort. Ensure that planting plans for street trees take into
         consideration shade and comfort for pedestrians and bicyclists and traffic calming
         benefits.
   2.7 Universal design. Provide pedestrian facilities that are accessible to persons with
         disabilities and ensure that roadway improvement projects address accessibility by using
         universal design concepts.
Funding for Improvements
   2.8 Funding for bikeways through street construction funds. Continue to designate a
         portion of the City’s annual street construction and improvement fund for financing
         bikeway design and construction.
   2.9 Bicycle Plan. Ensure that the City Bicycle Plan maintains consistency with the
         requirements in the Streets and Highways Code in order to be eligible for further funding
         for improvements from the State, such as the Bicycle Transportation Account funds.
   2.10 Street trees in Capital Improvement Program (CIP). Include street trees as part of
         project design and include in the City’s CIP programming and implementation.
   2.11 Funding for Bicycle Plan through TIF. Include funding for the City’s Bicycle Plan
         updates and bikeway improvements consistent with the Bicycle Plan in the City’s TIF
         recognizing the multi-modal travel needs of the City.
Increasing Bicycle Use and Safety
   2.12 Bicycle use by City employees. Establish a program to encourage bicycle use among
         City employees.
Circulation Element                                                                         Page 30

                                                              City of American Canyon
Bike storage facilities and shower and locker rooms should be provided where feasible. Funding
may be provided for these facilities by incorporation into the TIF and be consistent with the
Parks and Community Services Master Plan.
   2.13 Bicycling access to parks. Provide safe bicycle access to and parking facilities at all
         community parks.
   2.14 Bicycle safety. Increase the safety of those traveling by bicycle by:
                   Sweeping debris from and repairing bicycle paths and lanes;
                   Ensuring that bikeways are delineated and signed according to Caltrans or
                    City standards, and that lighting is provided where needed;
                   Providing bicycle paths and lanes on bridges and overpasses;
                   Ensuring that all new and improved streets have bicycle-safe drainage grates
                    and are free of hazards such as uneven pavement or gravel;
                   Providing adequate signage and markings warning vehicular traffic of the
                    existence of merging or crossing bicycle traffic where bike routes and paths
                    make transitions into or across roadways; and
                   Work with the Napa Valley Unified School District to promote classes on
                    bicycle safety in the schools.
   2.15 Demarcation of Class III Bikeways. In order to increase awareness of bicyclists
         sharing the roadway with motorized vehicles, demarcate Class III bicycle facilities,
         where appropriate, by painting “sharrows” on streets. Because of high maintenance costs
         associated with sharrows, their use should be prioritized on areas with higher frequency
         of bicycle conflicts or where the bikeway may be obscured by traffic or geometrics. At
         minimum, Bike Route signage should be provided to identify and guide cyclists in using
         the City’s bikeway system.
   2.16 Improved bikeway visibility. Use visual cues, such as brightly-colored paint on bike
         lanes or a one-foot painted buffer strip, along bicycle routes to provide a visual signal to
Circulation Element                                                                            Page 31

                                                              City of American Canyon
         drivers to watch out for bicyclists and nurture a “share the lane” ethic. Prioritize using
         areas of town where automobile-bicycle collisions have occurred in the past, based on
         data from the Statewide Integrated Traffic Records System maintained by the California
         Highway Patrol.
Pedestrian Access and Comfort
   2.17 Pedestrian access to shopping destinations. Install clearly marked crosswalks at
        intersections near all commercial uses, as well as clearly marked pedestrian paths within
        parking areas. Mid-block crossings are discouraged. However, if conditions warrant and
        are approved by City Engineer, crosswalks and signage indicating pedestrian activity
        should be installed at mid-block entrances where existing commercial uses are adjacent to
        other high-intensity uses, such as parks and schools where necessary for safety. Where
        possible, route pedestrians to grade separated crossings over State Route 29.
   2.18 Pedestrian connections to employment destinations. Encourage the development of a
         network of continuous walkways within new commercial, town center, public, and
         industrial uses to improve workers’ ability to walk safely around, to, and from their
         workplaces. Where possible, route pedestrians to grade separated crossings over State
         Route 29.
   2.19 Pedestrian connections to schools. Continue developing the existing network of
         walkways between schools and residential uses, and encourage the development of new
         continuous walkways between schools and residential uses. Where possible, route
         pedestrians to grade separated crossings over State Route 29.
   2.20 Bicycle Master Plan. The NCTPA Countywide Bicycle Master Plan for the City of
         American Canyon, as it may be amended from time to time, links all community centers,
         civic areas, schools, and parks in the City and connects to other neighboring bikeway
         networks. This plan is hereby incorporated by reference into the City of American
         Canyon General Plan.
Circulation Element                                                                             Page 32

                                                            City of American Canyon
PUBLIC TRANSPORTATION
The City has a variety of public transportation options including fixed route systems and
demand-responsive systems as well as local systems and regional systems. Figure 6 presents the
existing transit available to City residents.
American Canyon Transit (ACT) is a part of the Napa County Transit (VINE) family of services
operated by the NCTPA. ACT is a bus service that provides a 90 minute round trip route
through the City on weekdays between 7:30 AM and 6:00 PM. ACT provides one main route
served by two buses, ACT-1 and ACT-2, as well as a Peak Service route during the morning. The
ACT buses will deviate from routes and provide on-demand service as time permits for disabled
and senior citizens.
Route ACT-1 Southbound starts at 6 am weekdays from the ACT bus stop on Main Street next to
Wal-Mart. ACT-1 travels southbound via Rio Del Mar to Donaldson Way and continues (blue
route on Figure 5) Route ACT-2 Northbound starts at 10 am weekdays from the ACT bus stop on
James Street at Crawford Way. ACT-2 travels easterly via Donaldson Way to southbound
Shenandoah and continues (blue route on Figure 6).
Circulation Element                                                                       Page 33
                                                             City of American Canyon
                                            FIGURE 6:
                AMERICAN CANYON PUBLIC TRANSPORTATION
The AM Peak Service makes two loops in the AM. The first loop is from the Wal-Mart bus stop
at 7:25 am, and the second loop is from the Rio Del Mar/Eucalyptus intersection (7-Eleven) bus
stop (green route on Figure 6). This route is designated as the “American Canyon High School”
route, as depicted on the bus front signs. The following stops are made during the AM Peak
Service route:
       Rio Del Mar at Eucalyptus (7-Eleven)
     Rio Del Mar at Carolyn
Circulation Element                                                                       Page 34

                                                               City of American Canyon
       Donaldson Way at Rio Del Mar
       Donaldson Way at Benton Way
       Elliott at American Canyon Road
       Elliott at Knightsbridge
       Elliott at Kimberly
       Kimberly at Danrose
       Broadway at Ventana
       Broadway at Cartagena Way
       Newell Drive at American Canyon High School
       Donaldson Way at Summerwood
VINE provides services outside the ACT routes between several cities in Napa County. Within
the City, Route 10 and VINE 29 offer bus stops within the City limits. Route 10 (purple route on
Figure 6) runs from Napa Valley College in the City of Napa to the City of Vallejo and stops at
SR 29/Rio Del Mar and at the American Canyon Senior Center on Elliot Drive between
Knightsbridge Way and Kimberly Drive.
VINE 29 (yellow route on Figure 6) is a commuter express route from Calistoga to El Cerrito
Del Norte BART and the Ferry Terminal in Vallejo. Vine 29 stops at the American Canyon Post
Office at SR 29/Crawford Way. Both of these routes are available throughout the week. VINE Go
is also an available door-to-door dedicated service for qualifying disabled and senior citizens.
3. PUBLIC TRANSIT POLICIES
GUIDING POLICIES
    3.1 Promote safe, efficient, and convenient public transportation. Promote the use of
         public transportation for daily trips, including to schools and workplaces, as well as
         other purposes.
Circulation Element                                                                           Page 35

                                                             City of American Canyon
   3.2 Work with multiple agencies and jurisdictions. Continue to cooperate with other
         agencies and jurisdictions to promote local and regional public transit, including ACT
         and VINE serving American Canyon.
IMPLEMENTING POLICIES
Local Transit
   3.3 Improve local transit operations. Work with NCTPA to continue the present course
         of expanding both ACT and VINE fixed route services and improving operations.
   3.4 Improvements to Demand-Responsive transit. Work with NCTPA to improve the
         City’s demand responsive transit system and aggressively pursue transit grant funds in
         order to continue funding operations.
   3.5 Consistency with Napa County Congestion Management System. Monitor the
         frequency, routing and coordination of local transit services for consistency with the
         requirements of the NCTPA Congestion Management Plan (CMP).
The NCTPA CMP includes minimum standards regarding these factors in an effort to enhance
the coordination within the regional transportation system.
   3.6 Transit stop spacing. Transit stops should be spaced no further than 1,000 feet apart, if
         spaced for continuous service on city streets. Spacing may deviate from the general
         standard in industrial areas where individual businesses occupy large parcels (greater
         than 20 acres) and where stops should serve employee entrances directly as approved by
         the City Engineer.
   3.7 Funding for transit services. Work with NCTPA to continue to pursue federal and
         State funds to subsidize capital and operating costs associated with the City’s transit
         operation. If federal funds are reduced and capital needs are not being met, transit may
Circulation Element                                                                           Page 36

                                                               City of American Canyon
         be added to the TIF through a Nexus Study that after a public hearing process is
         approved by the City Council.
   3.8 Transit usability. Work with NCTPA to situate transit stops at locations that are
         convenient for transit users, and promote increased transit ridership through the
         provision of shelters, benches, bike racks on buses, and other amenities.
   3.9 Transit services marketing. Encourage ridership on public transit systems through
         marketing and promotional efforts. Provide information to residents and employees on
         transit services available for local and regional trips.
   3.10 Transit for seniors. Require new community care facilities and senior housing projects
         with over 25 beds to provide accessible transportation services for the convenience of
         residents.
   3.11 Development that supports transit. Ensure that new development is designed to make
         transit a viable transportation choice for residents. Design options include:
                   Have neighborhood centers or focal points with sheltered bus stops;
                   Locate medium and high density development on or near streets served by
                    transit wherever feasible; and
                   Link neighborhoods to bus stops by continuous sidewalks or pedestrian paths.
Regional Transit and Coordination
   3.12 Regional transit to support SB 375 compliance. Coordinate with other agencies to
         implement regional transit solutions as part of the SB 375 Sustainable Communities
         Strategy.
   3.13 Coordinate local and regional transit. As the City’s local transit system continues to
         be developed, services should be oriented to link with other potential future commuter
Circulation Element                                                                         Page 37

                                                               City of American Canyon
         bus and/or commuter rail services.
    3.14        Support existing regional transit services. Continue to support the VINE
service provided by NCTPA.
    3.15 Regional Transit Agency. Support efforts to improve the coordination and efficiency of
         bus service on a regional level and, if appropriate, the regionalization of transit service
         delivery.
RAILROADS
Rail transportation in the City is currently limited to freight service only. No commuter rail
service exists in the City or County. The main rail line (See Figure 3) in the City is owned by
Union Pacific Railroad Company and enters the City parallel to and on the east side of SR 29 at
the Solano County line. The rail line continues on this trajectory diverting from SR 29’s
alignment north of American Canyon Road. North of Napa Junction Road, the railroad line
splits. One segment heads further northeast to parallel Jameson Canyon Road towards the City of
Fairfield. Another segment heads northwest under SR 29 and across Green Island Road towards
the City of Sonoma. Lastly, one leg heads north past Napa County Airport, terminating just
north of Kennedy Park in the City of Napa and connecting to the Napa Valley Wine Train.
AIRPORT
The Napa County Airport is just northwest of the City limits in unincorporated territory. It is a
General Aviation airport with charter flights available, but no scheduled commercial flights. The
airport can accommodate most private aircraft including jets, up to 120,000 pounds. The airport
was built by the United States Army Air Force in 1942, and was deeded to Napa County after
World War II for civilian use. In 1971 International Air Services Company opened a flight
training school at the airport.
Planning in the airport area is subject to Land Use development policies set forth in the Airport
Industrial Specific Plan and the Airport Land Use Plan. The Specific Plan received a minor
Circulation Element                                                                             Page 38

                                                               City of American Canyon
amendment that was adopted in 2004. The circulation system described in Airport Industrial
Specific Plan are largely consistent with those designated in this Circulation Element.
 TRUCK ROUTES
Truck routes are intended to carry heavyweight commercial, industrial, and agricultural vehicles
through and around the community with minimum disruption to local auto traffic and minimum
annoyance to residential areas. Due to the high level of existing and expected future light
industrial activity in the northwest quadrant of the City, truck routes should be clearly designated
so that intrusion of heavy vehicle traffic into residential areas can be avoided. Currently, SR 29
carries significant truck traffic and is designated as a Surface Transportation Assistance Act (STAA)
terminal access route. The 1982 Surface Transportation Assistance Act set standards for large
trucks, known as STAA trucks, and set minimum truck sizes that states allow on the National
Network including the Interstate System and other defined routes, such as SR 29. Roadways
identified as Industrial Collectors in the City’s General Plan Circulation Map, Green Island
Road, and SR 29 are the City’s designated truck routes.
4. TRUCK AND RAIL GOODS MOVEMENT POLICIES
GUIDING POLICIES
    4.1 Promote safe and efficient goods movement. Promote the safe and efficient movement
         of goods via truck and rail with minimum disruptions to residential areas.
    4.2 Promote railroad safety. Minimize the safety problems associated with the railroad,
         including the construction and maintenance of at-grade crossings and the physical
         barrier effect of the track alignment on the City.
Circulation Element                                                                              Page 39

                                                              City of American Canyon
Implementing Policies
Truck Movement
    4.3 Truck route identification. Continue to sign truck routes. Ensure that clear signage is
          provided from regional gateways to truck routes in the City.
    4.4 New truck route designation. All highways, arterials, and industrial streets shall be
          designated truck routes.
    4.5 Truck route design. Incorporate provisions for trucks in the design of Industrial
          Collector streets and other designated truck routes. Ensure that truck routes are designed
          according to California Legal and where appropriate STAA standards for intersections
          and turning movements.
    4.6 Location of industrial development. Continue industrial expansion in the north
          industrial area to minimize the neighborhood impacts of truck movements.
    4.7 Secure truck parking. Encourage high-security off-street parking for tractor-trailer rigs
          in industrial designated areas.
Locate parking in areas with demonstrated need and where police patrol can be provided. High
visibility, including good lighting, should be provided.
    4.8 Financing for truck facilities. Explore possible funding sources, including user fees, to
          help finance truck routes and truck parking areas, at least in part.
Railroad
    4.9 Railroad crossing safety. Continue the ongoing comprehensive program to improve the
          condition and safety of existing railroad crossings by upgrading surface conditions and
Circulation Element                                                                            Page 40
                                                               City of American Canyon
         installing signs and signals where warranted. Participate in railroad safety education,
         such as Operation Lifesaver activities when offered.
Special consideration must be given to improving east-west cross-town emergency access,
potentially with a grade separated crossing.
   4.10 New railroad crossings. Provide new crossings across the railroad (UPRR) in
         conjunction with the planned roadway improvements shown on Figure 3. The provision
         of new crossings will ensure at least one cross-town route is maintained in case rail
         activity interrupts local and regional traffic flow and/or emergency access. New
         crossings will be at:
                   Newell Drive (grade separated); and,
                   South Napa Junction Road (initially at-grade, may be grade separated in the
                    future).
Circulation Element                                                                          Page 41

                                                             City of American Canyon
SUSTAINABLE ROADWAY EXPANSION
New roadway construction such as the system expansion included in this Circulation Element
can have deleterious environmental and societal effects if not dealt with carefully, with
recognition of environmental and societal impacts. Without deliberate consideration of
environmental factors such as seismic and landslide activity, new roadway construction can also
pose public safety hazards. The following policies complement the policies already set forth in
the Circulation Element to further reduce undesirable indirect consequences of new roadway
construction and existing roadway expansion.
5. SUSTAINABLE ROADWAY EXPANSION POLICIES
   5.1    Parking and congestion pricing. Continue to evaluate the feasibility of implementing
          parking and/or congestion pricing, working with Caltrans as appropriate when
          considering congestion pricing strategies for SR 29.
Currently, American Canyon has no downtown or another concentrated area of parking, making
parking pricing infeasible. This strategy could become relevant with development of the mixed-
use Town Center, and parking pricing strategies should be evaluated at that time. Additionally,
the City should continue to work with Caltrans and the Metropolitan Transportation Commission
(MTC), should congestion pricing for Highway 29 be considered.
   5.2 Air quality monitoring. Evaluate compatibility of air quality along SR 29 with planned
         commercial and residential land uses within the SR 29 Priority Development Area
         (PDA). At the time a Specific Plan for the SR 29 PDA corridor is prepared, conduct an
         air quality study to evaluate transportation-generated air pollutants on sensitive receptors
         and propose appropriate corridor-wide techniques to filter air such as providing a double
         row of trees along each side of SR 29.
Circulation Element                                                                            Page 42
                                                                City of American Canyon
Trees can help cut down air pollution by: (1) Cooling, which reduces evaporative emissions
from vehicles and need for air conditioning and power generation emissions from buildings.
Cooling also reduces the speed of chemical reactions that lead to the formation of ozone and
particulate matter; and (2) Removal of ozone, nitrogen dioxide, and particulate matter. See
http://www.arb.ca.gov/research/ecosys/tree-aq/tree-aq.htm
   5.3    Noise attenuation. Use Table 5: Noise and Land Use Compatibility Matrix as a review
          criterion for all development. Incorporate noise attenuation measures for all projects that
          have noise exposure levels of “conditionally acceptable” and higher; these may include:
                    Facades constructed with substantial insulation;
                    Sound-rated windows in habitable rooms;
                    Sound-rated doors in all exterior entries;
                    Active cancellation;
                    Acoustic baffling of vents for chimneys, fans and gable ends;
                    Ventilation system affording comfort under closed-window conditions; and
                    Insulated doors and roofs meeting the noise-level reduction requirements.
Circulation Element                                                                           Page 43

                                          City of American Canyon
                                 TABLE 5:
                 NOISE AND LAND USE COMPATIBILITY MATRIX
Circulation Element                                          Page 44
                                                               City of American Canyon
   5.4 Noise impacts to existing buildings. Notify property owners who seek building permits
         for new construction or substantial alterations for noise-sensitive uses that may be
         located within DNL 65 dB or higher as a result of projected traffic. In addition to
         notification, provide information on methods for attenuating noise through interior and
         exterior insulation strategies (e.g. windows size, orientation, and insulation, facade
         insulation, baffling, , barriers, and others) and available resources (e.g., National Council
         of Acoustical Consultants, Associated General Contractors of California, etc.).
   5.5 Light pollution. In order to reduce light and glare, ensure that lighting associated with
         new development or facilities (including street lighting, recreational facilities, and
         parking) is designed using City engineering standards and/or Best Management
         Practices to prevent artificial lighting from illuminating adjacent private property in
         residential neighborhoods and/or natural areas. If isolated areas are identified as having
         excessive spillover post construction, specific mitigations shall be implemented, e.g.,
         installation of glare shields.
   5.6 Archaeological preservation. Ensure that improvements outlined in the Circulation
         Element are implemented in a manner that is sensitive to archaeological resources that
         may be located where improvements are planned. At the time that detailed alignments of
         proposed improvements are finalized, archaeological resources maps should be
         consulted. In the event that archaeological resources are encountered during
         construction, require that grading activity in the immediate area cease until a qualified
         archaeologist can evaluate the resource. If the resource is determined to be historically
         or culturally significant, formulate and implement appropriate avoidance and/or
         mitigation measures.
   5.7 Seismic activity. Ensure that all proposed street improvements located within an
         Alquist-Priolo fault zone (shown in EIR Figure 3.10-2) are designed with adequate
         seismic considerations. In these areas, require that a soils engineering and geologic-
         seismic analysis be prepared by a California-registered engineer or engineering
Circulation Element                                                                             Page 45
                                                               City of American Canyon
         geologist, and ensure that new roadways and street improvements are sited, designed,
         and constructed in accordance with applicable provisions of the Uniform Building Code
         (Title 24 of the California Code of Regulations) and other relevant professional
         standards to minimize or prevent damage or loss and to minimize the risk to public
         safety.
   5.8 Landslide activity. Ensure that all proposed street improvements located within a
         landslide risk zone (shown in EIR Figure 3.10-2) are designed with adequate structural
         considerations. In these areas, require that a soils engineering and analysis be prepared
         by a California-registered engineer or engineering geologist, and ensure that new
         roadways and street improvements are sited, designed, and constructed in a manner that
         will not increase the hazard (e.g. avoiding concentration of water, maintaining slope
         bases, and maintaining vegetative cover, and avoiding steepening of slopes).
   5.9 Identify and protect nesting habitat. Projects on sites with nesting bird habitat
         proposing to commence construction or other ground-disturbing activities during the
         typical nesting season (February through mid-September) shall be required to conduct a
         survey by a qualified biologist no more than 10 days prior to the start of disturbance
         activities. If nests are found, no-disturbance buffers around active nests shall be
         established as follows until the breeding season has ended or until a qualified biologist
         determines that the birds have fledged and are no longer dependent on the nest for
         survival;
             250 feet for non-listed bird species;
             500 feet for migratory bird species; and
             One-half mile for listed species and fully protected species.
Circulation Element                                                                           Page 46

~                                                                                "
                                                                                 ,
                                                                                          ,
                                                                                          "
                                                                                    I\~' . , .~
                                                              ...'
, -',
                 I                                                        I'
                   .'.;-
                         ":-                                                       , ',', ' " ',tJ,',' ",)
            .'
                                                                             , i 1C-'ENCR' At ,P, 7~
                                                                   'Utilities'Elemen't
                                              " ~,-
           -,                                   ~.
                                                                     '-.'J
, I
                                                                                                             !1
                                         'I
       -I
                                                                                                          '.\.
                    "'¡/                                                                                    .--;,1
               I
                             .11.             -¡ \
                                            J '
                                  !:' _,.-1
                                                   I,                                           .,
                                                                                                      I '
                                               .:' .
                                                         l
      '-1'
                                                                                   J."
                                      .-t-
                   1\
                                                      "\
           1/ "
                                                           I'
                                                                                            1'"

                                                                5.0 UTILITES ELEMENT
STA TUTORY REOUIREMENTS
In addition to the seven mandatory elements, other optional elements may be
included in a City's General Plan, The California Government Code Section 65303
states:
        The General Plan may include any other elements or address any other
        subfects which, in the fudgnient of the legislative body, relate to the physical
        development of the county or city.
American Canyon's Utilities Element is just such an optional chapter. Once
adopted, ths element will have the same legal status as any of the mandatory
elements. Additionally, other state requirements pertaining to the mandatory
elements, such as internal consistency, also apply to the optional element.
        THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                                          5-1
                                                                  5.0 UTILITIES ELEMENT
OPPORTUITIES AND CONSTRAINTS (iSSUES)
1, The City does not currently have sufficient annual water entitlements to supply
       all proposed future development, without supplemental water from other
       sources.
2. Water delivery restrictions from the NBA Aqueduct wil further restrict the
       City's ability to supply peak (maximum day) demands during summer months.
3. The City water treatment plant is currently near capacity, and must be expanded
       to serve growth.
4. Reclaimed wastewater could be utilized to satisfy a portion of the City's
       water demands.
5. Groundwater (underlying American Canyon or developed cooperatively with
       Napa and/or Vallejo) and purchase and transfer of water entitlements offer
        opportunities for American Canyon to meet its future water supply needs.
6. Adequate storm drainage and flood control facilities are necessary. It is desirable
        to utilize the 100-year flood standard when upgrading existing flood control
        facilties and building new ones.
7. Flood control and drainage plans adequate to protect existing and proposed
        development areas should be developed and coordinated with local and
        regional agencies when planning for flood control.
8. Planning and design standards for storm drainage and flood control
        improvements should be developed. The standards should include the current
        requirements for new development to mitigate for increased runoff peak
        discharges by providing additional capacity through channel improvements, or
        detention storage to keep future peak discharges at current levels.
9. A comprehensive Storm Drainage Master Plan for the planning area should
        be developed.
10. All     storm drainage facilities in the City of American Canyon should be upgraded
        and maintained appropriately.
11. Uniproved creek water courses with steep slopes may increase high velocity
     , flow and subsequently erosion and siltation problems.
12. Future development within the City of American Canyon would result in
        significantly increased wastewater flows potentially exceeding American
        Canyon's currently allocated share of disposal capacity in the Soscol treatment
        facility within the next few years.
13. In order to treat and dispose of future wastewater flows anticipated from
        proposed future development, the City of American Canyon must either
            THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                                                5-2
                                                                 ,5.0 UTILITES ELEMENT
    upgrade the City's existing wastewater treatment facilities, finalize an agreement
    with Vallejo Sanitation area Flood Control District or pursue other options.
14. Reclaimed wastewater could be utilzed to supply a portiõn of the City's water
    demands.
15. The life span, availability and environmental safety of the present system of
    primary solid waste removal (e.g., landfils for disposing of waste) are critical
    issues in this region as well as around the country. Currently approximately
    90 percent of solid waste in the State of California is disposed of in landfils.
16. The State Legislature, through the California Integrated Waste Management
    Board Act of 1989, mandates that all California Cities and Counties prepare
    Source Reduction and Recycling Elements and Household Hazardous Waste
    Elements (SRRE and HHE). The primary function of the SRRE and HH is
    to establish a local plan to reduce solid waste generation and disposal through
    source reduction, recycling and composting. The Act requires that each County
    and City remove from disposal 25 percent of waste generated by the year 1995
    and 50 percent by the year 2000.
17. Implementation of the solid waste management programs wil require
    commitment of staff and funding to the programs,
        THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                                           5-3

                                                              5.0 UTILITIES ELEMENT
OVERVIEW OF UTLITIES POLICIES
The policies within this Element address the following:
1. Ensuring that development and population growth does not exceed available
    water supply and utility services.
2. Ensuring the quality of the City's water supply,
3. Ensuring that facilities capable of meeting existing and future peak demands,
    including fire flow requirements, are provided and maintained.
4. Minimizing water consumption rates.
5. Maintaining adequate utility services.
6. Ensuring that funding for utilty services is borne by those who benefit.
7. Ensuring that adequate storm drainage and flood control facilities are provided
    to protect life and property from flood hazards.
8. Ensuring that the costs of improvements to the storm drainage and flood
    control system are borne by those who benefit.
9. Enhancing the quality of runoff and surface water.
10. Ensuring that adequate wastewater collection and treatment facilities are
    provided to service both existing and future development.
11. Ensuring that the costs of wastewater collection and treatment facilities are
    borne by those who benefit.
12. Pursuing public funding support for the expansion and upgrading of the
    wastewater collection and treatment system when these improvements wil
    provide substantial public benefit to the City,
13. Ensuring that all wastewater collection and treatment facilities are operated to
    maximize public safety,
14. Ensuring compliance with all applicable solid waste regulations and rules while
    remaining cost efficient.
15. Pursuing methods of educating the public about solid waste recyclig and reuse.
        THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                                           5-4
                                                                                 5.0 UTILITIES ELEMENT
,
   GOALS, OBJECTVES AND POLICIES
   WATER RESOURCES
   Goal
   5 It shall be the goal of American Canyon to establish and maintain a secure
                     water supply and treatment, distribution and storage system to serve the
                     land uses proposed under the general plan.
   Objective
   5.1 Confirm reliabilty of NBA water supply.
   Policies
   5.1.1 Work with other NBA users to resolve fishery issues that have resulted in
                     the imposition of pumping restrictions. (15,3)
   5.1.2 Investigate physical options (e.g" additional screening capacity) to increase
                     pumping capacity. (I                   5.3)
  5.1.3 Investigate opportunities for additional sharing of NBA supply among
                     NBA users. (I 5.3)
  5.1.4 Pursue acquisition of additional entitlements from DWR. (I                       5.3)
  5.1.5 Maximize use of unscheduled water available through the NBA. (I                         5.3)
  Objective
  5.2 Obtain additional water supply sources as necessary to supplement the
                    NBA supply and serve anticipated growth under the proposed land
                    use plan.
  Policies
  5.2.1 Investigate feasibility of development of program of conjunctive use of
                    NBA supply and local groundwater in American Canyon. ' (I            5.3)
  5.2.2 Participate in program with other NBA users to obtain supplemental
                    surface water through a water transfer from another area (e.g., Sacramento
                   River water rights holders). (15.3)
  5.2.3 Participate in investigation with Napa County of feasibility of
                    development of groundwater conjunctive use program in the county.
                   (15,3)
  5,2.4 Promote water conservation and wastewater reclamation as additional
                   water supply sources. (I 5,2, 15.16 through I 5.23)
               THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                                                                             5-5
                                                                                                5.0 UTILITIES ELEMENT
5.2.5             In the event that suffcient capacity is not available to serve a proposed
                  project, the City shall not approve the project until additional capacity or                          "
                  adequate mitigation is provided. (I
                                                                                5.11 and 15.12)
Objective
5.3 Increase abilty to share water supply with Napa and Vallejo during
                  emergencies and extended periods of restriction of the NBA supply.
Policies
5.3.1 Investigate feasibilty and cost-effectiveness of increasing storage of raw
                  water in local area. (l 5.3)
5.3.2 Investigate benefits and costs of increasing capacity of interconnection
                  with Napa. (I              5.3)
5.3.3 Evaluate benefits and costs of constructing an interconnection with
                  Vallejo. (I 5.1 and I 5.3)
Objective
5.4 Establish a water management program to promote water conservation
                   and wastewater reuse.
Policies
5.4.1 Promote the use of water-saving plumbing fixtures and water-saving
                   landscaping. (I 5.2, I 5.16 through I                   5,23)
                                                                                                                   5,8,
5.4.2 Develop a rate schedule structured to promote water conservation. (I
                   15,9, and 15.21)
5.4.3 Conduct a leak detection survey to identify water lost within the
                   distribution system. (I 5.22)
5.4.4 Investigate potential uses for and costs of supplying reclaimed wastewater.
                   (I 5.1 and I 5.23)
5.4.5 Require that development projects consider the appropriateness of the
                   channelization of storm water runoff to facilitate its possible capture and
                   re-use for on-site irrigation and other purposes. (I 5.2)
Goal
SA It shall be the goal of American Canyon to provide a high quality water
                   supply to American Canyon water users.
Objective
5.5 Select supplemental raw water supply sources with water quality as a
                   high priority.
               THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                                                                           5-6
                                                                               5.0 UTILITIES ELEMENT
.
   Policy
   5.5.1     Include water quality considerations in selection of supplemental supplies.
              (I 5,1 and I5.3)
   Objective
   5.6 Ensure that water treatment plant meets applicable drinking
             water standards.
   Policies
   5.6.1 Conduct periodic comparisons of drinkig water standards and produced
             water quality. (I             5.1)
  5.6.2 Upgrade treatment facilities as necessary to meet applicable standards.
             (I  5.1, 15.4, and 15.14)
  Goal
  5B It shall be the goal of American Canyon to develop and maintain a water
             treatment and distribution system that meets generally accepted
             operational criteria for service to provide daily and peak demands,
             including fire flow requirements, to meet present and future needs in a
             timely and cost effective manner.
  Objective
  5.7 Expand water treatment, storage and distribution facilities as necessary to
             meet increasing water demands.
  Policies
  5.7.1 Provide for the construction of upgraded and expanded, distribution,
            storage, and treatment facilities to support existing and new development.
            (I 5.1, I 5.2, I 5.4, and I S,14)
  5.7.2 Provide for the maintenance and replacement of existing distribution,
            storage, and treatment facilities as necessary. (I 5.1, 15.4 and 15.14)
  5.7.3 Require adequate water supply, distribution, storage, and treatment
            facilties to be operational prior to the issuance of certificates of occupancy.
            (I 5.2 and 15.11)
  5,7.4 Require all new development to be served from an approved domestic
            water supply. (I              5,2, I 5,11, 15.12, and 15.13)
  5.7.5 Monitor the demands on the water system and, as necessary, manage
            development to mitigate impacts and/or facilitate improvements. (I                  5.10,
            15,12, and I 5.13)
          THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                                                                     5-7
                                                                               5.0 UTILITIES ELEMENT
5.7.6 Impose limits on new water hookups, if necessary, to comply with
          avaiable domestic water supply. (15.11 I 5.12, and I 5,13)
5.7.7 Develop a program of public education to encourage water
          conservation practices. (I                5.19)
5.7.8     Designate, preserve, and acquire land if necessary for siting future water
          supply, storage and distrbution facilties in accordance with the policies of
          the Natual and Historic/Cultual Resources Element. (I 5.1 and I 5.15)
5.7.9     Complete regular updates of water master plan and related capital
          improvement program to maintain current plan for expansion and
          improvement of distribution and storage facilties. (I 5.1, 15.4, and 15.14)
5.7.10    Develop a set of operational criteria and compare with performance of
          current facilities. (I 5,10)
5.7.11    Expand water treatment plant to meet the projected demands shown in
          Figue 5-5 of the Utilties Appendix. (I S.14)
Objective
5.8 Ensure that the costs of improvements to the water supply, distribution,
          storage, and treatment system are borne by those who benefit.
Policies
5.8.1 Require improvements to the existing water supply, distribution, storage,
          and treatment facilities necessitated by a new development proposal be
          borne by the project proponent (in proportion to benefit); either through
          the payment of fees, or by the actual construction of the improvements.
          (I5.2, I 5.8, and I 5.9)
5.8.2 Review the development charge, acquisition of service charge, and
          monthly service charges on an annual basis to ensure that adequate
          amounts of fees and charges are collected to fund the operation,
          maintenance and repair of existing facilities and to construct new facilities.
          (I 5.6, I 5.8, and 15.9)
5.8.3 Apply'collected developer fees, acquisition of service fees, and monthly
          service charges associated with domestic water service toward the
          operation, maintenance, repair, and replacement of existing facilities and
          for the construction of new facilties. (I           5,6, 15.8, and 15,9)
Objective
5.9 Provide public funding support for expansion and upgrading of the water
          supply, distribution, storage, and treatment system when these
          improvements wil benefit the City.
         THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                                                          5-8
"4
                                                                                   5.0 UTILITIES ELEMENT
--1
     Policy
     5.9.1     Use public funding sources, when appropriate and available, to fund
               futue water supply, distribution, storage, and treatment improvements
               which benefit the City. Pursue sources of funds, which may include, but
               not be limited to: revenue bonds, lease purchase agreements, and State
                and Federal grants and loans. (l 5.5 and 15.7)
    FLOOD CONTOL AND STORM DRAINAGE
     Goal
    5C Establish and maintain adequate planning, construction, maintenance,
               and funding for storm drain and flood control facilities to support
               permitted land uses and preserve the public safety; upgrading existing
               deficient systems and expanding, where necessary, to accommodate new
               permitted development and to protect existing development in the City.
               Pursue public funding sources (i.e., grants) to reduce fiscal impacts of
               implementation to the City.
    Objective
    5.10 Ensure that adequate storm drain and flood control facilties are provided
               and properly maintained to protect life and property from flood hazards.
    Policies
    5.10.1    Provide for the maintenance of existing public storm drains and flood
              control facilities and for the construction of upgraded and expanded storm
              drain and flood control facilities, where necessary, to protect existing and
              accommodate new permitted development. (I                    5.24, 15,26, I 5.29, and I 5.38)
    5.10.2    Provide for a City Drainage Master Plan study in order to identify any
              deficiencies and needed improvements in the drainage system. (I S.24 and
              15.38)
    5.10.3    Require that adequate storm drain and flood control facilities be
              constructed coincident with new development. (I 5,24, 15,25, and I 5.33)
    5.10.4    Limit new development, when necessary, until adequate flood control
              facilities are constructed to protect existing development and
              accommodate the new development runoff, or until mitigation is
              provided. (I 5.24, I 5.25, I 5.32, and 15.33)
    5.10.5    Review development proposals for projects within the City's Sphere of
              Infuence and encourage the county to disapprove any project which
              cannot be accommodated with an adequate drainage system, (I                        5,34)
            THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                                                                       5-9
                                                                                                       '.
                                                                                 5.0 UTILITIES ELEMENT
                                                                                                         ,
5.10.6 Implement flood control improvements in a manner which maintain
         the integrity of significant riparian and other environmental habitats in
         accordance with Natural/Cultural Resources Element. (I                       5.25)
5.10.7 Consider, though the plannng and design process, designs that provide
         for public utilties within the street right-of-way or some other easily
         accessed location. (I 5.25)
5.10.8 Continue to participate in the National Flood Inurance Program. To ths
         end, the City shall ensure that local regulations are in full compliance
         with standards adopted by the Federal Emergency Management Agency.
         (l 5.25 and I 5.37)
5.10.9 Require new residential development, including mobile homes, be
         constructed so that the lowest floor is at least 12 inches above the 100-year
         level for storm drainage. (I 5.25 and I 5.37)
5.10.10 Require nonresidential development be anchored and flood-proofed to
         prevent damage from the 100-year flood or, alternatively, elevated to at
         least 12 inches above the 100-year flood leveL. (l 5.25 and I 5.37)
5.10.11 Require existing development to comply with policies 1.9 and 1.10 when
         improvements are made costing at least 50 percent of the estimated
         current market value of the structure before the improvements. (I 5.25 and
         15,37)
5.10.12 Require that new development be de'signed to prevent the diversion of
         floodwaters onto neighboring parcels. (I                          5.25)
5.10.13 Clear flood control channels routinely of vegetation and debris which
         could impede stormwater flows, while protecting significant riparian
         vegetation. (I 5.25 and I 5.28)
5.10.14 Cooperate with area agencies in the maintenance and improvement of
         levees and drainage channels. (I 5.35 and I                       5.36)
5.10.15 Support state and federal legislation which provides funding for the
         construction of flood control improvements in urbanized areas. (I
                                                                                                5.29)
5.10.16 Discourage uses that promote the erosion or structural deterioration of
         levees. (I 5,25)
5.10.17 Impose appropriate conditions on grading projects performed during the
         rainy season to ensure that silt is not conveyed to storm drainage systems.
         (I  5.25)
5.10.18 Require that development projects maximize the use of pervious surface
         materials (grass, ground cover, and other) that minimize storm water
         runoff. (I 5.39)
       THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                                                                 5-10
                                                                              5.0 UTILITIES ELEMENT
r,
       Objective
~ "1   5.11 Ensure that the costs of improvements to the storm drain and flood
                    control system are borne by those who benefit.
       Policies
       5.11.        Require improvements to existing storm drain and flood control facilities
                    necessitated by a new development proposal be borne by the project
:                   proponent; either through the payment of fees, or by the actual
                    construction of the improvements in accordance with State Nexus
                    Legislation. (I      5.30, I 5.31, and I 5.33)
       5.11.2       Consider allowing the formation of benefit assessment districts and
                    community facilities districts, where appropriate, in which those who
~1
                    benefit from specific local storm drain and flood control improvements
                    pay a pro rata share of the costs. (I 5.27)
- .
    ¡ 5.11.3        Collect adequate amounts of fees and charges to fund the
                    operation/maintenance of existing facilities and to construct new facilities.
                    (I 5.28, I 5.30, and 15.31)
, '
    , URBAN RUNOFF              WATER QUALITY
      The following goals, objectives and policies are recommended for the City of
      American Canyon and build upon those sections of the Natural and
      Historic/Cultural Resources Element that pertain to water quality (see objectives
      8.8 and 8.9).
      Goal
      50 Maintain the quality of surface and subsurface water resources within the
                   City of American Canyon and its Planning Area.
      Objective
      5.12 Enhance runoff water quality upstream of points of discharge to
                   channelized drainage courses.
      Policies
      5.12.1       Capitalize on opportunities to reduce pollutant loading through passive
                   treatment systems such as vegetated fiter strips, grass swales, and
                   infiltration/ sedimentation areas in sui table open space areas, and
                   incorporated into landscaping adjacent to parking lots and streets. (I8.15,
                   18,24, and I 5.39)
      5.12.2       Incorporate features in new drainage detention facilities which enhance
                   the water quality of discharges from the facility. (I 8,24 and 15.40)
                  THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                                                               5-11

                                                                                                ",-,
                                                                                                   I
                                                                                                , j
                                                                           5.0 UTIUTIES ELEMENT
5.12.3    Minimize impervious area that is directly connected to piped or
          channelized drainage systems in new development. (I 8.24, 1 5.39, and 15,40)
Objective
5.13 Prevent degradation of surface water quality due to constrction activities
          and industrial operations.
                                                                                                . ,
Policies
5.13.1    Require that development activities comply with the State General Storm
          Water Permit For Construction Activities with measures that protect
          surface water quality to the maximum extent practicable. (I 5,41, 1 5,42, and
          18.27)
5.13.2    Encourage owners of industrial operations to obtain coverage under the
          State Storm Water Permit For Industrial Activities, and to comply with
          provisions of the Permit, through notification and educational activities.
          (l 5.43)
WASTEWATER DISPOSAL
Goal
5E It shall be the goal of the City of American Canyon to establish and
          maintain adequate planning, construction, maintenance, and funding for
          wastewater collection and treatment facilities to support land uses;
          upgrading existing deficient systems, and expanding, where necessary, in
          the City's service area.
Objective
5.14 Provide a system of wastewater collection and treatment facilities which
          wil adequately convey and treat wastewater generated by existing and
          future development in the City's service area.
Policies
5.14.1    Provide for the improvement of wastewater collection and treatment
          facilities where existing systems are deficient. (I 5.45, I 5.46, and 15.47)
5.14.2    Provide for the construction of upgraded and expanded wast~water
          collection and treatment improvements to support existing and new
          development. (I                5.44, I  5.46, I 5,47, and 15.58)
5.14.3    Provide for the maintenance of existing wastewater collection and
          treatment facilities. (I 5.46, 15.49, and I                5.50)
5.14.4    Require new development to connect to a master planned sanitary sewer
          system. Where construction of master planned facilities is not feasible,
         THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                                                              5-12
1   J
                                                                                                               5.0 UTILITES ELEMENT
.-1
                  and where the future construction of master planned facilties wil not be
                  jeopardized, the City Council may permit the construction of interim
, .1              facilties sufficient to serve the present and short-term future needs. (15.45,
                  15.46 and 15.54)
. !
       5.14.5     Require all new development to secure sewer capacity rights prior to or at
                  the time buiding permits are issued. (I 5.55, 15.56, and I 5.57)
, i
       5.14.6     Establish and maintain a record of the capacity and utilzation of
                 wastewater collection and treatment facilties serving the City of American
                 Canyon, monitoring impacts and demands of new development, and, as
. \              necessary, managing development to mitigate impacts and/or facilitate
                 improvements. (I                  5.53)
. ,    5.14.7    Impose limts and prioritize sewer connections, if necessary, to comply
                 with available treatment capacity. (I 5.45 and 15.47)
. ,    5.14.8    Consider the use of innovative wastewater treatment systems that are
                 environmentally and economically efficient, such as the artificial
                 marshland wastewater treatment system. (I                                      5.44, I 5.46, 15.47, and I 5.58)
      Objective
      5.15 Ensure that wastewater collection and treatment facilities are upgraded
                 and installed in a timely manner to meet usage requirements and
                maximize cost effciency.
      Policies
      5.15.1    Require that wastewater collection and treatment facilities be installed and
                available for use prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. (I                                        5.54)
      5.15.2    Continue to plan for and coordinate the implementation of infrastructure
                requirements to meet development demands. (1'.44, I 5.45, and 15.47)
      5.15.3    Update the City's Wastewater Master Plan as necessary to accurately
                determine which collection and treatment facilities wil be needed to serve
                present and future growth in the city. (I                                 5.45)
      5.15.4    Implement a five-year capital improvement program to upgrade and
                maintain the City's wastewater collection system. (I                                        5.47)
      5.15.5   Review development proposals for projects within the City's Sphere of
               Influence and encourage the County to disapprove any project which
               cannot be served with adequate public wastewater collection and
               treatment facilities. (I                 5.55)
              THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                                                                       5-13
                                                                                                    I
                                                                                                 , I
                                                                           5.0 UTILITIES ELEMENT
Objective
5.16 Ensure that the costs of infastructure improvements are borne by those
          who benefit.
Policies
5.16.1    Require that the cost for improvements to the existing wastewater
          collection and treatment facilities necessitated by a new development                  , ,
          proposal be borne by the project proponent in proportion to benefit; either
          through the payment of fees, or by the actual construction of the                      , )
          improvements. (I                  5.51 and I   5.52)
5.16.2    Review sewer connection fees, capacity fees, and monthly service charges,
          as necessary, to ensure that adequate amounts of fees and charges are
          collected to fund the operation/maintenance of existing facilities and to
          construct new facilities. (I 5.51 and I 5.52)
5.16.3    Apply collected developer fees, sewer connection fees, capacity fees, and
          monthly service charges associated with wastewater collection and
          treatment services toward the operation, maintenance, repair, and
          replacement of existing facilties, and for the construction of new facilties.
          (I 5,47 and 15.54)
Objective
5.17 Provide public funding support for expansion and upgrading of the
          wastewater collection and treatment system when these improvements
          wil provide substantial public benefit to the City.
Policy
5.17.1    Pursue public funding of wastewater collection and treatment
          improvements which benefit the City. (I                  5,48)
Objective
5.18 Ensure that all wastewater collection and treatment facilities are operated
          to maximize public safety.
Policies
5.18.1    Provide for the monitoring of users and generators of toxic or potentially
          hazardous substances to prevent contamination of water and wastewater.
          (I 5,46)
5.18.2    Require, when necessary, pre-treatment of wastewater from industrial
          sources prior to City treatment facilities. (I             5,46)
        THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                                                              5-14
=i
                                                                          5.0 UTILITIES ELEMENT
     SOLID  WASTE
     Goal
     SF         To provide for the collection and disposal of solid waste while
                maximizing source reduction, recycling and composting, within
" ,
                economic constraints.
     Objective
. i  5.19 Develop and implement a plan that provides a level of service that wil
                comply with all applicable solid waste regulations and rules while
                remaining cost efficient.
. I
     Policies
,,
     5.19.1    Evaluate and consider cityide mandatory garbage collection and recycling
               programs. (I 5.50 and 15,63)
    5.19.2     Monitor the operations of garbage collection contractors to ensure that
, i
               service levels are adequate. (I            5.59)
    5.19.3     Coordinate with the County of Napa concerning the City's continuing use
, i            of the American Canyon Sanitary Landfil (I           5.65)
    5,19.4     Maintain close contact with the South Napa Waste Management
               Authority concerning completion, use, and maintenance of the transfer
               facility. (I       5.65)
    5.19.5     Continue to evaluate options for solid waste disposaL. (1 5.65)
    Goal
    5G        To achieve maximum public participation in source reduction, recycling,
              and composting activities through outreach programs in Napa County.
    Objective
    5.20 Study and actively pursue methods of educating the public of solid waste
              recycling and reuse, including source separation, with the goal of reducing
              its solid waste generation by 25 percent by 1995 and 50 percent by the year
              2000, established by the California Integrated Waste Management Act..
    Policies
    5.20.1    Develop, in coordination with County, public information and education
              programs to complement source reduction, recycling and composting
              efforts and participation. (I 5.61, 15,64, and 15,62)
    5.20.2    Continue to operate and expand all information and education programs
              through the year 2000. (I 5,61 and I 5.64)
            THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                                                          5-15
                                                                                     'ï
                                                                                        I
                                                             5.0 UTILITIES ELEMENT " J
IMPLEMENTATION PROGRAS
The following programs implement the policies for utilities contained in the          , 1
preceding section of this element. The capital "I" and number preceding each
program are referenced by the policies that they implement.
WATER  RESOURCES
INFRASTRUCTIRE PLAS AND PROGRAS
15.1     Prepare an updated comprehensive Water Master Plan to define existing       , f
         conditions and reflect signiicant changes in the planned land use withn
         the City. Capital improvement plans and prioritization schedules shall
         also be prepared. The utility systems shall be updated accordingly. City    ,j
         maitenance and replacement actions shall be identified.                     . ,
         Responsibilty: City of American Canyon Public Works Department
         Funding Source: City of American Canyon General Fund, Development
                                                                                     .,
                             Impact Fees and/or any other City approved funds
         Schedule: Update every five (5) years or as needed,
                             funding permitted
15.2 Prepare water system improvement standards to set forth minimum
         requirements for the plannng, design, construction and maintenance of
         water system improvements.
         Responsibilty: City of American Canyon Public Works Department
         Funding Source: City of American Canyon General Fund, Development
                           Impact Fees and/or any other City approved fuds
         Schedule: Update every five (5) years or as needed,
                           funding permitted
15.3 Develop additional, secure water supplies sufficient to reliably supply
         long-term needs of the City by developing groundwater supplies or by
         securing additional water entitlements.
         Responsibilty: City of American Canyon Public Works Department
         Funding Source: City of American Canyon General Fund, Development
                            Impact Fees and/or any other City approved funds
         Schedule: Update every five (5) years or as needed,
                            funding permitted
FINANCE OF MAINENANCE AND CONSTRUCTION OF INFRASTRUCTURE
15.4 Prepare a new five-year Capital Improvement program for adoption and
         prioritization by the City CounciL.
       THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                                         5-16

'1
                                                                      5.0 UTILITIES ELEMENT
-,
               Responsibilty: City of American Canyon Public Works Department
              Funding Source: City of American Canyon General Fund, Development
                                  Impact Fees and/or any other City approved funds
              Schedule:           Every five (5) years or as funding permits
     15.5     Allow for the formation of benefit assessment districts and/or undertake
              muncipal bonding programs for maintenance and construction of water
              systems and facities.
              Responsibilty: City of American Canyon Public Works Department and
                                 City Council
, 1
              Funding Source: Funds from the creation of benefit assessment districts
                                 and/or municipal funding program
              Schedule: As needed or as funding is available
     15.6     Review and update water rates for operation and maintenance of the
              existing water system.
, ,
              Responsibilty: City of American Canyon Public Works Department
              Funding Source: City of American Canyon General Funds, water revenue
                                 rates and/or any other City approved funds
              Schedule: Annually or as needed
    15.7 Continue to solicit funds for the improvement study, design, construction
              and maintenance of the City's public infrastructure system.
              Responsibilty: City of American Canyon Public Works Department
             Funding Source: State and Federal Agencies
              Schedule: As necessary or as funding permits
    FEES AND SERVICE CHAGES
    I5.8 Review and amend, as necessary and appropriate, water system impact
             fees collected from new development for the construction of new facilities
             necessitated by the new development.
             Responsibilty: City of American Canyon Public Works Department
             Funding Source: City of American Canyon General Fund, Development
                                Impact Fees, and/or any other City approved funds
             Schedule: Annually, (or as necessary) as funding permitted
    I5.9 Review fees and service charges associated with the City utilties to ensure
             that they are adequate for the purpose collected.
             Responsibilty: City of American Canyon Public Works Department
             Funding Source: City of American Canyon General Fund, Development
                                Impact Fees and/or any other City approved funds
             Schedule: Annually, (or as necessary) as funding permitted
          THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                                              5-17
                                                                                       . i
                                                                                       , J
                                                               5.0 UTILITIES ELEMENT
                                                                                       , ì
ENSURE ADEQUATE INFRASTRUCTURE CAPACITY AN FACILITIES
15.10 Collect and maitain data on the location, capabilty, level of utilization ' ,
         and conditions of water system facilties, The respective departments shall
         advise the Public Works Department as new development applications are
         reviewed by the City regardig the availabilty of service. ' ,
         Responsibilty: City of American Canyon Public Works Department
         Funding Source: City of American Canyon Utility Funds" Development
                           Impact Fees and/or any other City approved funding
                           sources
         Schedule: As development applications are submitted and "Wil
                           Serve" letters at time of tentative map approval
                                                                                       i j
15.11    Construction of the facilities necessary for the connection to a public water
         system, or payment of fees, shall be a condition of approval for all
         discretionary projects in the City. All facilities within the City shall be
         designed and constructed in conformance with the adopted Water Master
         Plan and the standards established by the Engineering Division and Public
         Works Department.
         Responsibilty: City of American Canyon Public Works Department
         Funding Source: Development Impact Fees
         Schedule: As development applications are submitted, or as
                           funding permits
15.12    Continue to monitor projects proposed within the City, Sphere of
         Influence, and Urban Limit Line and coordinate with the County to
         encourage that water system infrastructure demand can be met. In cases
         where adequate water supply or infrastructure is not available, project
         approvals should not be granted until faciity or supply needs are met.
         Responsibilty: City of American Canyon Public Works Department in
                           coordination with appropriate county agencies
         Funding Source: City of American Canyon General funds, Development
                           Impact Fees and/or any other City approved funds
         Schedule: Ongoing as development applications are submitted
15.13    Continue to monitor projects proposed within the City's Sphere of
         Infuence and Urban Limit Line and coordinate with Napa County for
         proper planning to ensure that infrastructure demands can be met.
         Responsibilty: City of American Canyon Public Works Department
         Funding Source: City of American Canyon General Fund, Development
                           Impact Fees and/or any other City approved funds
         Schedule: Ongoing, as development applications are submitted
15.14    Review development plans to determine what water facilities are needed
         to serve the project, as well as existing development. Adequate water
       THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                                         5-18

'-
                                                                                5.0 UTILITIES ELEMENT
, ,
             supply shall be a condition of project approval. Water system facilities
,,
             shall be designed in accordance with the City's Water Master Plan and the
             established standards of the Department of Public Works. Designs that
             provide for easy access to public utilities for maintenance purposes shall
             be encouraged.
~
             Responsibilty: City of American Canyon Public Works Department
             Funding Source: City of American Canyon General Fund, Development
                                            Impact Fees, special assessments, and/or any other City
                                            approved funds
             Schedule:                      Ongoing, as development applications are submitted
     15.15   During the process of preparing an updated Water Master Plan, identify
             the lands needed for future utility facilities. Seek to have the property
             designated for utility use, if appropriate, and commence acquisition of any
             necessary fee titles or easements as required, and as approved by the
             City CounciL.
             Responsibilty:                City of American Canyon Public Works Department in
                                            cooperation with respective utility purveyors
             Funding Source: City of American Canyon General Funds, Development
                                           Impact Fees and/or any other City approved fuds
             Schedule:                     As necessary, funding permitted
    WATER CONSERVATION PROGRA
    15.16   Incorporate the following in the City's Zoning Code:
             a. Requirements for the use of drought-resistant and low-water using
                plan species in site landscape.
            b. Requirements of new uses which consume very high levels of water
                and/or energy to be evaluated               according to the means by which these
                levels can be reduced and, if not possible, their benefit to the City as an
                appropriate use (including public review).
            Responsibilty: City of American Canyon Plannng Department
            Funding Source: City of American Canyon General Funds, Development
                                           Impact Fees and/or any other City approved funding
                                           sources
            Schedule: Within 18 months of the General Plan's adoption or as
                                           funding permits
    15.17   Incorporate State requirements (Government Code Section 66473.1) for the
            use of water efficient fixtures and water-saving design elements in new
            construction.
            Responsibilty: City of American Canyon Planning Department
            Funding Source: City of American Canyon General Funds, Development
                                          Impact Fees and/or any other City approved funds
            Schedule:                     As necessary or as funding permitted
           THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                                                       5-19
                                                                                    ''I
                                                                                        j
                                                              5.0 UTILITIES ELEMENT
                                                                                       1
15.18  Prepare an approved plant list of drought-tolerant and low-water using       "-...
                                                                                        ,
       species for distribution to designers of project landscape plans.
       Responsibility: City of American Canyon Plang Departent
       Funding Source: City of American Canyon General Funds and/or any             ; L
                          other City approved funds
        Schedule: Within 24 months of General Plan adoption or as
                          funding permits
15.19  Contiue public education programs to promote water conservation.
       Responsibilty: City of American Canyon Planning Department in
                          cooperation with other appropriate agencies/ ,1
                          departments
       Funding Source: City of American Canyon General Funds, Development
                          Impact Fees and/or any other City approved funds .'
       Schedule: Ongoing, as funding permits
15.20  Begin audits on all existing City 'owned buildings and properties
       identifying levels of existing water use and potential conservation
       measures.
       Responsibilty: City of American Canyon Public Works Department
       Funding Source: City of American Canyon General Funds, Development
                          Impact fees, and/or any other City-approved funds
       Schedule:          Annually, or as funding is available
15.21  Establish possible rebate programs for property owners who upgrade
       defective plumbing.
       Responsibilty:     City of American Canyon Public Works Department
       Funding Source: State and Federal Funding, and/or the City of American
                          Canyon Water Enterprise Fund and Development
                          Impact Fees
       Schedule: As funding becomes available
15.22  Develop and implement a water conservation program.
       Responsibilty: City of American Canyon Public Works Department in
                          cooperation with responsible water agencies.
       Funding Source: State and Federal Funding, and/or the City of American
                          Canyon Development Impact Fees, and Water
                          Enterprise Fund
       Schedule: Annually, or as funding is available
15.23  Expand the program for the use of reclaimed water for landscape irrigation
       and other non-contact uses. Establish project site and use where condition
       of approval should be used.
      THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                                       5-20
¡;
                                                                 5.0 UTILITIES ELEMENT
 1
             Responsibilty: City of American Canyon Public Works Department
             Funding Source: City of American Canyon General Funds, Development
,i                              Impact Fees and/or any other City approved funds
             Schedule:          Ongoing, as funding is available
-,
    FLOOD CONTROL AND STORM DRAINAGE
    INFRASTRUCTURE PLANS AN PROGRAS
    15.24   Prepare the Storm Drainage Master Plan to evaluate existing conditions
             and to reflect significant changes in the planned land use withn the City.
            Capital improvement plans and prioritization schedules shall also be
            prepared. The utilty systems shall be updated accordingly. City
            maintenance and replacement actions shall be identified.
 i          Responsibilty: City of American Canyon Public Works Department
            Funding Source: City of American Canyon General Fund, Development
                               Impact Fees and/or any other City approved fuds.
            Schedule: Update every five (5) years or as needed, funding
                               permitted
   15.25    Prepare storm drainage and flood control improvement standards to set
            forth minimum requirements for the plannng, design, construction and
            maintenance of storm drainage and flood control improvements.
            Responsibilty: City of American Canyon Public Works Department
            Funding Source: City of American Canyon General Fund, Development
                               Impact Fees and/or any other City approved funds
            Schedule: Update every five (5) years or as needed, funding
                               permitted
   FINANCE OF MAINENANCE AND CONSTRUCTION OF INFRASTRUCTURE
   15.26    Prepare a new five-year Capital Improvement program for adoption and
            prioritization by the City CounciL.
            Responsibilty: City of American Canyon Public Works Department
            Funding Source: City of American Canyon General Fund, Development
                               Impact Fees and/or any other City approved funds
            Schedule: Every five (5) years or as funding permits
   15.27   Allow for the formation of benefit assessment districts and/or undertake
           municipal bonding programs for maintenance and construction of storm
           drain and flood control systems and facilities,
           Responsibilty: City of American Canyon Public Works Department and
                               City Council
           Funding Source: Funds from the creation of benefit assessment districts
                               and/or municipal funding program
           Schedule: As needed or as funding is available
          THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                                            5-21

                                                                                     -I
                                                                                     , J
                                                              5,0 UTILITIE5 ELEMENT
                                                                                     , 1
                                                                                     .i !
15.28   Consider adopting storm water rates for operation and maintenance of the
                                                                                     -.
        existig drainage system.
        Responsibilty: City of American Canyon Public Works Department
        Funding Source: City of American Canyon General Funds, storm revenue         , ;
                           rates and/or any other City approved fuds
        Schedule: Evaluate within 24 months of the General Plan's                    , 1
                           adoption or as fuding is available                        , ,
15.29   Contiue to solicit funds for the improvement study, design, construction
        and maintenance of the City's public infrastructure system.
        Responsibilty: City of American Canyon Public Works Department               . ,
        Funding Source: State and Federal Agencies
        Schedule: As necessary or as fuding permits
                                                                                     ,f
FEES AND SERVICE CHAGES
                                                                                     ,,
15.30   Review and amend as necessary and appropriate, drainage impact fees
        collected from new development for the construction of new facilties         , .i
        necessitated by the new development.
        Responsibilty: City of American Canyon Public Works Department
        Funding Source: City of American Canyon General Fund, Development
                           Impact Fees, and/ or any other City approved fuds
        Schedule: Anually, (or as necessary) as funding permitted
15.31   Review fees and service charges associated with the City utilties to ensure
        that they are adequate for the purpose collected.
        Responsibilty: City of American Canyon Public Works Department
        Funding Source: City of American Canyon General Fund, Development
                           Impact Fees and/or any other City approved funds
        Schedule: Annually, (or as necessary) as funding permitted
ENSURE ADEQUATE INFRASTRUCTURE CAPACITY AND FACILITIES
15.32   Collect and maintain data on the location, capability, level of utilzation
        and conditions of storm drainage and flood control facilities. The
        respective departments shall advise the Public Works Department as new
        development applications are reviewed by the City regarding the
        availabilty of service.
        In the event that suffcient capacity is not available to serve a proposed
        project, the City shall not approve the project until additional capacity or
        adequate mitigation is provided.
      THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                                        5-22
~
                                                                   5.0 UTILITIES ELEMENT
"
            Responsibilty: City of American Canyon Public Works Department
            Funding Source: City, of American Canyon Utilty Funds, Development
                               Impact Fees and/or any other City approved funding
                               sources
            Schedule:          As development applications are submitted and "Wil
                               Serve" letters at time of tentative map approval
    15.33   Construction of the facilties necessary for the connection to a public
            drainage system, or payment of fees, shall be a condition of approval for all
            discretionary projects in the City. All facilities withn the City shall be
            designed and constructed in conformance with the adopted Storm
            Drainage Master Plan and the standards established by the Engineering
            Division and Public Works Department.
            Responsibilty: City of American Canyon Public Works Department
            Funding Source: Development Impact Fees
            Schedule: As development applications are submitted, or as
                              funding permits
    15.34   Continue to monitor projects proposed within the City's Sphere of
            Influence and Urban Limit Line to coordinate with the County to
            encourage denial of any project in which storm drainage and flood control
           infrastructure demands cannot be met.
           Responsibilty: City of American Canyon Public Works Department in
                              coordination with appropriate county agencies
           Funding Source: City of American Canyon General funds, Development
                              Impact Fees and/or any other City approved funds
           Schedule: Ongoing, as development applications are submitted
  15.35    Continue to monitor projects proposed within the City's Sphere of
           Influence and Urban Limit Line and coordinate with Napa County for
           proper plannng to ensure that infrastructure demands can be met.
           Responsibilty: City of American Canyon Public Works Department
           Funding Source: City of American Canyon General Fund, Development
                              Impact Fees and/or any other City approved funds
           Schedule: Ongoing as development applications are submitted
  I  5.36  Review development plans and coordinate with Napa County, as needed,
           to determine what storm drain facilities are needed to protect the project,
           as well as existing development. Adequate flood protection shall be a
           condition of project approval. Storm drain facilities shall be designed in
           accordance with the City's Storm Drainage Master Plan and the established
           standards of the Department of Public Works designs that provide for easy
           access to public utilities for maintenance purposes shall be encouraged.
          THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                                            5-23
                                                                     5.0 UTILITIES ELEMENT
              Responsibilty: City of American Canyon Public Works Department
              Funding Source: City of American Canyon General Fund, Development
                                  Impact Fees, storm drain construction fund, special      - 1
                                  assessments, and/or any other City approved fuds         . ;
              Schedule:           Ongoing, as development applications are submitted
15.37         Structues intended for human occupancy located in the IOO-year flood
              plain shall be reviewed for conformance with local, State and Federal
              (FEMA) requirements.
              Responsibilty: City of American Canyon Public Works Department
              Funding Source: City of American Canyon General Fund, Development
                                  Impact Fees and/ or any other City approved fuds
              Schedule: Ongoing, as development application of such nature are
                                  submitted
15.38         During the process of preparing the Storm Drainage Master Plan, identiy
              the lands needed for future utility facilities. Seek to have the property
              designated for utility use, if appropriate, and commence acquisition of any  l i
              necessary fee titles or easements as required, and as approved by the City
              CounciL.
              Responsibilty: City of American Canyon Public Works Department in
                                  cooperation with respective utility purveyors
              Funding Source: City of American Canyon General Funds, Development
                                  Impact Fees and/or any other City approved funds
              Schedule: As necessary, funding permitted
URBAN RUNOFF          WATER QUALITY
Implementation measures I 8.15, I 8.24, and I 8.27 are referenced as they appear in
the Natural and HistoriclCultiiral Resources Element of the General Plan.
15.39         Establish design standards and/or guidelines for open space/landscaping,
              filter strips, grass swales, and infiltration/sedimentation areas to be used
              in minimizing impervious area which is directly connected to piped or
              channelized drainage systems.
              Responsibilty: City of American Canyon Plannng Department
              Funding Source: City of American Canyon General Fund and/or other
                                  City funds
              Schedule: Within 24 months of the General Plan's adoption
15.40         Establish design standards and/or guidelines for detention facilties which
              wil provide a dual purpose (water quality enhancement and detention)
              function.
             THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                                               5-24
~
                                                              5.0 UTILITIES ELEMENT
           Responsibilty: City of American Canyon Public Works Department
           Funding Source: City of American Canyon General Fund, Development
                             Impact Fee and/or other City funds
           Schedule:         Within 24 months of the General Plan's adoption
   15.41  Require that applicants for new development submit proof of coverage
          under the State General Storm Water Permit For Construction Activities,
          or exemption therefrom.
          Responsibilty: City of American Canyon Planng Department
          Funding Source: City of American Canyon General Fund or
                             Development Impact Fee
           Schedule: Ongoing
   15.42  Verify through construction inspection that construction activities not
          exempt from the State permit requirements are conducted in accordance
          with a Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plan which complies with the
          State General Storm Water Permit For Construction Activities.
          Responsibilty: City of American Canyon Public Works Department
          Funding Source: City of American Canyon General Fund or
                            Development Impact Fee
          Schedule:         Ongoing
  15.43   Notify owners of industrial operations that the City of American Canyon
          has adopted policies intended to protect the environment and minimize
          pollutant loads. Inorm the owners that their industrial operation may be
          required by the State to obtain coverage under the State Storm Water
          Permit Program.
          Responsibilty: City of American Canyon
          Funding Source: City of American Canyon General Fund
          Schedule:         Ongoing
  WASTEWATER DISPOSAL
  INFRASTRUCTURE PLANS AND PROGRAM
  15.44   The City shall continue to investigate the wastewater treatment and
          disposal options described in the Final Report-Wastewater Treatment
          and Disposal Options for City of American Canyon (Brown and Caldwell,
          January, 1994).
          Responsibilty: City of American Canyon Public Works Department
          Funding Source: City of American Canyon General Fund and/or any
                            other City approved funds
          Schedule:         One of the three options should be selected and
                            necessary facilities should be constructed as
                            expeditiously as possible
         THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                                         5-25
                                                                                     M
                                                                                        I
                                                                                     . ¡
                                                               5.0 UTILITIES ELEMENT
                                                                                     1 ~
15.45   Update the Wastewater Master Plan to define existing conditions and
        reflect signiicant changes in the planned land use withn the City. Capital
        improvement plans and prioritization schedules shall also be prepared.
        The utiity systems shall be updated accordingly. City maintenance and
        replacement actions shall be identified.
        Responsibilty: City of American Canyon Public Works Department               ,,
        Funding Source: City of American Canyon General Fund, Development
                             Impact Fees and/or any other City approved fuds
        Schedule: Update every five (5) years or as needed,
                             funding permitted
                                                                                      -,
15.46   Prepare sewer system improvement standards to set forth mInimum
        requiements for the plannng, design, construction and maintenance of
        wastewater improvements.
        Responsibilty: City of American Canyon Public Works Department
        Funding Source: City of American Canyon General Fund, Development
                             Impact Fees and/or any other City approved funds
        Schedule: Update every five (5) years or as needed,
                             funding permitted
FINANCE OF MAINENANCE AND CONSTRUCTION OF INFRASTRUCTU
15.47   Prepare a new five-year Capital Improvement program for adoption and
       . prioritization by the City CounciL.
        Responsibilty: City of American Canyon Public Works Department
        Funding Source: City of American Canyon General Fund, Development
                             Impact Fees and/or any other City approved fuds
        Schedule: Every five (5) years or as funding permits
15.48   Allow for the formation of benefit assessment districts and/or undertake
        municipal bonding programs for maintenance and construction of
        wastewater systems and facilities.
        Responsibilty: City of American Canyon Public Works Department and
                             City Council
        Funding Source: Funds from the creation of benefit assessment districts
                             and/or muncipal funding program
        Schedule: As needed or as funding is available
15,49   Review and update sewer rates for operation and maintenance of the
        wastewater system.
        Responsibilty: City of American Canyon Public Works Department
        Funding Source: City of American Canyon General Funds, wastewater
                             revenue rates and/or any other City approved funds
        Schedule: Annually or as needed
      THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                                          5-26

""
                                                                    5.0 UTILITIES ELEMENT
r!
    15.50    Contiue to solicit fuds for the improvement study, design, construction
             and maintenance of the City's public infrastructure system.
             Responsibilty: City of American Canyon Public Works Department
             Funding Source: State and Federal Agencies
"            Schedule: As necessary or as funding permits
    FEES AND SERVICE CHARGES
    15.51   Review and amend, as necessary and appropriate, wastewater system
            impact fees collected from new development for the construction of new
            facilities necessitated by the new development.
            Responsibilty: City of American Canyon Public Works Department
            Funding Source: City of American Canyon General Fund, Development
                                Impact Fees, and/ or any other City approved funds
            Schedule: Annually, (or as necessary) as funding permitted
   15.52    Review fees and service charges associated with the City utilities to ensure
            that they are adequate for the purpose collected.
            Responsibilty: City of American Canyon Public Works Department
            Funding Source: City of American Canyon General Fund, Development
                                Impact Fees and/or any other City approved funds
            Scliedule: Annually, (or as necessary) as funding permitted
   ENSUR ADEQUATE INFRASTRUCTURE CAPACITY AND FACILITIES
   15.53    Collect and maintain data on the location, capabilty, level of utiization
            and conditions of wastewater system facilites. The respective
            departments shall advise the Public Works Department as new
            development applications are reviewed by the City regarding the
            availabilty of service.
           In the event that sufficient capacity is not available to serve a proposed
           project, the City shall not approve the project until additional capacity or
            adequate mitigation is provided.
           Responsibilty: City of American Canyon Public Works Department
           Funding Source: City of American Canyon Utilty Funds, Development
                               Impact Fees and/or any other City approved funding
                               sources
           Schedule: As development applications are submitted and "Wil
                               Serve" letters at time of tentative map approval
   15.54   Construction of the facilities necessary for the connection to a public
           wastewater system, or payment of fees, shall be a condition of approval for
           all discretionary projects in the City. All facilities within the City shall be
           designed and constructed in conformance with the adopted Wastewater
          THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                                            5-27
                                                              5.0 UTILITIES ELEMENT
        Master Plan and the standards established by the Engineering Division and
        Public Works Department.
                                                                                     , 1
        Responsibilty: City of American Canyon Public Works Department
        Funding Source: Development Impact Fees
         Schedule: As development applications are submitted, or as
                           fundig permits
15.55   Continue to monitor projects proposed within the City's Sphere of
        Influence and Urban Limit Line to coordinate with the County to
        encourage denial of any project in which wastewater system infastructure     . .
        demands cannot be met.
        Responsibilty: City of American Canyon Public Works Department in
                           coordination with appropriate county agencies
        Funding Source: City of American Canyon General funds, Development
                           Impact Fees and/or any other City approved fuds
        Schedule: Ongoing, as development applications are submitted
I 5.56  Continue to monitor projects proposed within the City's Sphere of
        Influence and Urban Limit Line and coordinate with Napa County for
        proper plannng to ensure that infrastructure demands can be met.
        Responsibilty: City of American Canyon Public Works Department
        Funding Source: City of American Canyon General Fund, Development
                           Impact Fees and/or any other City approved funds
        Schedule: Ongoing, as development applications are submitted
15.57   Review development plans to determine what facilities are needed to
        serve the project, as well as existing development. Adequate wastewater
        disposal facilities shall be a condition of project approvaL. Wastewater
        system facilities shall be designed in accordance with the City's Wastewater
        Master Plan and the established standards of the Department of Public
        Works. Designs that provide for easy access to public utilties for
        maintenance purposes shall be encouraged.
        Responsibilty: City of American Canyon Public Works Department
        Funding Source: City of American Canyon General Fund, Development
                           Impact Fees, special assessments, and/or any other City
                           approved funds
        Schedule: Ongoing, as development applications are submitted
15.58   During the process of updating the Wastewater Master Plan, identify the
        lands needed for future utility facilities. Seek to have the property
        designated for utility use, if appropriate, and commence acquisition of any
        necessary fee titles or easements as required, and as approved by the City
        CounciL.
       THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                                         5-28
q
                                                                       5.0 UTILITIES ELEMENT
f1
               Responsibilty: City of American Canyon Public Works Department in
                                   cooperation with respective utilty purveyors
t- ~
               Funding Source: City of American Canyon General Funds, Development
                                   Impact Fees and/or any other City approved funds
..             Schedule: As necessary, funding permitted
      SOLID WASTE
, 1   15.59    The City shall continue to monitor the level of service provided by
               garbage and recycling collection contractors to ensure that it adequately
               meets the needs of residents and business customers.
, 1
               Responsibilty: City of American Canyon Public Works Department
              Funding Source: American Canyon General Fund and/or any other City
'.,                                approved funds
              Schedule: Ongoing
, ,
      15.60   Identify appropriate funding sources for placing and maintairug trash
              and/ or recycling receptacles in the City.
              Responsibilty: City of American Canyon Public Works Department
, I           Funding Source: American Canyon General Fund and/ or any other City
                                  approved funds
              Schedule: Ongoing
     15.61    Promote the recycling of solid waste including but not limited to: paper,
              metals, aluminum cans, green waste, cardboard, plastic and glass.
              Promotions shall include: public recognition for recycling efforts, use of
              City facilities for short term recycling projects (e.g., paper and can drives),
              and dissemination of information regarding City and area
              recycling programs:
              Responsibilty: City of American Canyon Public Works Department
              Funding Source: American Canyon General Fund and/or any other City
                                  approved funds
              Schedule: Ongoing as funding permits
     15.62   Administer educational programs regarding the benefits of source
             reduction and recycling. Coordinate efforts at the local elementary and
             intermediate school level to provide youth education programs.
             Responsibilty: City of American Canyon Public Works Department
             Funding Source: American Canyon General Fund and/or any other City
                                  approved funds
             Schedule: Ongoing, as funding permits
     15.63   Solicit federal funds to offset the City's fiscal impacts for implementing
             and enforcing the SRRE and HHWE to comply with the California
             Integrated Waste Management Act.
            THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                                               5-29
                                                                                   ..
                                                            5.0 UTILITIES ELEMENT L
                                                                                   . 1
       Responsibilty: American Canyon City Council, and Department of
                         Public Works
       Funding Source: American Canyon General Funds and/or any other City         :-1
                         approved fuds                                             , ,
       Schedule: Ongoing, as fuds become available
15.64  The City shall work with the County to comply with programs and submit
       to Napa County yearly progress reports documenting source reduction and
       recyclig results.
       Responsibilty: American Canyon City Council, and Department of
                         Public Works                                              , ,
       Funding Source: American Canyon General Funds and/or any other City
                          approved fuds
       Schedule:          FY 1994/95                                               . i
IS.65  Participate in the regional efforts of the Authority for the undertaking of
       landfil needs, and long range planning for the provision of adequate
       landfil capacity to serve the future population of American Canyon.
       Responsibilty: American Canyon City Council, and Department of
                          Public Works
       Funding Source: American Canyon General Funds and/or any other City
                          approved funds
       Schedule: As necessary, or as funding permits
      THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                                       5-30
ï                                                                           I           .i .'
                                                                                                                  '.
                                                                                               ~t.,'. i
""ò
    ¡
      't'
                                        \- /
                                                          Ii
                                                                                 -~ou.LM
                                                                                  'c PNi ERA ',L Õ 'p ~
.- 1
                                               l
'1
                              .1                    '.:-,                Pu blfcSêrvic'es 1,&/
                                                                           1- -, . ,.-  ..'")
                                                                                            .:1'.._;'
                                    ('.
                                                             !
                                                             - '.
                                                                        P,a ciíttie!lrEleIneftl~'
                                                                                                   \ r\'
          '/
                 ~
, 1
    I
                                                                                                               'I
                                          I,
                       ,
                   i-I
                          \ ,.
                                                                                                             ,~
                                          . '\~.                              i,
             '.'                                                                                        "
                  .. -:                            -,
                     ì,
                                                                                                 l
                        ,
                                                                  r -: ~
                                 -.I!                                                                     i'
                                                                                      !
                           i.
                                                 ¡t
                                                                                                                  /,
                                                                                    T

=i
                                                   6.0 PUBLIC SERVICES AND FACILITIF.S ELF.MF.NT
, 1
      STATUTORY REOlIREMENTS
,-,   In addition to the seven mandatory elements, other optional elements may be included
      in a City's General Plan. The Californa Government Code Section 65303 states:
r'1
             The General Plan may include any other elements or address any other subjects which, in
             the judgment of the legislative body, relate to the physical development of the
             county or citiJ.
, -,
    !
      Once the Public Services and Facilities Element is adopted, it becomes a component of
      the General Plan with the same legal status as the mandatory elements.
, 1
    ¡
   j
r 1
, i
, ¡
. 1
              THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                                                 6-1

                                           6.0 PUBLIC SERVICES AND FACILITIFS ELF.F.T
OPPORTUNITIES AND CONSTRINTS (iSSUES)
                                                                                      !.~
EDUCATION AND SCHOOLS
1. Opportunities exist to coordinate development activities with the Napa County
    School District so that the City's residents are better served by their local     ,',
    educational institutions.
2. Joint educational planng efforts between the City of American Canyon and the
    Napa County School District can yield innovative job traing and adult educational
    programs that benefit the City and surrounding region.
FIRE
1. Futue development in the City wil necessitate expansion of fire prevention and
    emergency medical services.
2. As the City grows and develops, the need wil arise to site a new fire station in
    the City.
                                                                                      - 1
POLICE
Opportuties exist to improve and expand cooperative crime prevention efforts
between the Sheriff's Department and local neighborhood based organizations.
LIBRARIES
Opportunities exist to develop interim and permanent library facilities in the City.
         THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                                           6-2
i
  I
                                                 6.0 PUBLIC SERVICES AND FACILITIES ELEMF.T
. 1
    OVERVIEW OF PUBLIC SERVICES AND FACILITIES POLICIES
    The policies found with ths Element of American Canyon's General Plan address the
    following topics:
, , 1. The expanion of American Canyon's school facilities.
    2. The development of new educational programs that serve a wide cross-section of
, ,
        the communty.
    3. The provision of fire and emergency medical services in the City.
    4. The adequacy of existing building and fire codes.
    5. The provision of police services by the Sheriff's Department.
, 1
    6. The development of library facilities in the City.
, ,
            THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                                               6-3
                                                                      6.0 PUBLIC SERVICES AND F ACILITIFS ELF.ENT
GOALS. OBIECTVES AN POLICIES
The following section presents the goals, objectives and policies related to parks and
recreation in the City of American Canyon. Implementing programs are referenced at
the conclusion of each policy by an "I" and a number in parentheses and are described
in the last subsection of the element.
EDUCATION AND SCHOOLS
Goal
6 Promote a high level of educational quality for the City's residents.
Objective
6.1 Provide adequate educational facilties and programs that meet the needs of
            American Canyon's residents by coordinating development activities with the
            Napa Valley Unified School District.
Policies
6.1.1 Work with the Napa Valley Unified School District to ensure that school
            facilities and programs are expanded commensurate with the City's
            population growth and development. (I 6.1 and I 6.2)
6.1.2 Establish as a high priority the development of a middle school in the City of
            American Canyon. (J 6.1 and 1 6.2)
6.1.3 Work cooperatively with the Napa Valley Unified School District to logically
            locate new schools within the City of American Canyon based on growth
            trends and general accessibilty. (I                           6.1 and 16.4)
6.1.4 Encourage the Napa Valley Unified School District to site and design schools
            as focal points of neighborhood and community identity, including the
            establishment of pedestrian linkages with adjoinng residential development.
            (I 6.1 and I 6.4)
6.1.5 Ensure that the new middle school facilities are of equal quality as other
            school facities in the Napa County school system. (16.1 and I6.2)
6_1.6 Encourage the Napa Valley Unified School District to design schools so that
            their periphery maitains an appropriate transition with adjoining residential
            neighborhoods; avoiding the use of walls, fences, and landscape which
            establish a visual barrier. (J 6,1)
6.1.7 Work with the Napa Valley Uniied School District to continue the joint use of
            school faciities for community recreational and civic purposes. (I
                                                                                                     6.4)
6.1.8 Encourage the Napa Valley Unified School District to provide continuing
            educational programs for adults and the communty. (16.1)
         THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                                                                     6-4
~
                                                                        6.0 PUBLIC SERVICES AND FACILITIF.S ELF.F.NT
 ,
    6.1.9     Work with the Napa Valley Unified School District to formulate development
              mitigation fees, to the extent permitted by State law, that are reflective of the
              ful costs of facilities and services unique to the City of American Canyon and
              explore methods by which these can be specifically allocated to facities and
              services located exclusively withn the City. (I                        6.1 and I6.3)
    6.1.10    Requie appropriate school mitigation measures such as the reservation of
              sites as deemed necessary by the Napa County Uniied School Distrct when
              takig action on development proposals involving legislative decisions such
              as zone changes and General Plan amendments. (16.1 and 16.4)
   6.1.11     Consider designating a site for a future high school at a location deemed
              suitable by both the City and school district when evaluatig proposed
              communty or specific plans in areas that require master plannng under the
             Land Use Element. (16.1 and 16.4)
   6.1.12    Work jointly with the school district to establish communty oriented
             programs on school sites such as before and after school day care, the Boys
             and Girls Club, and interim public library faciities. (16.4)
   6.1.13    Locate preschool and day care facilities in appropriate areas throughout the
             City to meet the needs of a growing population. Require master planned
             areas to designate sites for daycare facilties. (16.1 and I                      6.4)
   6.1.14    Consider utilzing creative methods for financing community facilities to
             facilitate the establishment of the proposed middle school, such as provisions
             of the Lighting and Landscaping Act or the Community Facilities Act. (I                          6.1)
   Objective
   6.2 Promote programs that provide educational opportunities for the City's
             residents by private organizations and other public agencies.
   Policies
   6.2.1 Establish programs that educate the public, regarding the presence of
             significant environmental resources within and adjacent to the City of
             American Canyon, including the Napa River wetlands. (l6.5)
   6.2.2 Establish programs that educate the public regarding the history and
             characteristics of the viticulture and agriculture industries and their
            importance to the region. (l6.5)
   6.2.3 Work with representatives of local industries to promote the establishment of
            job training programs that increase the opportunity of American Canyon
            residents to be employed locally. (I                            6.7)
           THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                                                                      6-5
                                                                                                                            .\
                                                                             6.0 PUBLIC SERVICES AND FACILITIES ELEMENT
                                                                                                                            . i
                                                                                                                              ,
6.2.4 Consider establishig programs that are designed to educate the public
                  regarding issues of civic importance, such as the structure and functionig of
                   government, recyclig, and environmental awareness. (16.8)
FIRE
Goal
6A Maintain a high level of fire protection and emergency services to
                   CitylDistrict businesses and residences.
Objective
6.3 Ensure that the Fire District's facility, manpower and equipment needs keep
                   pace with the City's growth.
Policies
6.3.1 Require that City planning staff work closely with Fire District offcials to
                   ensure that fie facilities and personnel are expanded commensurably to serve
                   the needs of the City's growing population and development base. (I 6.9, I
                                                                                                                      6.13,
                   and I    6.14)
6.3.2 Identiy possible locations on the Land Use Map for a future fire
                                                                                                                 station.
                   These locations should be optimally sited to maintain adequate response
                   ties to all City and District residents in addition to being based on growth
                   pattern. (I          6.12)
6.3.3 Continue to respond to 90% of all calls within five miutes or less. (I6.1S)
Objective
6.4 Utilze proactive measures to ensure protection of life and property of City
                   and District residents and to maximize use of available resources.
Policies
6.4.1 Continue to implement an ordinance requiring built-in fire protection for
                   most building types, including single- and multi-family residential, to:
                   a. minie the potential for loss of life and property.
                   b. allow for the provision of a high level of fire
                                                                                               protection services while
                         reducig the needs for additional staff and equipment. (I 6.16 and I 6.17)
6.4.2 Evaluate the existing fire sprinkler ordinance for possible expansion of
                   provisions so that it is applicable to smaller commercial and industrial
                   structues. (I           6.10)
6.4.3 Require, through the development review process, that all structures and
                   facilities subject to the District's jurisdiction adhere to City, state and federal
               THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                                                                             6-6
Î
                                                                        6.0 PUBLIC SERVICES AND FACILITIES ELF.ENT
              reguatory standards such as the Uniorm Building and Fire Codes and other
              applicable safety guidelines. (I                        6.17)
   Objective
   6.5 Contiue efforts towards community participation and public education of
              fire safety and emergency response programs.
   Policy
   6.5.1      Provide opportuties for community participation in fie prevention and
              public safety activities through such programs as the volunteer Firefighters,
              Explorer Scouts and Disaster Preparedness Neighborhood Teams. (I 6.11 and
              16.18)
   Objective
   6.6 Maintain and possibly expand the Fire District's role in emergency
             medical response.
   Policies
   6.6.1 Encourage the District to continue to provide primary emergency medical
             response. (I 6.19)
  6.6.2 Evaluate the economic feasibilty and functional effectiveness of the District
             providig advanced lie support and transport services. (I                          6.19)
  POLICE
  Goal
  6B Ensure a high level of police protection for the City's residents, businesses
            and visitors.
  Objective
  6.7 Coordinate development activities with the Napa County Sheriffs
            Department or other contract agency to ensure that adequate facilities and
            services are maintained for the City's residents, businesses and visitors.
  Policies
  6.7.1 Work with the Sheriffs Department to ensure that enough personnel are
            added to the Department to serve the needs of a growing population and a
            developing City. (16.20)
  6.7.2 Periodically evaluate population growth, development characteristics, level of
            service (response time and staffng), and incidence of crime in the City to
            ensure that an adequate level of police protection is maintained. (I 6.20 and
            I6.21)
           THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                                                                      6-7

                                                                    6.0 PUBLIC SERVICES AND FACILITIES ELF.ENT
                                                                                                               . ,
                                                                                                                 I
Objective
6.8 Ensure that the public safety policing services provided are of the highest
          quality and effciency reflecting the needs of the residents and businesses of
          American Canyon.
                                                                                                               , \
Policies
6.8.1 Annualy monitor the adequacy of policing services to ensure that they are
          commensurate with the needs of the City, as judged by response time, types
          and qualiy of service, personnel skills, the crime rate and other relevant
          criteria. (I       6.20)
6.8.2 Periodically assess the quality and efficiency of existing police services and
          consider alternatives such as contracting with other agencies, the in-house
          provision of partial police services, or thè establishment of a full service city
          police departent. (I 6.20 and I 6.21)
Objective
6.9 Increase the residents' and Sheriff's Department abilty to minimize crime
          and improve security for all uses of public and private buidings, sites, and
          open spaces.
Policies
6.9.1 Support and encourage community-based crime prevention efforts (such as
          Neighborhood Watch and anti-gang and drug programs) through interaction
          and coordination of existing programs, assistance in the formation of new
          neighborhood watch groups, and regular communication with neighborhood
          and civic organizations. (I                    6.22)
6.9.2 Require that landscaping in proximity to commercial, industrial, multi-family,
          and public structures be sited to allow for security surveilance. (I
                                                                                                   6.23)
6.9.3 Require the incorporation of lighting which provides adequate exterior
          ilumination to facilitate security surveilance around commercial, industrial,
          multi-family, and public structures. (/6.23)
LIBRARY
Goal
6C Ensure the enhanced provision of libraiy services for the City's residents
          and businesses.
Objective
6.10 Work towards the establishment of interim and permanent library facilties in
          American Canyon by coordinating with the Napa City-County
          Library System.
         THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                                                                    6-8

                                                        6.0 PUBLIC SERVICES AND FACILITIES ELEMENT
Policies
6.10.1    Establish as a high priority the initiation of a cooperative effort between the
          City and the Napa City-County Library System to determine the appropriate
          location for interim and permanent library facilities withi American Canyon.
          (I 6.24)
6.10.2    Encourage the Napa City-County Library System to provide library outreach
          services for seniors and the disabled, if they cannot visit library facilties. (I
          6.24)
6.10.3    Coordiate with the Napa City-County Library System to contiue to provide
         funding for library facilities and activities and examine other potential
         funding sources, including State, Federal, and corporate and private
          contributions. (I          6.24)
6.10.4   Consider the provision of interim library facilities at the proposed middle
         schooL. (I         6.24)
6.10.5   Maximize community access to a new permanent library by locating the
         facility near a high use/activity area such as in the future town center or near
         the futue middle schooL. (I             6.24)
6.10.6   Ensure the adequate provision of building area, staff, and materials that meet
         acceptable per capita library standards as facilities are established in
         American Canyon. (I               6.24)
       THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                                                       6-9
                                                                                             ~
                                            6.0 PUBLIC SERVICF.S AND FACILITIES ELF.F.T
                                                                                             , ì
                                                                                                 ,
IMPLEMENTATION PROGRAMS
The following programs implement the public services and facilities policies found in "1
the precedig substation of ths element. The capital "I" and number precedig each
program are referenced by the policies that they implement.
EDUCATION AND SCHOOLS
16.1     The City Counci shall establish periodic meetigs with Napa Valley Unied             ., 1
         School District representatives. These meetings wil help ensure that policy
         makers from both governmental entities understand the needs and
         requirements of the other and wil facilitate an exchange of inormation
         regarding school site development, fuding sources, operation standards and
         consistent population projections.
         Responsibilty: City of American Canyon City Council in coordination
                             with the Napa Valey Unified School District
         Funding Source: American Canyon General Fund
         Schedule: Ongoing, as funding permits
I 6.2 The City shall discuss any deficiencies in its educational system with the
         Napa Valley Uniied School District to identify problems and facilitate the
         improvement of school services.
         Responsibilty: City of American Canyon City Council in coordination
                             with the Napa Valley Unified School District
         Funding Source: American Canyon General Fund
          Schedule: Ongoing, as funding permits
I 6.3 Requie persons requesting building permits to pay the appropriate school
         fees to the Napa Valley Uniied School District prior to issuance.
          Responsibilty: City of American Canyon City Council in coordination
                             with the Napa Valley Unified School District
          Funding Source: American Canyon General Fund
          Schedule: Ongoing, as funding permits
I 6.4 Coordinate efforts with the Napa Valley Unified School District to assess
          opportunities for joint use of facilities, including recreational areas, libraries
          and parkig, as the District considers development of new school sites.
          Responsibilty: City of American Canyon City Council in coordination
                             with the Napa Valley Unified School District
          Funding Source: American Canyon General Fund
          Schedule: Ongoing, as funding permits
I 6.5 Work with the appropriate environmental resource/ conservation
          organizations and state and federal agencies to encourage the establishment
          of programs that educate the public regarding the presence and importance of
          signiicant environmental resources within and adjacent to the City.
        THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                                           6-10

                                             6.0 PUBLIC SERVICES AND FACILITIES ELF.ENT
          Responsibilty:       City of American Canyon City Council in coordination
                              with other governmental agencies
          Funding Source: American Canyon General Fund
          S,chedule:          Ongoing, as funding permits
 I 6.6    Work with representatives of the viticulture and agriculture industries
          located in the Napa County region in order to establish programs aimed at
          educatig the public about the history and characteristics of these industries
          and their significance to the region.
          Responsibilty: City of American Canyon City Council in coordination
                              with representatives of the viticulture and agriculture
                              ind1.stries
          Funding Source: American Canyon General Fund
          Schedule: Ongoing, as funding permits
16.7      Promote the establishment of job-trainig programs that focus on teaching
          skils valued by local industry, thereby improving the chances that American
          Canyon's residents can be employed locally.
          Responsibilty: City Manager and Planning Director in cooperation with
                              representatives of local industry
          Funding Source: American Canyon General Fund
          Schedule: Ongoing, as funding permits
I 6.8    Work with representatives of the Napa Valley Unified School District to
         devise innovative educational programs dealing with issues of civic
         importance.
         Responsibilty:      City of American Canyon City Council and local Parent
                             Teachers Association in coordination with the Napa Valley
                             Unified School District
         Funding Source: American Canyon General Fund
         Schedule:           Ongoing, as fuding permits
FIRE
I 6.9 Encourage the American Canyon Fire Protection District to develop a
         comprehensive Strategic Plan based upon the population's demand for fire
         fighting and prevention services. The plan should address ways to aclùeve
         high quality service for each division (i.e., fire prevention, communication
         and administration, and emergency planning), and should include
         implementation measures that cover a ten year time frame.
         Responsibilty: City of American Canyon in coordination with the
                             American Canyon Fire Protection District
         Funding Source: American Canyon Fire Protection District
         Schedule: Ongoing, as funding permits
       THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                                           6-11

                                          6.0 PUBLIC SERVICES AND FACILITIES ELF.ENT
                                                                                      , 1
16.10  Ensure that the City updates its fire codes by implementig the most recent     . ;
       State and National standards (UC, NFC and NFPA).
       Responsibilty: American Canyon Fire Protection District
       Funding Source: American Canyon Fire Protection District
       Schedule: As requied or as funding permits
16.11  Coordiate with the Napa Valley Unied School District and private school
       administrators to ensure that fire prevention programs are conducted
       annually in all of the City's schools. The programs shall inorm students
       about fire safety, emergency preparedness and emergency first aid
       techques.
       Responsibilty:     American Canyon Fire Protection District in cooperation
                          with the Napa Valley Unified School District
       Funding Source: American Canyon Fire Protection District in cooperation
                          with the Napa Valley Unified School District
       Schedule:          Ongoing, as fuding permts                                   , 1
16.12  The City shall work with the Fire District to analyze its emerging patterns of
       development and utilize the land use map found in the Land Use Element
       when seeking appropriate locations for a new fire station.
       Responsibilty: City of American CanYOn Planning Department in
                          cooperation with the American Canyon Fire Protection
                          District
       Funding Source: American Canyon Fire Protection District
       Schedule: Ongoing, as funding permits
16.13  Coordinate with the American Canyon Fire District to ensure that the City's
       fire and emergency services are not eroded by population increases and that
       new facilities and services are planned in accord with the anticipated growth
       and the policies set forth in ths General Plan.
       Responsibilty: City of American Canyon Planning Department in
                          cooperation with the American Canyon Fire Protection
                          District
       Funding Source: American Canyon General Fund and American Canyon
                          Fire Protection District
       Schedule: Ongoing, as funding permits
16.14  Maintain an up-to-date and comprehensive record of fire events in American
       Canyon that includes: the number, type and geographic concentration of fires
       in American Canyon and its environs; the amount, type and cost of damage;
       the number and type of injuries incurred as a result of local fires; and
       emergency response time. This data base shall also include information
        concerning the cost of service provision, including the maintenance of
      THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                                         6-12
.,
                                              6.0 PUBLIC SERVICES AND FACILITES ELEMENT
            equipment and facilities; the number of false alarms; and other pertent data
            that describes servce characteristics. Service deficiencies and their possible
            remedies shal also be identiied.
            Responsibilty: American Canyon Fire Protection District
            Funding Source: American Canyon Fire Protection District
            Schedule: Anually, as funding permits
    16.15   Regularly evaluate service response ties in order to ensure that 90 percent of
            all calls are answered with five minutes or less.
            Responsibilty: American Canyon Fire Protection District
            Funding Source: American Canyon Fire Protection District
            Schedule:          Anually
   16.16   Continue to requie the installation and maintenance of smoke detection and
           sprinler. systems in all new residential buildings, in existing multi-family
           residential structues with thee or more unts, and in all residential rentals in
           the City. Undertake a study to identify the types of systems that can be
           installed in existing commerciaL, industrial, and multi-family residential
           buildings. If automatic sprinker systems and other fie protection systems do
           not exist, evaluate the feasibility of their installation. Ths study should be
           coordinated with the Fire Department, building engineers, construction
           industry representatives, and any other appropriate agencies and/or fire and
           construction professionals.
           Responsibilty: American Canyon Planning Department in cooperation
                               with the Fire Protection District
           Funding Source: Development fees and American Canyon Fire Protection
                               District
           Schedule: Anually as funding permits
   I 6.17  Utilize the City's development review process to ensure that proposed
           projects adhere to all pertinent regulatory standards such as the Uniform
           Building and Fire Codes.
           Responsibilty: American Canyon Building Department in cooperation
                              with the Fire Protection District
           Funding Source: Development application fees
           Schedule: Ongoing, as necessary
   16.18   Encourage the Fire District to establish public participation and education
           programs that stress communty safety and disaster preparedness.
           Responsibility: American Canyon Fire Protection District
           Funding Source: American Canyon Fire Protection Distrct
           Schedule: Ongoing
          THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                                            6-13
                                          6.0 PUBLIC SERVICES AND FACILITF.S ELEMENT
16.19   The City shall work with the American Canyon Fire Protection District to      , ,
        ensure that emergency medical services continue to be provided. The Fire
        Distrct shall also continue to study whether it would be economicaly feasible
        and functionally effective for the District to provide advanced lie support
        and tranport services to American Canyon.
        Responsibilty: City of American Canyon along with the American
                            Canyon Fire Protection District
        Funding Source: American Canyon Fire Protection Distrct
        Schedule: Ongoing. The study should be conducted within 36
                            month of the General Plan's adoption
POLICE                                                                                , J
I 6.20  Work with the Sheriff's Department to ensure that American Canyon's
        policig needs are continuously monitored. Annual assessments of the City's
        police services should address staffng levels and the condition of al existig
        facities and equipment, as well as equipment, facilities, and personnel needs , ;
        for the coming fiscal year based on anticipated population growth, level of
        service, and the crime rate.
        Responsibilty: City of American Canyon in coordination with the Napa
                            County Sheriff's Department                               . ¡
        Funding Source: American Canyon General Fund
        Schedule: Ongoing                                                             , ,
I 6.21  The City shall periodically evaluate the quality of its police service as
        provided by the Napa County Sheriff's Department. Consideration shall be
        given to alternative policing arrangements, such as the in-house provision of
        partial police services or the establishment of a full service city police
        department.
        Responsibilty:      City of American Canyon
        Funding Source: American Canyon General Fund
        Schedule:           Annually
I 6.22  Work with the Napa County Sheriffs Department to enact an ongoing
        outreach program for existing neighborhood watch groups. Areas without
        watch programs should be identified and assisted in initiating and continuing
        neighborhood watch programs. A similar program structure for commercial
        areas in the City shall be established and may be effectuated the Chamber of
        Commerce, if and when it is established, or any similar organiations.
        Responsibilty: City of American Canyon
        Funding Source: American Canyon General Fund
        Schedule: Ongoing, as funding permits
16.23   The City shall amend its Building Code and design review process to include
        defensible space design requirements in all new projects. These requirements
        wil help ensure maximum visibilty and security for entrances, pathways,
       THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                                         6-14

                                           6.0 PUBLIC SERVICES AND FACILITES ELEMENT
        and corridors, as well as open space (both public and private) and parking
        lots/structues. The code and design review amendments should address
        landscaping and lighting in addition to site design.
        Responsibilty: City of American Canyon Planng Department
        Funding Source: American Canyon General Fund
        Schedule: Withn 18 months of the General Plan's adoption
LIBRARY
16.24   The City shall work with the Napa City-County Library System to ensure that
        adequate services are provided to all residents. The City wil assist the library
        in identifying additional sources to fund improvements such as developer
        fees, tax credits for the contribution to books and other resources and public
        fund raising campaigns.
        Responsibilty: City of American Canyon Planng Department
        Funding Source: American Canyon General Fund and/or any other
                            available fuds/fees approved by the City
        Schedule: Ongoing, as funding permits
      THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                                         6-15
                                                              .~~(h~
                                                              \1
                                                    --I
                                                .1
           i.
                                                                   G ENE R AL pl,7~
                                ;-,
                            . )
                                                   'p'arRs'&
                                                        . 'i Recreatìon Elemeiil
                                    :¡ ,
                                                               -;.
                   c                                       ."
                                                                          L   '.1
                                         t.
                                                                                  '.J\
                                      ""
                     .,'. ~" ~-.~t, ,
                   ~W:~~rï~j¡~~ìt~7:~:~"'
                   ~-:"~'-=~-'.o -- ._:.,-õ' ..
   ".'" -¡
                 ,
              ".
                                                                   .,',
                                                                                           \ j
",, -
                                                                                             ,.
                                                                                                ,i
                                                                                       ',!
                                                                                                   I
                        -;"

                                                   7.0 PARKS AND RECREATION ELEMENT
    STATUORY REOilREMENTS
    In addition to the seven mandatory elements,       other optional elements may be
    included withn a communty's General Plan. Section 65303 of the California
    Government Code states:
           The General Plan may include any other elements or address any other
          subjects which, in the judgment of the legislative body, relate to the physical
          development of the county or city.
    Once the Parks and Recreation Element is adopted by the City of American Canyon,
    it becomes a component of the General Plan, with the same legal status as the
    mandatory elements.
  ,
, ¡
. ,
. ,
            THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                                            7-1

                                                                                      "ì
                                               7.0 PARKS AND RECREATION ELEMENT
OPPORTUITIES AND CONSTRAINTS (iSSUES)                                                 -j
1. The opportunty exists to create a regional park on the grounds of the American     " 1
    Canyon Landf that can serve the entire County of Napa.
2. Natural open spaces, such as drainages, rivers, weti¡ids, hisides, canyons, and
   undeveloped lands, offer unique opportunties for the development of a diverse
    network of active and passive parks.
                                                                                      . ,
3. The City has the unque opportunity of providing an off-street trail system that    . .
    connects foothill and wetland areas.
4. Some City parks that are located with existing residential tracts are inaccessible
    to surrounding neighborhoods.
5. American Canyon's bike path network can be improved by enhancing linkages
   between different parts of the City through the establishment of ' ,
    additional routes.
6. Although American Canyon currently exceeds its parkland standard of 5 acres
   per 1,000 residents (the City has 6.14 acres per 1,000 residents today), future
   population growth wil require the acquisition of additional parkland as
    determined by the adopted ratio.
        THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                                         7-2

,
                                                     7.0 PARKS AND RECREATION ELEMENT
"1
    OVERVIEW OF PARKS AND RECREATION POLICIES
~   The policies found with this Element of American Canyon's General Plan address
    the following topics:
" ,
    1. Park standards.
    2. The different types of parks that exist today, or wil exist in the future.
    3. Parkland acquisition.
    4. Park improvements.
    5. Park operation and maintenance.
    6. Park programming.
. ,
  ,
            THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                                              7-3
                                                                                                    '"
                                                                   7.0 PARKS AND RECREATION ELEMENT
                                                                                                    :- 1
GOALS. OBJECTS AND POLICIES
The following section presents the goals, objectives, and policies related to parks and
recreation in the City of American Canyon. Implementig programs are referenced
at the conclusion of each policy by an ''1' and a number in parentheses and are
described in the last subsection of the element. . i
PARK AND TRAIL STANDARDS
Goal
7 Enrich the quality of life in American Canyon by providing parks, trails
          and recreational services for all of the City's residents.
                                                                                                    . ,
Objective
7.1 Provide park facilities to meet the needs of existig and futue residents.
Policies
7.1.1 Provide a suffcient number of mini, neighborhood, community and
          regional park facilities to achieve a minimum standard of 5 acres of
          parkland per 1,000 residents (see Figure 7-1 and Table 7-1 for an ilustration
          and explanation of existing park facilities). (I                  7.1)
7.1.2 Create a comprehensive, citywide Parks and Recreation Master Plan that
          provides specific criteria and guidelines for the siting, design, and
          programming of parks and recreational facilities. (I                   7.4)
7.1.3 Work toward the establishment of a system of public parks interconnected
          by off-street trails or bicycle lanes. (I 7.1 and I            7.4)
7.1.4 Work toward the establishment of permanent baseball and softball fields
          in the City to ensure their continued availability should the Little League's
          existing leasehold for land adjacent to the Napa Junction School expire.
          (l 7.4)
Objective
7.2 Develop and maintain a comprehensive and interconnected public trail
          system that includes bicycle, hiking and equestrian trails.
Policies
7.2.1 Develop a comprehensive Trail Master Plan that links the wetlands and
          the Bay Area Ridge and Bay Trail and includes an implementation
          strategy, design criteria, and policies for establishing maintenance
          responsibilities. (/7. and I 7.8)
         THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                                                               7-4

                                                                 , ,
                                ~C1          l.             .
                                                                   ¡
                                GENERAL p~
                                                                 ,j
                                    ,. ,
                                    l~ Envlco Corpraúon Graphlcs
SOR(Hlyd ""~ c.
CITY PARKS
AND RECREATIONAL FACILITIES
                            7-6                        ~7-1

  I
. I
                                                                                7.0 PARKS AND RECREATION ELEMENT
"1
      7.2.2 Work with the cities of Vallejo and Napa and County of Napa to establish
                a trail connection between these areas and along the eastern shorelie of
                the Napa River. (I                 7.32)
      7.2.3     Explore the means by which ongoing maintenance for the various trail
. !             systems can be accomplished through cooperative sharing agreements
. ¡            with other public agencies, volunteer user groups or exclusively by private
               parties. (I 7.7 and I            7.32)
     7.2.4 Minimize the use of walls along city trails by relying on berms and
               landscaping whenever possible. (I                           7.7)
     7.2.5 Require all large scale developments to incorporate an internal trail
               system with linages to the surrounding sidewalk network. (I                                    7.7)
     7.2.6     Lin residential and commercial land uses by                              pedestrian trails. (I      7.7 and I
. ,.           7.8)
     TYPE/HIERARCHY OF TRAILS
     Goal
     7 A Provide a variety of parks and trails that serve the diverse recreational
               needs of American Canyon's residents and take into account the unique
               features of the City's natural environment.
     Objective
     7.3 Ensure that American Canyon provides both active and passive
               recreational activities in a variety of park and trail settings.
     Policies
     7.3.1 Establish the following classifications for American Canyon's parks:
               a. Mini-Park-Mini parks are less than one acre in size and are not
                        designed for active recreational uses. They do, however, provide
                        passive open space and buffering from adjacent urban development
                        and typically include elements such as walking paths and benches.
               b. Neighborhood Park Neighborhood parks are usually two and a half
                        to five acres in size and are primarily planned for children five to
                        fourteen years of age. To maximize the use of the parceL, these parks
                        are ideally located within the center of a neighborhood and sited
                        adjacent to a school whenever possible. Recreation facilties typically
                        provided in neighborhood parks include children's play areas (ideally
                        equipped with a variety of play equipment for a range of users), picnic
                        tables, and basketball courts. The service area for a neighborhood
                        park is generally one-quarter to a one-half mile radius.
             THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                                                                       7-7

                                                                                                          "1
                                                                                                             I
                                                                       7.0 PARKS AND RECREATION ELEMENT
                                                                                                          ri
          c. Community Park-Community parks are designed to serve several
               neighborhoods. Community parks are planned for youths and adults
               and provide for a wider range of activities than the neighborhood                          . 1
               park or playground. Community parks generally range in size from                           , ¡
               10 to 40 acres and provide facilities for both indoor and outdoor
               recreational activities such as softball diamonds, basketball courts,
               tenns courts and community centers. The service area for a .
               communty park is typically a one to one and a half mie radius.
          d. Regional Park-Regional parks are usually 50 acres or larger and are
               designed to serve both the local community in which the park is
               located and people from surrounding communties. Additionally,
               they typically include significant natural features and provide                            , .
               outdoor recreational facilties, such as picncking, camping, and
               hiking, as well as unque programs that appeal to a broad range of
               interests and recreational needs. (1 7.4)                                                  , ,
7.3.2 Designate status and approximate locations for the following tyes of trails
          in the Trails Master Plan:
          a. Urban Trail Urban trails are multi-purpose pedestrian/bicycle trails
               that connect residential areas to regional and community parks,
               schools, and commercial and industrial employment areas.
          b. Rural Trail Rural trails are multi-purpose equestrian/pedestrian/
               bicycle trails that are typically unpaved and used primarily for
               recreational purposes. These trails often serve to link various parts of
               a community and sometimes provide linkages between different
               communities.
          c. Bicycle Right-of-Way Bicycle rights-of-way are typically found
               adjacent to or on the outer edge of roads and are often                    integrated with
               urban and rural trails. They also provide additional access to
               recreational, educational, and commercial/industrial employment
               areas. (1 7.7)
PARKLAND ACQUISITION
Goal
7B Provide adequate parkland acreage in both location and quantity to meet
          the range of recreational needs of existing and future residents and
          preserve natural resources within the City of American Canyon.
Objective
7.4 Develop an integrated and cohesively designed park system that is
          complementary to existing and proposed development and sensitive to
          the natural environment.
       THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                                                                7-8

, ,
                                                                                     7.0 PARKS AND RECREATION ELEMENT
     Policies
     7.4.1 Consider the following when acquiring parkland:
                .        The City's need for open space and recreation facilities based on
                         current and projected open space requirements.
                .        The preservation of unique and valuable natural resources and the
                         conservation of historic and cultural assets.
                .        Thè useabilty of proposed parklands and the ease of accessibility for
                         futue users.
                .        The current demands on and conditions of existing facilities.
                .        A balance of passive and active recreational opportunities and
                        facilities designed to meet the existing and future needs of all user
                         groups. (I 7.2, / 7.15, and I 7.1 6)
     7.4.2 Limit the City's future acceptance of dedicated parkland to land that fits the
               character and requirements of community and/or neighborhood park
               areas. (I      7.4, I 7.6, and /7.21)
    7.4.3 Acquire future community and neighborhood park sites before a
               significant proportion of the new population to be served by the park
               exists. (I 7.21 and / 7.22)
    7.4.4 Require that adequate development and maintenance funds are available
              before new parklands are acquired. (I                                 7.24)
    7.4.5 When acquiring natural open space, such as wetlands and trail extensions,
              coordinate with local, regional, state and federal agencies whenever
              possible. (I 7.32 and /7.33)
    7.4.6 Pursue the acquisition of surplus federal, state, and local lands to meet
              present and future recreation and community service needs. (I                                7.42)
    7.4.7 Require that new residential subdivisions dedicate parklands withn their
              project boundaries, unless it is the City's objective to develop a park that
              serves the subdivision at an alternative location as specified in the Parks
              and Recreation Master Plan, in which case in-lieu fees shall be provided by
              the developer. (/7.1 and I 7.3)
    7.4.8 Require that new multi-family residential developments of five or more
              units provide recreational or open space facilities onsite and contribute
              fees that aid in the public development of other facilities to offset
              additional demands generated by their resident population. (/7.1 and i                             7.3)
    7.4.9 Require that new, large-scale commercial developments, such as the town
              center, provide open space facilities within the development for passive or
            THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                                                                       7-9

                                                                                  7.0 PARKS AND RECREATION ELEMENT
            active recreation or contribute fees for the public development of such
            uses. (I 7.3 and I 7.10)
7.4.10      Cooperate with other government agencies when acquiring new parkland.
            (I 7.33)
7.411       Investigate the feasibilty of transforming the American Canyon Landfil
            into a regional park. (I 7.36)
7.4.12      Consider the development of small public parks and nature viewing sites
            around the wetlands. (I 7.4, I 7.15, and I 7.26)
                                                                                                                   ;,
                                                                                                                     ,
7.4.13      Encourage the development of a golf course withn the City or its Sphere
            of Inuence with reasonable access to residents. (I 7.25)
7.4.14      Explore options for acquiring a regional park trailhead that would be
            lined to proposed regional park facilities in Solano County. (l 7.1 and I 7.9)
Objective
7.5 Equitably distribute future developed park sites to serve the greatest
            number of American Canyon residents.
Policies
7.5.1       Disperse park facilities and equipment, such as sports fields, basketball
            courts, tennis courts, swimming pools and picnic areas, throughout the
            City to prevent an undue concentration at anyone location. (I7A)
7.5.2 Locate future community and neighborhood park sites and their
            associated recreation facilities in accordance with the Parks and Recreation
            Master Plan for the City of American Canyon. (l7.4, I 7.9, I 7.21, and I
                                                                                                           7.22)
Objective
7.6 Provide adequate funding for parkland acquisition, improvements, and
            programs to help ensure timely and balanced development of parks and
            recreation facilities in American Canyon.
Policies
7.6.1 Continue to implement a Quimby Ordinance1 to provide additional
             parkland funding through residential development. (l7.3 and 17.10)
7.6.2 Fund new neighborhood parks from Quimby fees in residential areas of
             the City. (I        7.3)
1   A Quimby Ordinance allows a city to accumulate funds for the provision of additional parkland
    through a fee linked to development and / or requires developers to directly provide new parks
    within the community to offset the additional recreational need created by their projects.
         THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                                                                     7-10
                                                          7.0 PARKS AND RECREATION ELEMENT
 7.6.3 Grant Quimby fee waivers only when parklands in excess of five
           contiguous and usable acres are received and when such waivers are
           determined to be in the best interest of the City's residents as determined
           by the Mayor and City Counci. (I 7.1 and 17.3)
 7.6.4 The City shall update, as needed and appropriate, the park in-lieu fee
           assessed to all new development. (I          7.3)
 7.6.5 Provide mechanisms by which the City may accept gifts and dedications of
           parks, open space and facilties. (I       7.11)
7.6.6 Consider the use of special taxes, bonds, or assessment districts for park
           development and maintenance. (I 7.9)
7.6.7 Seek out and aggressively pursue all forms of federal, state, county, private
           foundation and endowment support to assist in the acquisition,
           development and programming of park and recreation resources in the
           City of American Canyon. (17.39)
7.6.8 Develop an acquisition and/or financing program for the future
           development of parks in order to allow the City to establish a viable park
           and recreation system. (17.9)
7.6.9 Encourage the establishment of commercial recreation faciities, such as
           skating rins, that provide services and facilities that could not otherwise
          be provided by the City. (17.14 and I 7.40)
PARK DESIGN, COMPATIBILIT AND IMPROVEMENTS
Goal
7C Ensure that American Canyon's parks are developed so that buildings,
          open air facilties, and landscaping are unified and functionally related.
Objective
7.7 Provide for the optimum functional and aesthetic integration of all
          recreationaL, environmental, cultural and social elements into the
          plannng and design of city parks.
Policies
7.7.1 Require that parks reflect the topography and environmental resources of
          the region. (17.26)
7.7.2 Require that parks are designed as safe places for both passive and active
          leisure activities. (I 7.27 and I 7.34)
7.7.3 Design active parks so that they do not negatively impact adjacent
          residential neighborhoods. (I        7.29)
        THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                                                7-11
                                                                         7.0 PARKS AND RECREATION ELEMENT
7.7.4 Design and improve community and neighborhood parks according to the
          following:
          a. locate on collector or neighborhood streets, accessible to adjacent
                  residential neighborhoods;
          b. site uses so that they do not adversely impact adjacent residencies (e.g.
                  locate high activity, noise-generating uses away from residencies);
          c. provide parking so that it does not disrupt abuttng residences;
          d. design for defensible space;
          e. site parks away from high noise generators (highways) and other
                   nuisances (Le. power lines); and
          f. incorporate park landscape that is compatible with the landscape of
                   adjacent areas. (I              7.4, 1 7.5, and 1 7.28)
PARK OPERATIONS AND MAINTENANCE
Goal
7D Ensure that City parks are properly operated and maintained in the most
          effective and efficient manner possible.
Objective                                                                                                 . .
7.8 Operate and maintain American Canyon's park and recreation facilities by
          utilzing programs that are designed for the most effective use and
          enhancement of park sites at the minimum possible cost.
Policies
7.8.1 Provide opportunities for a wide variety of recreational activities and park
          experiences, including active recreation such as basketball, baseball, soccer
          and volleyball, and passive recreation such as reading and sunbathing.
          (1 7.4)
7.8.2 Ensure that park facilities are not only functional, but that they are
          maintainable at a reasonable cost. (1 7.4, /7.5, /7.24, and 17.38)
7.8.3 Encourage neighborhood groups, organizations, clubs and businesses to
          take a greater interest and financial responsibility in the improvement of
           the park and recreation system in American Canyon through the donation
          of goods, services and financial support. (I
                                                                               7.39)
7.8.4 Promote the establishment of a volunteer services program to assist City
          park and recreation staff, thereby stimulating more direct community
          involvement and reducing future staffing costs. (I 7.14 and 1 7.40)
         THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                                                                7-12
                                                                             7.0 PARKS AND RECREATION ELEMENT
 7.8.5 ThYÒty shall periodically review its parks and recreation fee structure to
            make sure it is meeting established objectives. (I                          7.3)
 7.8.6 Establish that a prime measure of success in the future design and
            programming of communty/regional park facilities is the abilty of the
            park investment to generate revenues that help the City recover requisite
            operational and maintenance costs. Revenue may be generated by
            employing user fees and/or establishing vending operations or
            educational programs. (I                      7.4, I 7.17, and I  7.40)
 7.8.7 Restrict and control nighttime park use if adjacent residences are adversely
            affected by park related noise. (I 7.28 and I                        7.34)
 7.8.8 Rehabiltate existing American Canyon parks based on such measures as
           increased public access, lower maintenance costs and increased service
            delivery. (I         7.4, I 7.5, and I 7.20)
 Objective
7.9 Foster cooperation between public and quasi-public agencies in regards to
           existing land resources and recreational facilities.
Policies
7.9.1 Continue to implement existing joint use agreements between the City
           and public agencies (e.g. school district) and seek out new opportuties to
           share established park and recreation resources for the common benefit of
           American Canyon residents. (I 7.4 and I                            7.31)
7.9.2 Expand recreational opportunities in American Canyon by developing a
           community park in concert with a new middle school that may include a
           gymnasium, pool and other facilities, thereby providing for the joint use
          of this recreational facility. (I 7.4 and I 7.41)
RECREATIONAL PROGRAMING
Goal
7E Develop park programming that provides a variety of active and passive
          activities for American Canyon's residents.
Objective
7.10 Increase the community's use of recreational spaces and encourage the
          creation of recreational opportunities unique to American Canyon that
          wil contribute to tourism and economic development as well as local
          pride and communty spirit.
        THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                                                                  7-13

                                                                              7.a PARKS AND RECREATION ELEMENT
Policies
7.10.1    Determine the extent to which the recreational needs of American Canyon
          residents are being met by the City's facilities and programs. (I
                                                                                                     7.37)
7.10.2    Encourage opportuties in American Canyon parks for participation in
          outdoor-oriented athletic sports, thereby increasing public involvement
          and enjoyment of these activities. (I 7.13)
                                                                                                                  i 1
7.10.3    Establish programs, activities and park facilities that help "mainstream"
          the specialized needs of chidren, the elderly, and the physically challenged
          into the daily provision of public recreation services and leisure
          opportunities in American Canyon. (I 7.12 and I 7.37)
7.10.4    Combine park sites that contain significant natural features with
          recreational learning opportunities wherever possible. For example, the
          City could establish a natural resources learning center near the Napa                                  . .
          River Wetlands, as called for in Implementation Program I 8.52 of the
          Natural and HistoridCuItural Resources Element. (17.19,17.30, and I 7.43)
7.10.5    Incorporate day care and elder care centers into city parks where
          appropriate. (I             7.23)
7.10.6    The City should recognize and support the efforts of local groups and
          organizations that are providing                                  recreational opportunities for youth.
          (l 7.35)
Objective
7.11 Incorporate recreational features and facilities that are responsive to the
          preferences of American Canyon's resident population.
Policies
7.11.1    Develop parks that respond to the recreational preferences of those living
          within their proposed service areas. (I 7.6 and I                           7.37)
7.11.2    Provide a variety of desirable amenities within recreation areas so as to
          accommodate persons of varying ages and people who have different
          leisure time interests. (l 7.1 and 17.18)
         THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                                                                   7~14
f
                                                     7.0 PARKS AND RECREATION ELEMENT
    IMPLEMENTATION PROGRAMS
    The following programs implement the parks and recreation policies contained in
    the preceding subsection of this element. The capital "I" and number preceding
    each program are referenced by the policies that they implement.
    CODES/ORDINANCES
    17.1 Maintain and update, as necessary, Development Code requirements (in
              conjunction with the development of the subdivision or zoning
              ordinance) to ensure that proposed residential developments provide land
             for public parks and recreational facilities at a ratio of five acres of
             parkland for every 1,000 residents.
             Responsibilty: City of American Canyon City Council
             Funding Source: City of American Canyon General Fund
             Schedule: Within 12 months of the General Plan's adoption
   17.2 Update acreage and park facility requirements periodically to ensure that
             needs and demands are being met.
             Responsibil ty:     City of American Canyon Plannng Department
             Funding Source: City of American Canyon General Fund andj or any
                                other available funding sources approved by the City
             Schedule:          Ongoing, as funding is available
  I  7.3 The City shall maintain the use of the Quimby Act, in-lieu fees, and
             developer contributions as the primary means of parks and recreation
             funding. As necessary, these shall be adjusted within the limits
             established by law. Fees shall be imposed on commercial development to
             the extent that direct impacts can be defied or as a condition of density or
             use "bonuses." At least once every three years, the City shall evaluate
             whether or not the fees are adequate to support parkland programming,
             acquisition and improvement goals.
             Responsibilty: City of American Canyon Public Works Department
             Funding Source: City of American Canyon General Fund and/or Park
                                in-lieu fees collected from development in accordance
                                nexus legislation
             Schedule: At least once every three years
  17.4 The City shall prepare a Parks and Recreation Master Plan that wil address
            the following:
                 . current, five-year, ten-year, and twenty-year recreational needs;
                 . park development and design standards, including:
                       - type and size (mini, neighborhood, community, and regional
                          parks);
          THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                                             7-15
                                                  7.0 PARKS AND RECREATION ELEMENT
                                                                                       , 1
                                                                                         ¡
                    - location and the equitable distribution of parks;
                        relationship to adjacent properties and community facilities;
                    - provision and design of recreational facilities;
                    - landscaping;
                        energy and water conservation;
                        maintenance standards, etc.;
              . joint use and/or development agreements;
              . park improvements, including:
                    - existig sites to be improved or expanded;
                        locations for futue park acquisition by type of park;
                        facilties and programs to be provided at each site;
              . individual park master plans, as described in Implementation
                 Program I 7.5;
              . the timing and phasing of park acquisition and improvements;
              . costs for parks acquisition and improvements, including funding
                 sources; and
              . implementation priorities.
         Responsibilty: City of American Canyon Public Works Department and
                              City Council
         Funding Source: City of American Canyon General Fund
          Schedule:           Within 18 months of the General Plan's adoption
I 7.5 The City shall prepare master plans for each park and recreation open
          space element. These plans shall incorporate the elements discussed in
          the Citywide Parks and Recreation Master Plan, with particular emphasis
          placed on the location of outdoor and indoor facilities, such as athletic
          fields, basketball courts, swimming pools, passive recreation elements
          (e.g., park benches and picnic facilities), and public parkig. Landscape and
          irrigation plans as well as "transition measures" utilized between the park
          and adjacent land uses wil also be incorporated into these plans.
          Furthermore, the design of each park shall reflect and be sensitive to the
          natural characteristics of the site, including topography, drainage,
          vegetation, and environmental habitat. Local community groups shall be
          involved in the preparation of each plan.
          Responsibilty: City of American Canyon Public Works Department
          Funding Source: City of American Canyon General Fund
          Schedule: Ongoing, as required
I7.6 The City shall periodically update the Parks and Recreation Master Plan
          and the Trails Master Plan to ensure that existing facilities meet the needs
          of the City as it changes and grows.
        THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                                           7-16

                                                  7.0 PARKS AND RECREATION ELEMENT
           Responsibilty: City of American Canyon Public Works Department
           Funding Source: City of American Canyon General Fund, development
                             fees, and/or other available funding sources approved by
                             the City
           Schedule:         Every five (5) years, as needed or as funding permits
 I7.7 The City shall prepare a Trails Master Plan that wil address the following:
              . trail development and design standards, includig:
                    - location;
                        construction standards;
                       relationship to adjacent land uses (particularly housing);
                    - abilty of trail to li different parts of the community;
                    - requirements for large scale developments to incorporate
                       trail networks into their interior circulation systems;
              . joint maintenance agreements;
              . the tiing and phasing of trail acquisitions and improvements;
              . costs for trail acquisition and improvements, including funding
                 sources; and
              . implementation priorities.
          Responsibilty:     City of American Canyon Public Works and Planning
                             Departments and City Council
          Funding Source: City of American Canyon General Fund
          Schedule:          Within 18 months of the General Plan's adoption
I7.8 The City shall continue to work with the Bay Areas Ridge Trail Council to
          establish a 400 mile regional, multi-use trail consistent with the BARTC's
          trail planning criteria. The Ridge Trail wil traverse the ridge tops
          surrounding San Francisco Bay, connecting the Bay Area's parks and open
          spaces, serving the citizens of each community through which it passes.
          Within the American Canyon Urban Limit Line, the City shall work with
          the BARTC to facilitate a trail connection from the American Canyon
          communty to the Bay Area Ridge Trail along the Napa-Solano border and
          connecting to the Lynch Canyon Open Space area in Solano County.
          Responsibilty: City of American Canyon Public Works and Planning
                            Departments and City Council
          Funding Source: City of American Canyon General Fund
          Schedule: Within 18 months of the General Plan's adoption
17.9 Establish and implement a parkland acquisition program, independent of
          development driven parkland acquisition activities, to meet current and
         future park and recreation needs. Such a program shall:
       THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                                         7-17
                                                                                7.0 PARKS AND RECREATION ELEMENT
                                                                                                                        ì
                                                                                                                      . ,
              a. Identify potential park sites by monitoring real estate activity in the
                       city. When a site is on the market, the City should consider its
                       appropriateness for use as a mini-park or, if contiguous with existing                         . j
                       parks, as an extension of that park. Consideration should be given to
                       the following:
                       (1) configuration and useabilty for parkland;
                       (2) costs of acquisition and improvements;                                                     . ,
                       (3) availabilty of revenue;
                       (4) compatibilty with adjacent uses;
                       (5) loss of housing unts;
                       (6) significance of existing structures as architectural or historic
                                resources; and
                       (7) site accessibilty.
                       Public hearings shall be conducted when a site is being considered for
                       park use.
              b. Establish a trust fund to pay for the acquisition and development of
                       new parks with the funds being derived from the following sources:
                       (1) General revenue funds;
                       (2) Tax increment fund (in Redevelopment Project Areas);
                       (3) Developer assessments (through use of the Quimby Ordinance
                                and exactions of commercial developments);
                       (4) Business or fund-raising contributions;
                       (5) Mello-Roos Community Facilties Act;2
                       (6) Special taxes;3
                       (7) Benefit assessment districts;4
                       (8) Facilties bonding; and
                       (9) State and Federal grants or loans.
                                                                                                                      , ,
2 The Mello-Roos Community Facilties Act of 1982 authorizes local governments to levy special
  taxes within newly created Community Facilities Districts. The Act also au thorizes local
  governents to issue bonds backed by these special taxes. Funds may be used to pay for capital
  facilties, including parks. Community Facilities Districts are established by
                                                                                                  a two-thrds vote of
  the residents of the proposed district.
3 Special taxes are taxes collected and earmarked for a special purpose, such as a particular kind of
  service or facility, rather than being deposited in the general fund. For capital acquisition, such as
  parkland, the Mello-Roos Act (see Ch.9aL.3) provides the most practical way to levy a special tax.
  Under Proposition 13, the levy of a special tax requires support from two-thirds of the
  effected voters.
4 Special assessments are levied for local improvements that directly benefit specific real property,
  against the property owners who benefit from those improvements. Special assessments are not
  taxes and do not require a two-thirds vote of the electorate, as do special taxes.
          THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                                                                       7-18

L
    i                                                      7.0 PARKS AND RECREATION ELEMENT
ci
                 c. Utiize the funds to acquire and develop sites identified above and/or
                      historically and architecturally significant structures adjacent to parks
t--~l                 tl1at can be adaptively reused for public facilties.
                Responsibilty: City of American Canyon Plannig and Public Works
c!
                                    Departments
                Funding Source: City of American Canyon General Fund
                Schedule: Within 12 months of the General Plan's adoption
, 1
        I7.10   Include a requirement in the new Zoning Ordinance that all development
                projects provide onsite, pedestrian-oriented open space facilities or pay in-
                lieu fees for similar facilities sited nearby.
                Responsibilty:      City of American Canyon Planng Department and City
                                    Council
 . "'           Funding Source: City of American Canyon General Fund
                Schedule:           Within 12 months of the General Plan's adoption
 '"i    I7.11   As an incentive for obtaining additional funding for park improvements,
                devise mechanisms for receiving tax deductible contributions, which may
               include the donation of equipment and facilities.
               Responsibilty: City of American Canyon Public Works Department
               Funding Source: City of American Canyon General Fund
               Schedule:           Withi 24 months of the General Plan's adoption
       I7.12   Provide barrier-free access to all American Canyon facilities as mandated
               by the Americans with Disabilties Act.
               Responsibilty: City of American Canyon Public Works Department.
               Funding Source: City of American Canyon General Fund and/or
                                   application fees
               Schedule: Ongoing, as project applications are submitted
      PARK DEVLOPMENT GUIDELINES
      I  7.13  Provide an appropriate number and variety of sports fields and other
               recreational amenities in American Canyon Parks to meet the
               needs/demands of the communty.
               Responsibilty: City of American Canyon Department of Public Works
                                   and Plannng Department
               Funding Source: Plannng and Design: City of American Canyon General
                                   Fund, redevelopment tax increment revenue and/or
                                   development application fees
                                   Construction/Implementation: development conditions
                                   or fees, redevelopment tax increment revenue, and/or
                                   Mellow-Roos, or other assessment district
               Schedule: Ongoing or as funding permits
              THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                                                  7-19
                                                                                       ,,
                                                                                         I
                                               7.0 PARKS AND RECREATION ELEMENT ' i
                                                                                       "1
                                                                                       . ,
 17.14  Develop planng guidelines or incentives that encourage industrial and
        office park developments to provide athletic clubs and other applicable
        outdoor recreation or open space facilities specifically targeted toward their
        day use workig population base.
        Responsibilty: City of American Canyon Plang Department
        Funding Source: City of American Canyon General Fund and/ or
                          development application fees
        Schedule: Within 24 months of the General Plan's adoption, or as
                          funding permits
I 7.15  Emphasize the protection, enhancement and sensitive development of
        park and open space areas that possess great scenic, environmental,
        historic, and cultual values.
        Responsibilty: City of American Canyon Planning and Public Works
                          Departments
        Funding Source: City of American Canyon General Fund and/or
                          development application fees
        Schedule: Ongoing as project applications are submitted
I 7.16  Ensure that park sites have numerous access points to various roads, paths
        and trails.                                                                    . ,
        Responsibilty: City of American Canyon Public Works Department
        Funding Source: City of American Canyon General Fund and/ or
                          development application fees
        Schedule:         Ongoing   as project applications are submitted
I 7.17  The City shall conduct a cost/benefit analysis prior to acquiing any new
        parklands.
        Responsibilty: City of American Canyon Finance Department
        Funding Source: City of American Canyon General Fund and/or
                          development application fees
        Schedule:         As new parkland acquisitions are proposed
I7.18   Balance the distribution of active and passive spaces in the City's parks.
        Responsibilty: City of American Canyon Planning and Public Works
                          Departments
        Funding Source: City of American Canyon General Fund and/or
                          application fees
        Schedule: Ongoing as parks are developed
I7.19   Use the standards, criteria and park classification system established in the
        Parks and Recreation Master Plan when determining the proper location
       THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                                        7-20
9
                                                         7.0 PARKS AND RECREATION ELEMENT
ri
                  for and development character of educational facilities and/or programs
                  within the cityide park system.
r ~
                  Responsibilty: City of American Canyon Plannig Department
                  Funding Source: City of American Canyon General Fund and/ or
                                     application fees
'1                Schedule: Ongoing, as funding is available
        I  7.20   Implement park rehabilitation and restoration recommendations
, I               emphasized in the Parks and Recreation Master Plan.
                  Responsibilty: City of American Canyon Public Works Department
, ,               Funding Source: Planing and Design: City of American Canyon General
                                     Fund, redevelopment tax increment revenue, and/or
                                     development application fees
, ,                                  Construction/Implementation: development conditions
                                     or fees, redevelopment tax increment revenue, and/or
                                    Mellow-Roos or other assessment district
, ')              Schedule: Ongoing, as funding permits
       I  7.21   Future park sites should adhere to the sequence set forth in the
                 Implementation and Prioritization section of the Parks and Recreation
                 Master Plan, applicable specific plans and/or development agreements.
                 Responsibilty: City of American Canyon Plannng and Public Works
                                    Departments
                 Funding Source: City of American Canyon General Fund development
                                    condition or fees, and/or other available funding
                                    sources approved by the City
                 Schedule: Ongoing, as funding is available
      17.22      Development of new neighborhood and community parks shall be
                 considered essential public improvements. Furthermore, they shall be
                 constructed in the same sequence as the intial construction of roads and
                 utility systems serving new residential areas of the City.
                 Responsibilty: City of American Canyon Planning and Public Works
                                    Departments
                 Funding Source: City of American Canyon General Fund development
                                    condition or fees, and/or other available funding
                                    sources approved by the City
                 Schedule: Ongoing, as funding is available
     I    7.23   The City shall incorporate day care and elder care centers into parks that
                 are considered appropriate locations for such facilties. These centers shall
                 be sited according to need, accessibilty, cost considerations and design
                 constraints in addition to any other factors deemed important.
                THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                                                 7-21
                                                7.0 PARKS AND RECREATiON ELEMENT
                                                                                    c 1
        Responsibilty:       City of American Canyon Planning and Public Works
                             Departments                                            . ~
        Funding Source: City of American Canyon General Fund
        Schedule:            As funding permits
17.24   The City shall ensure that suffcient maintenance, development and
        staffing funds are both available and earmarked for new parkland before it
        is acquied.
        Responsibilty:       City of American Canyon Planng and Public Works
                             Departments
        Funding Source: City of American Canyon General Fund
        Schedule:            As funding permits
I 7.25  The City shall encourage the development of a golf course within the City
        and its Sphere of Influence by working with the development community
        and property owners.
        Responsibilty: City of American Canyon Plannig Department
        Funding Source: City of American Canyon General Fund
        Schedule: Ongoing, until project is underway
I 7.26  The design of new parks and the renovation of existing parks shall adhere
        to the policies and guidelines established in the Aesthetic and Biological
        Resources sections of the Natural and Historic/Cultural
        Resources Element.
        Responsibilty:       City of American Canyon Planning and Public Works
                             Departments
        Funding Source: City of American Canyon General Fund
        Schedule:            Ongoing
17.27   The City shall incorporate design features such as adequate lighting and
        state of the art playground equipment to make American Canyon's parks
        as safe as possible.
        Responsibilty: City of American Canyon Public Works Department
        Funding Source: City of American Canyon General Fund
        Schedule: Ongoing
17.28   Establish standards for a park defensible space ordinance (Le. physical
        design characteristics that minimize criminal activity) and coordinate with
        the Sheriff's Department to ensure design review of park development
        plans.
        Responsibilty:       City of American Canyon Planning and Public Works
                             Departments
        Funding Source: City of American Canyon General Fund
        Schedule:            Within 18 months of the General Plan's adoption
       THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                                        7-22
.,
                                                        7.0 PARKS AND RECREATION ELEMENT
. --1
    :
         17.29    Parks shall be designed so that active uses are buffered or set back from
                  adjacent residential uses.
~,
                  Responsibilty: City of American Canyon Public Works Department
                  Funding Source: City of American Canyon General Fund
                  Schedule: Ongoing
, 1
         AGENCY AND PUBLIC/PRIVATE COOPERATION
, 1
        I 7.30    Work with other local and regional government entities to evaluate the
                  feasibility of establishing a nature center and/ or other such
.,                educational/recreational amenities in American Canyon.
                  Responsibilty: City of American Canyon Plannng Department
                  Funding Source: State and Federal grants, special assessment fees and/or
. ,
                                    general fund
                  Schedule:         As funding permits
 , ,
    ,
       I  7.31   Improve and modify the existing joint use facility agreements with school
                 districts and other agencies to allow for the enhanced use of public
                 facilties for the various joint use proposals contained in the Parks and
                 Recreation Master Plan.
                 Responsibilty: City of American Canyon Planning and Public Works
                                    Departments
                 Funding Source: City of Americ'an Canyon General Fund and/or
                                   development application fees
                 Schedule: Ongoing, as funding is available
      17.32     Coordinate with the appropriate local, county and state agencies to ensure
                 the proper protection, maintenance, and/or enhancement of the City's
                open space and recreational resources.
                Responsibilty: City of American Canyon Plannng Department
                Funding Source: City of American Canyon General Fund and/or
                                   development application fees
                Schedule:          Ongoing, as funding is available
      17.33     The City shall coordinate its park acquisition activities with other
                government agencies.
                Responsibilty:     City of American Canyon Planning Department in
                                   cooperation with Napa County, state government
                                   agencies and other local governments
                Funding Source: City of American Canyon General Fund
                Schedule:          Ongoing, as requied
      17.34     Contiue and enhance cooperation between the Director of Public Works
                and the Sheriffs Department regarding park and trail safety.
               THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                                               7-23
                                               7.0 PARKS AND RECREATION ELEMENT
                                                                                      1
        Responsibilty:    City of American Canyon Planning and Public Works
                          Departments in cooperation with the Napa County
                          Sheriff's Department
        Funding Source: City of American Canyon General Fund
        Schedule:         Ongoing
I 7.35  Cooperate with organizations and/or groups that provide recreational
        opportunities for American Canyon's young people (e.g. the Boys and         , ¡
        Girls Club, YMCA, etc.) to ensure that the widest array of services are
        provided within the City.
        Responsibilty: City of American Canyon Plannng Department
        Funding Source: City of American Canyon General Fund                        ¡ 1
        Schedule: Ongoing                                                           , I
DATA COMPILATION AND SPECIAL STUDIES
17.36   The City shall undertake a study as part of the Parks and Recreation Master . ì
        Plan that investigates the feasibilty of transforming the American Canyon
        Landfil into a Regional Park.
        Responsibilty: City of American Canyon Planning and Public Works
                          Departments in cooperation with South County Waste
                          Management Authority and other appropriate                . ,
                                                                                      i
                          government agencies                                         ,
        Funding Source: City of American Canyon General Fund
        Schedule: Withn 18 months of the General Plan's adoption
I 7.37  Conduct a parks and recreation user survey to provide direction for future
        parks and recreation policy development. In addition to evaluating the
        desirability of various existing and proposed services and .facilties, ths
        survey should address such issues as the need for providing after school
        and summer recreation programs for children, and the degree to which
        programs for the elderly and the physically challenged need to be
        expanded or created.
        Responsibilty: City of American Canyon Plannng or Public Works
                          Department
        Funding Source: City of American Canyon General Fund and/ or
                          development application fees
        Schedule: Within 24 months of the General Plan's adoption or as
                          funding permits
I 7.38  Conduct a periodic in-house review and evaluation of park facilities in
        order to achieve the most effcient use of park operation and maintenance
        funds.
       THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                                        7-24

-:
                                                          7.0 PARKS AND RECREATION ELEMENT
c-i
                   Responsibilty: City of American Canyon Planning and Public Works
                                       Departments
                   Funding Source: City of American Canyon General Fund and! or
                                       development application fees
                   Schedule: Annually, or as funding is available
,,
        I  7.39   Consider establishing a non-profit foundation to solicit private
                  organizations to sponsor public recreation activities, supply equipment
                  and uniorms, donate facilities in parks, etc., and to act as a vehicle to
                  provide clear tax advantages to donors and contributors of funds and
                  resources.
                  Responsibilty: City of American Canyon
                  Funding Source: City of American Canyon General Fund and! or
 "                                    development application fees
                  Schedule:           Within five years of the General Plan's adoption, or as
                                      funding permits
      I   7.40    Identify those prime park sites and proposed recreation facilities that can
                  be better operated by private investors/operators, and solicit proposals
                  from qualified entities for development and management thereof.
                  Responsibilty: City of American Canyon Planning, Public Works, and
                                      Finance Departments
                  Funding Source: City of American Canyon General Fund development
                                      condition or fees, and!or other available funding
                                      sources approved by the City
                  Schedule: As necessary, or when funding is available
    I     7.41   The City shall conduct a Parks and Recreation Master Plan Special Study in
                 cooperation with the Napa County School Board, in order to determie
                 the appropriate location for a pool and/or gymnasium that can be shared
                 by a new middle schooL.
                 Responsibilty: City of American Canyon Planning and Public Works
                                      Departments
                 Funding Source: City of American Canyon General Fund
                 Schedule: Within 24 months of the General Plan's adoption
    17.42        The City shall maintain an inventory of surplus state, county and local
                 land that exists within the City and its Plannng Area and, as funding is
                 available, purchase and acquire those parcels that are appropriate for
                 recreational purposes. When purchase is not possible, consider the
                 negotiation of long-term lease agreements to provide park and
                 recreational facilities.
                 Responsibilty: City of American Canyon Planning and Public Works
                                      Departments
                THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                                                  7-25
                                                                              1
                                           7.0 PARKS AND RECREATION ELEMENT ' i
                                                                              r 1
                                                                                 ,
        Funding Source: City of American Canyon General Fund                  , ¡
        Schedule: Within 24 months of the General Plan's adoption
                                                                              ~l
EDUCATION                                                                     . ,
17.43   Establish cooperative, interpretive, historical and environmental       i
        education programs utilizing various natural and cultural resources   . ¡
        found in American Canyon.
        Responsibilty: 'City of American Canyon Planning Department in        , I
                        cooperation with the Napa County School District      . ,
        Funding Source: City of American Canyon General Fund and/or
                        development application fees
        Schedule: Within five years of the General Plan's adoption or as      , ,
                        funding permits
                                                                              . ,
                                                                                i
                                                                              , ¡
      THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                                    7-26

1
                                                         '4iam        tJ~
                                                                       e",_
             -,
                                       /.,
                                           I. I"'"           GENERAl p~
    I'
                 Natural
                       i, -. ,I&,Historic          I'
                                                    ~ i,       I C'uitural
                                                         'iElement--
                                                                 J " _
                                                      -i  :"
 i
                    '. !
       I)
                                  ,
 i                              I
             ; ---
                                                                            11\,
   i,
                         I'
                    L_
                                    -,
                 \\
            ~I
                            ii
                                                                                 -¡
          \~:
                               ir
                                                                             ¡-

¡
                              8.0 NATURAL AND HISTORIC/CULTURAL RESOURCES ELEMENT
 ,
   STATUTORY REOUIREMENTS
-, Calfornia state law requires the preparation of two (2) elements that address a city's
   environmental resources: the Conservation and Open Space Elements. The
   American Canyon General Plan combines these elements into the Natural and
   Historic/Cultural Resources Element, thereby fulflling al state requirements. The
   pertinent statutory requirements that shape ths element include:
          Government Code Section 65302(d): A conservation element for the
          conservation, development, and utilization of natural resources including
          water and its hydraulic force, forests, soils, rivers and other waters, harbors,
         fisheries, wildlife, minerals, and other natural resources. That portion of the
          conservation element including waters shall be developed in coordination
          with any CountlJwide water agency and with all district and City agencies
          which have developed, served, controlled, or conserved water for any
         purpose for the county or City for which the plan is prepared.
          Government Code Section 65302 (e): An open space element as provided in
         Article 10.5 (commencing with Section 65560).
         Government Code Section 655560: "Open space land" is any parcel or area of
         land or water which is essentially unimproved and devoted to an open space
         use as defined in    this section, and which is designated on a local, regional or
         State open space plan as any of the following: (1) Open space for the
         preservation of natural resources. (2) Open space used for the managed
         production of resoui'ceS. (3) Open space for outdoor recreation. (4) Open
         space for public health and safety, including, but not limited to, areas which
         require special management or regulation because of hazardous or special
         conditions such as earthquake faults zones, unstable soil areas, flood plains,
         watersheds, areas presenting high fire risks, areas required for the protection
         of water quality and water reservoirs and areas required for the protection and
         enhancement of air quality.
         THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                                              8-1

                          8.0 NATURAL AND HISTORIC/CULTURAL RESOURCES ELEMENT
OPPORTUmES AND CONSTRINTS (iSSUES)
BIOLOGICAL RESOURCESIHABITAT
The City of American Canyon and its Plannng Area contain signiicant habitats,
including wetlands, riparian corridors, mixed hardwood forests, and vernal pools
that should be protected and enhanced to maintain both local and regional
biological diversity.
WATER RESOURCES
1. The Plannng Area contains several streams and creeks, such as American
     Canyon Creek, North Slough Creek, and Rio Del Mar Creek, which can
     contribute to the unique character of the City if they are protected and
     maintained in their natural state.
2. The Napa River marshlands/wetlands also contribute to the region's
    unque character.
3. Segments of the American Canyon Creek are currently impacted by residential
     development. To assure that the natural character of the Creek is not degraded
    any further, new housing developments planned for the southwestern portion
    of the City should be designed to protect the Creek's natural water course.
SOIL RESOURCES
1. There are parcels of land located east of Highway 29 within American Canyon's
    Planning Area that contain soils which are appropriate for agriculture.
    Opportunties therefore exist for the protection and enhancement of farmland
    within the Plannng Area.
2. Soil conservation measures are needed to avoid the loss of soil from wind
    exposure and erosion.
MINERAL RESOURCES
According to existing data and evidence, there are no known mineral resources in
economically viable quantities within the City's Planning Area.
AESTHETIC RESOURCES & TOPOGRAPHY
The visual resource issues relevant to the General Plan relate to protecting and
enhancing existing visual resources, removing features that detract from the
appreciation of the region's natural beauty, and developing visual resource
guidelines for future development. The primary aesthetic resource issues are
as follows:
1. The eastern portion of American Canyon's Plannng Area is bounded by hillsides
    that provide a visual backdrop to the City, which could be degraded by future
    development if not managed properly.
         THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                                          8-2
.'1
                              8.0 NATURAL AND HISTORIC/CULTURAL RESOURCES ELEMENT
  .,
     2.  The City has numerous public view corridors of both the eastern foothils and
         the wetlands.
     3.  The Highway 29 corridor provides opportunities for enhancing the City's visual
         quality.
.,   4. Hilsides and ridgelines could be at risk of degradation from insensitive
         development.
     ARCHAEOLOGICAL RESOURCES
     1. Four (4) prehstoric sites are known to exist within the City of American Canyon
         according to a records and literature review conducted by the California
         Archaeological Inventory at Sonoma State University (1991).
         The Napa County Airport Specific Plan and EIR (1986) identiied a number of
         sites considered highly sensitive due to their potential for supporting
         archaeological resources. These include Soscol Creek, the Fagan and Sheehy
         streams, the 20-foot contour elevation at the edge of the Napa River floodplain,
         sandstone, basaltic, and other rock outcroppings, alluvial deposits, and seasonal
         wetlands.
         Without adequate measures to mitigate development impacts, new
         development may threaten significant archaeological resources.
     CULTURAL RESOURCES
     The City can utiize and build upon the County's cultural database, which is
 . ,
     compiled by the Department of Conservation, thereby ensuring that cultural
     resources throughout the community are not significantly impacted by future
     development.
     ENERGY RESOURCES
     1. The City has the opportunity to reduce its reliance on automobiles and total
        vehicle miles traveled, by implementing land use and circulation strategies that
        reduce the distance between residential and commercial/retail uses.
     2. American Canyon has the opportunity to require and/or encourage the use of
        building design technques that minimizes heat loss and gain.
     3. American Canyon's location and climate make the city a suitable place for the
        utization of passive and active solar energy technologies.
     4. American Canyon is subject to prevailing winds from the San Francisco Bay and
        downslope through the valley and canyons providing opportunities for the
        consideration of wind-generating energy systems.
             THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                                              8-3
                         8.0 NATURAL AND HISTORic/CULTURAL RESOURCES ELEMENT
OVERVIEW OF NATURAL RESOURCES POLICIES
The policies found within ths element of American Canyon's General Plan address
the following topics:
1. Protection and preservation of significant flora and fauna.
2. Preservation of American Canyon's aesthetic resources, including ridgelines,
    canyons and signficant public views.
3. Protection of historically and archaeologically signiicant resources and the
    recogntion of their inherent historic value.
4. Protection of the City's soil and water.
5. Minimization of transportation related energy consumption.
6. Reduction of energy consumption in buildings.
7. Increasing public awareness of energy conservation methods.
8. Increasing the energy efficiency of City operations.
        THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                                          8-4
r                                         8.0 NATURAL AND HISTORIC/CULTURAL RESOURCES ELEMENT
. 1
     GOALS, OBJECTS AND POLICIES
     The following section presents the goals, objectives, and policies related to natural
     and historic/ cultural resources in the City of American Canyon. Implementing
     programs are referenced at the conclusion of each policy by an "I" and a number in
     parentheses and are described in the last subsection of the element.
: 1
     ALL BIOLOGICAL RESOURCE AREAS
     Goal
     8 Protect and preserve the significant habitats, plants and wildlife that exist
                in the City and its Planning Area,
     Objective
. ,
    8.1 Maintain data and information regarding areas of significant biological
                value within the Plannng Area to facilitate resource conservation and the
                appropriate management of development.
    Policies
    8.1.1 Acquire and maintain the most current inormation available regardig
               the status and location of sensitive biological elements (species and
               natural communities) within the City and, as appropriate, within the
               Sphere of Inuence and Urban Limit Line. (I 8.37)
    8.1.2 Support, where appropriate, state and federal studies of the Napa River
               wetlands and riverine systems. (l 8.33)
    8.1.3 Identify the most effective and regionally appropriate funding
               mechanisms for the long-term maintenance. and protection of significant
              biological resource areas. (I 8.39)
    8.1.4 Reguarly monitor and review developments proposed within the City's
               Plannng Area to assess their impacts            on local biological resources and to
              recommend appropriate mitigation measures that the developer and/or
               government agency can implement. (I 8.30, I 8.37, and 18.38)
    Objective
    8.2 Balance the preservation of natural habitat areas, including coastal
              saltmarsh, mixed hardwood forest, oak savannah, and wetland and
              riparian habitats, with new development in the City.
    Policy
    8.2.1     Land use applications for developments located withi sensitive habitats,
              including coastal saltmarsh, mixed hardwood forest, oak savannah, and
              riparian habitats (see Figure 8-1), or with areas potentially occupied by
            THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                                                        8-5

~
                                        8.0 NATURAL AND HISTORIC/CULTURAL RESOURCES ELEMENT
r ':
                vernal pools (see Figure 8-2) shall be accompanied by sufficient techcal
                background data to enable an adequate assessment of the potential for
                impacts on these resources, and possible measures to reduce any
                identifiable impacts. In addition to examining Figure 8-1 for information
                on these sensitive habitats, an on-site assessment shall be conducted by a'
                City approved qualified biologist to determine if sensitive habitats exist
                on-site,
               In instances where the potential for significant impacts exists, the
                applicant must submit a Biological Assessment Report prepared by a
               qualied professionaL. (I 8.30 find I 8.38)
     Objective
     8.3 Protect natural drainages and riparian corridors withi the American
               Canyon Plannng Area.
     Policies
     8.3.1 Review proposed developments in wetlands and riparian habitats to
               evaluate their conformance with the following policies and standards:
               a. The development plan shall fully consider the nature of existing
                   biological resources and all reasonable measures shal be taken to avoid
                   signficant impacts, including retention of sufficient natual open space
                   and undeveloped buffer zones.
               b. Development shall be designed and sited to preserve watercourses,
                   riparian habitat, vernal pools, and wetlands in their natural condition,
                   unless these actions result in an unfeasible project, in which case
                   habitat shall be replaced in accord with subsection "g" (below).
               c. Where riparian corridors are retained, they shall be protected by an
                   adequate buffer with a minimum 100             foot protection zone from the
                   edge of the tree, shrub, or herb canopy (see policy 8.3.2).
               d. Development shall incorporate habitat linkages (wildlie corridors) to
                   adjacent open spaces, where appropriate and feasible.
               e. Development shall incorporate fences, walls, vegetative cover, or other
                   measures to adequately buffer habitat areas, linkages or corridors from
                   built environment.
               f. Roads and utilities shall be located and designed such that conficts
                   with biological resources, habitat areas, linkages or corridors are
                   avoided where feasible.
               g. Future development shall utilize appropriate open space or
                   conservation easements in order to protect sensitive species or
                   their habitats.
              h. Future development shall mitigate unavoidable adverse impacts to
                   waters of the United States, wetlands and riparian habitats (pursuant to
                   the Federal Clean Water Act and the California Fish and Game Code,
             THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                                                      8-7

                                    8.0 NATURAL AND HISTORIC/CULTURAL RESOURCES ELEMENT
                         Section 1600 et seq.) by replacement on an in-kid basis. Furthermore,
                        replacement shall be based on a ratio determined by the California
                        Department of Fish and Game and/or Army Corp. of Engineers in
                        order to àccount for the potentially diminished habitat values of
                        replacement habitat, Such replacement should occur on the original
'., development site, whenever possible. Alternatively, replacement can
                        be effected, subject to state and federal regulatory approval, by creation
                        or restoration of replacement habitats elsewhere (offsite but preferably
                        withi the City's Plannng Area), protected in perpetuity by provision
                        for an appropriate conservation easement or dedication. (I 8.21, I 8.30, and
                       I 8.38)
         8.3.2 Prohibit development and grading that alters the biological integrity of the
                   Riparian Corridors as depicted on the Biological Habitats Map, uness no
                   feasible alternative exists or the damaged habitat is replaced with habitat of
                   equivalent value (see Figure 8-1).
                   Development that is permitted within Riparian Corridors shall:
                   a. miniize removal of vegetation, erosion, sedimentation and runoff by
                       appropriate protection or vegetation and landscape;
                   b. provide for sufficient passage of native and anadromous fish;
                   c. minimize wastewater discharges and entrapment;
                   d. prevent ground water depletion or substantial interference with
                       surface and subsurface flows;
                  e. provide for natural vegetation buffers;
                  f. minimize the channelization of streams and other watercourses; and
                  g. provide for the enhancement of riparian corridors. (I 8.32)
        8.3.3 Permit only the following uses within retained Riparian Corridors (see
                  Figure 8-1):
                  a. education and research, excluding buildings and other structues;
                  b. passive (non-motorized) recreation;
                  c. trails and scenic overlooks on public land(s) if located outside of
                      undeveloped buffer zones;
                  d. fish and wildlife management activities;
                  e. necessary water supply projects;
                 f. resource consumptive uses as provided for in the Fish and Game Code
                      and Title 14 of the California Administrative Code;
                 g. flood control projects where no other methods are available to protect
                      the public safety;
                 h. bridges when supports are not in significant confict with riparian
                      resources; and
                 i. underground utilties. (I 8.32)
               THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                                                    8-9

                                       8.0 NATURAL AND HISTORIC/CULTURAL RESOURCES ELEMENT
 8.3.4       Permit the modification of Riparian Corridor boundaries if it is
             determied that the existing boundary inappropriately reflects biological,
             topographical, or hydrological conditions. In such cases, boundary
             modification shall be based on a site specific study that takes into account
             field evidence and interpretation of physical and biological data, includig:               . i
             a) the natue and extent of the vegetation, or in the case of disturbed sites,
             the potential vegetation; b) topography, and; c) hydrology. Riparian
             vegetation shall be defined as those species and species assemblages
             referable to community classifications whose element codes are between
             60000 and 69999 (Riparian Forests, Woodlands, and Scrubs) of the
             Calfornia Natual Diversity Data Base (Holland, 1986). (18.38, I 8.4, and I 8.43)
8.3.5        Establish a network of open spaces along the City's natual drainages and
             riparian corridors and lin signficant biological habitats. Any recreational                . .
             use of these areas shall be designed to avoid damaging sensitive habitat
             areas, (I 8.28 and I 8.42)                                                                 . J
8.3.6        Preserve and integrate the City's natural drainages in new development,
             as opposed to their channelization or undergrounding, emphasizing
             opportunities for the development of pedestrian paths and greenbelts                       . ,
             along their lengths throughout the City. (I 8.29 and I 8.43)
Objective
8.4 Protect local vernal pools as well as the habitats of endangered species
             living withi American Canyon's Plannng Area.
Policies
8.41 Require that development plans incorporate all reasonable mitigation
            measures to avoid significantly impacting vernal pools for projects located
            within American Canyon's Planning Area. (I 8.37 and I                        8.38)
8.4.2 Preserve, where possible, the habitat of several in-fact endangered species,1
            including those shown on Figure 8-2 and listed in Table 8-1, as well as
            those that may be considered by the City in the futue. (I 8.30, 18.37, and I          8.38)
8.4.3 Encourage activities that improve the biological value and integrity of the
            City's natural resources through vegetation restoration, control of alien
            plants and anials, and landscape buffering. (I 8.21)
1   Rarity, theat and endangerment are considered a matter of fact, not law. Plants or animals can
    therefore be treated as rare, threatened, or endangered, even if they are not officially listed as
    such.
          THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                                                                    8-10
                              8.0 NATURAL AND HISTORIC/CULTURAL RESOURCES ELEMENT
                                           . TABLE    8-1
                                 Sensitive Biological Resources
 Habitats
 Coastal Bracksh Marsh (Element: 52200). Dominated by perennial, emergent, herbaceous
      monocots up to 2 meters tall. Cover is often complete and dense. May share some
      plants with freshwater marsh. Typical plants include Carex spp., Typlia latifolia,
       Disticlilis spicata, Juncus spp., and Salicornia spp. Usually occurs at the edges of coastal
      bays and esturies or in coastal lagoons. Best developed around Suisun Bay, but also
      reported at Fagan Marsh.
 Northern Vernal Pool (Element: 44100). A low, amphibious, herbaceous communty
      dominated by herbs and grasses. Germtion and growth of plants begin with winter
      rains, and continues through inundation. Just outside of the project area, reported
      from east of lúghways 12 and 29, north of Soscol Road, four miles north of Napa
      Junction.
 Valley Needlegrass Grassland (Element: 42110). A rndheight grassland dominated by
      perenal, tussock-formg purple needlegrass (Stipa pulclira). Native and introduced
      anual and grasses occur between the perennals and may exceed the total cover of
      the perennals; CDFG considers cover of 10 percent or more of native perennal grasses
      sufficient to classif as a native grassland. No specific locations reported.
Serpentie Bunchgrass (Element: 42130). An open grassland dominated by native perennial
      bunchgrasses. Total cover may be low, but is markedly dominated by native species, in
      contrast to valley needlegrass grassland. Reported from the southeast quadrant of the
      Plan Area in American Canyon, on four separate slopes.
Wildflower Field (Element: 42300). A collection of herb-dominated communties which are
     notable for conspicuous annual wildflower displays. Species dominance varies form
      site to site and from year to year, depending upon conditions and weather. Usually
     found on poor soils adjacent to grasslands or oak woodlands wlúch occur on more
     productive sites. No specific locations reported.
Pla"ts
Mason's liaeopsis (Lilaeopsis masonii). Status: C2, SR, List lB. Found in fresh and brackh
     water marshes and in riparian areas. Occurs on muddy or silty soils formed by tidal
     action or from stream deposition (from sea level to 25 feet elevation). Located along
     Napa River from Napa south to the confuence of Steamboat Slough (Ruygt, 1993),
     where it grows along the riverbank or on wood pilings.
Contra Costa goldfields (Lastlienia conjugens). CL, List IE. Occurs in valley and foothi
     grasslands where there are vernal pools; up to 700 feet elevation. Reported from just
     north of Soscol Creek along lúghways 12 and 29, approximately four miles south of
     Napa and 0.9 miles east of Soscol lústorical settlement.
Dwarf dowingia (Dowingia Izimilis). C3c, List lB. Occurs in vernal pools in valley and
     foothill grasslands. Reported just outside the Plan Area from an area 2,200 feet east of
     the Napa River at Horseshoe Bend; 2,1 miles south of entrance to Napa State Hospital
     along Highway 29.
         THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                                                 8-11

                                                                                                 '1
                            8.0 NATURAL AND HISTORIC/CULTURAL RESOURCES ELEMENT
                                       TABLE 8-1 (cant.)
                                Sensitive Biological Resources
                                                                                                 -."1
Plants (cont.)
Legenere (Legenere limosa). C2, List 1 B. Inabits verna pools from sea level to 1,400 feet      , ,
     elevation. Reported just outside of the Plan Area from vernal pool 2.4 miles south of
     Napa State Hospital east of Highway 29.
Showy Indian clover (Trifolium amoenum). C2, List lA. Occurs in valley and foothil
     grasslands on serpentine soil. Found in open, suny locations from sea level to 200
     feet elevation. Reported from Buchli Station Road and Napa Junction in 1952.
     Believed to be extict; last reported in 1969. Ruygt (1993) suggests that it would be a     ,- i
     preferred forage species for cattl.
Tiburon Indian paitbrush (Castileja neglecta). CL, ST, List IB. Found on serpentie soils
     in valey and foothl grasslands. Reported from American Canyon, approximately 0.5
     miles east of Flosden Road above old quarry.
Brewer's dwarf flax (Hesperolinon breweri). C2, List 1B. Occurs in serpentie chparral and
     foothill grasslands. Found on rocky soils in upper Suisun Valley. No specific              . ,
                                                                                                    ,
     locations reported.
Delta rule pea (Lathyrus j. jepsonii). C2, List lB. Reported in the Plan Area from Fagan
     Marsh, just north and northeast of Fagan Slough, and also south of Steamboat Slough.
Marin knotweed (Polygonum marinense), C2, List 3. Reported from Cuttings Wharf, Napa
     River.
Mount Diablo buckheat (Eriogonum tl'uncatum). C2, List lA. Occurs in chparral, coastal
     sage scrub, and valley-foothill grasslands on dry, exposed clay or rock surfaces. Possibly
     extict; last reported in 1940.
Soft bird's-beak (Cordylanthus m. molls). CR, CL, List lB. Reported in salt marshes of the      ; :
      Plan Area in vicity of Fagan and Steamboat Sloughs.
Suisun marsh aster (Aster chilensis lentus). C2, List lB. Reported in the Plan Area from
     Fagan Marsh, north and northeast of Fagan Slough.
Shootig star (Dodecatheon hendersonii cruciatum) Locally rare. Ruygt (1993) reports an
     unusual form with white flowers from the serpentine slopes south of American
     Canyon Creek.
Long-petalled iris (Iris longipetala). Locally rare. Ruygt (1993) reports this species from the
      serpentie slopes south of American Canyon Creek.
Balsamroot (Balsamorhiza m. macrolepis). List 3. Ruygt (1993) reports ths species from the
      serpentie slopes south of American Canyon Creek.
Monardella (Monardella douglasii). Locally rare. Ruygt (1993) reports ths species from the
      serpentie slopes south of American Canyon Creek. Species needs further taxonomic
      investigation.
         THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                                              8-12
~
                                   8.0 NATURAL AND HISTORIC/CULTURAL RESOURCES ELEMENT
,,
                                              TABLE 8-1 (cant.)
                                      Sensitive Biological Resources
.~
      Plaiits (cont.)
      San Joaquin saltbush (Atriplex joaquiniana= A. patula spicata). C2, List 3. Ruygt (1993)
              reports the occurrence of ths species from the marshlands of Amencan Canyon Creek.
      Invertebrates
;" ,
      Caliorna freshwater shrimp (Syncaris pacifca). FE, SE. Endemic to Napa, Mendocio, and
             Martn counties. Occurs on low gradient streams where there is heavy to moderate
             riparian cover. Inbits shallow pools away from main flows, and spends winters tn
,,           undercut bans with exposed roots. Often attaches to leaves hanging in water durtng
             sumer. Known from Huichca Creek, a tributary to the Napa River.
.i
      Reptiles and Amphibians
      Northwestern pond turtle (Clemmys m. manl1orata). Locally uncommon. Inhabitant of
            ponds, marshes, rivers, streams and irrigation ditches that have a rocky or muddy
            bottom and are grown to watercress, cattails, etc., May be seen baskig on logs, cattai
            mats and mudbanks from February to mid-November. Sometimes wandering
            considerably from aquatic habitats into grassland and forest.
     Californa tiger salamander (Ambystoma tig1'niwi californiel1se). Proposed FE, CSc. Most
            common in anual grasslands or grassy understory of hardwood habitats. Most
            populations occur below 1,000 feet elevation. Adults spend most of the year in
            underground refugia (e.g, ground squirrel burrows). Lays eggs tn vernal pools or other
            temporary water sources; rarely uses streams.
     Caliorna red-legged frog (Rana aurora draytonii). Cl, CSc. Found in quiet pools of
           streams, marshes, and ponds. Prefers shorelines with extensive aquatic vegetation,
           and is rarely found far from aquatic habitat. Breed from January to July, depending
           upon location. Susceptible to stream alterations and introduced exotic species
           (bulrogs, sunish).
     Foothill yellow-legged frog (Rana boylei). CSc. Occurs in or near rocky streams in a variety
           of   habitats from hardwoods to chaparral to coniferous forest. May be observed baskig
           on rocks in warm weather, but seeking cover during cold spells, Never found away
           from permanent water sources. Breeding from mid-March to May, depending upon
           conditions, but usually after flooding rains have ended.
     Animals
     California horned lizard (Plinjnosoma corol1atimi frontale). CSc. Found in open areas,
           especially where sandy soils and harvester ants are found, below 4,000 feet elevation.
           Prefers valley-foothi hardwood, conifer and nparian, and anual grassland habitats.
     Alameda whipsnake (Màsticop7iis lateralis euryxantlius). CL, CT. Prefers mied chparral,
          chamise-redshans chaparral, and valley-foothil riparian habitats. Active diurnally
          from March to November.
                THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                                                   8-13

                                                                                                -,
                                                                                                    I
                                         8.0 NATURAL AND HISTORic/CULTURAL RESOURCES ELEMENT    . ¡
                                                           TABLE 8-1 (cont.)                    ; ¡
                                               Sensitive Biological Resources
                                                                                                , t
Animals (cant.)
Birds
Black-shouldered kite (Elanus caeruleiis). CP, SA (breeding). Uncommon resident in             1- ¡
      coastal and valley lowlands, rarely very far from agricultual areas. Winter roosts may
      consist of a hundred kites or more. Requires fairly dense stands of broad-leafed
                                                                                               , ,
      deciduous trees for nestig.
Northern harrier (Circus ClJaneiis). CSC (breeding). Nests in shrubby vegetation, usually at
      the edge of a marsh, and occasionally in grasslands, sagebrush flats, and croplands
      away from water. More widespread in winter, especially in the south. Soars low over
                                                                                               \ .j
      open habitats searchg for mice and other rodents. Known to nest in the vicinty of
      the Plang Area, especially near the Napa River and surroundig agricultural
                                                                                        lands.
Cooper's hawk (Accipiter cDopen). CSC (breeding). Nests in riparian and oak woodlands
      with suitable foraging habitat nearby. Breeding populatiDns are uncommDn and local,
      much reduced from former densities. Wintering numbers are much lugher than
      breeding pDpulations, althDugh these tDO are much IDwer than in previous decades.
      Decles are due tD habitat loss, mainy Df IDwland riparian areas.
Sharp-shied hawk (Accipiter striatus), CSC (breedig). FDrmerly a CDmmon nester in
      much of northrn CalifDrnia, but records of nestig have become scarce. Much more
      CDmmon as a winter visitor, although these numbers are also much lower than in
      previous decades. Declines are the result of logging, habitat loss, and falconry. Not
      expected tD nest in the Plarung Area, but may occur in winter.
Ferrugious hawk (Buteo regalis). C2 (wintenng). Uncommon winter visitor and migrant
      at lower elevations. Found in open grasslands, agricultural fields, and IDW fooths
      where it Dften perches on the ground. Does not nest in CalifDrrua, but wintering
      numbers have declined and may be the result Df conversion of wintering habitat to
      agrculture Dr development, and poisDnig of rDdents. .
GDlden eagle (Àquila clirysaetos). CSC, CP, prDtected under the Federal Bald Eagle
      ProtectiDn Act. FDrages in a number Df open habitat types, such as grasslands,
      chaparral, and oak woodlands. Nesting requirements are more specific, including
      vertical rock faces with ledges or large trees with fDragig habitat nearby. The CDFG's
      Rarefid application reports a successful nesting east of VallejD in 1989, with other
      nesting attempts in 1988 and 1991.
Peregrine falcon (Falco peregrinus). FE, SE, CPo Frequents bodies Df water in open areas,
      such as marshes, mudfats, and riverbans. Nests on lugh cliffs, banks, dunes, or even
      snag cavities, near lakes, rivers, Dr other water Nesting in the area is possible,
      especially alDng the Napa River and San PablD Bay.
Prairie falcon (Falco mexicanus). CSc. UncommDn permanent resident of grasslands,
      savannahs, rangeland, and SDme agricultural areas. Nests on rDck faces or in the
      abandoned stick nests Df ravens Dr other birds of prey, overlooking foraging habitat.
      More widespread in winter tha during breeding as juveniles visit coastal areas, the
      Central Valley, and Owens Valley.
           THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                                                                        8-14

                                          8.0 NATURAL-AND HISTORIC/CULTURAL RESOURCES ELEMENT
                                                    TABLE 8-1 (cant.)
                                             Sensitive Biological Resources
      Birds (cont.)
      California black rail (Lateral/us jamaicensis coturniculis). CT, C1. Scarce permanent
. i          resident of salie, brackish and freshwater emergent wetlands. Some post-breeding
            movement is noted in Californa, but most are sedentary. Declnes due to loss of
            habitat and increasing susceptibilty to predation from non-native predators (domestic
   I        cats, red fox) and predators more tolerant of human activity. Several records from the
            project vicinty, including several locations along the Napa River such as White
            Slough imediately west of Vallejo and Fagan Slough west of the Napa County
. 1
            Airort.
      California clapper rail (Rallus Iongirostris obsoletus). FE, SE. Limited to saline and
            brackishwater areas in and around San Francisco, Monterey, and Morro Bays. Found
. .
  ,         in emergent wetlands dominated by pickleweed and cordgrass, with shalow water and
            mudflats for foragig. Records for the Plan Area at Fagan Slough.
      Western snowy plover (Cliaradrius alexandrinus nivosus). C2, CSc. Nests on sandy,
            marine shorelines, and occasionally at salt ponds and alkali lakes. Winters in similar
            habitat over a larger area than occupied for nesting. Three nests were observed in 1975
            in the Napa River delta, but were not present in 1978.
  !
     Burrowing owl (Atliene cunicularia). CSc. Permanent resident of dry grassland and desert
           habitats, and in successional stages of pinyon-juruper and ponderosa pine forests,
           Nests in the burrows of larger mammals, especially ground squirrels, and is rarely
           found in areas where ground squirrels do not occur. Declines are likely due to habitat
           loss and poisoning of ground squirrels. A few colorues are noted from the lower
           slopes of Sulphur Springs Mountain, although at least one has been extirated and
           another is threatened by golf course development. It is likely that other colorues
           persist in the region.
     Long-eared owl (Asia otus). CSc. Requires riparian habitat or other thickets, such as live
           oaks, with small, dense canopies for roosting and nesting. Uses old hawk, magpie, or
           raven nests for its own breeding. Known to nest in the Plan Area viciity.
     Purple marti (Progne subis). CSC (breeding). A rare to uncommon, local sumer resident
          in a variety of low elevation, woodland habitat, including valley-foothil hardwood,
          riparian, and conierous forests. Eliminated from much of its previous range by
          habitat loss and competition for nest cavities with European starlings and house
          sparrows. May nest in the eastern portion of the Planng Area in the low foothls of
          Sulphur Springs Mountain.
     Loggerhead shrike (Lanius ludovicianus). C2. Resident of open and semi-open habitat
          throughout the lowlands of California; may invade agricultural areas in winter. A
          miimal amount of taler vegetation is necessary for hunting perches,
     Yellow warbler (Dendroica petechia breivsteri). CSC (breeding). Sumer resident of tall
          riparian woodlands with dense wilows, cottonwoods, alders, etc. Decline of ths
          species is attributable to nest       parasitism by brown-headed cowbirds and habitat loss.
               THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                                                          8-15
                                                                                               "1
                                                                                                 j
                                         8.0 NATURAL AND HISTORIC/CULTURAL RESOURCES ELEMENT
                                                          TABLE 8-1 (cont.)
                                              Sensitive Biological Resources
                                                                                              , I
Birds (cant.)
Saltmarsh common yellowthroat (Geot/zlypis trc/zas sinuosa). C2. A resident of fresh and
     saltwater marshes in the San Francisco Bay region. Requires dense emergent
     vegetation for foraging, and nests in tall grasses, tule patches, and willows. Several
     populations known from the Napa River delta.
Yellow-breasted chat (Ictera virens). CSC (breeding). Sumer resident in riparian thickets
     with dense, brushy understory, Declines are likely due to habitat loss and nest
     parasitism by cowbirds. Remsen (1978) indicates that chats were fairly common but
     declg in Napa and Sonoma counties.
Mammals
                                                                                              . .
Suisun shrew (Sorex ornatus sinuosus). C1, CSc. Restricted to the tidal marshes on the
     northern shores of San Pablo and Suisun bays. Inhabits dense, low-lying vegetation of
     Spartina, Salicornia, and other emergent plants. Driftwood and litter above mean
     high tide level is requied for nesting. Declines are due to the separation of tidal
     marshes from upland refugia necessary during flooding, mismanagement of refuges          . ,
     in not providig refuge from flood. This species is not likely to occur in the Planng
     Area as it is very limited in distribution.
Townsend's western big-eared bat (Plecotus t. townsendii). CSC. Occupies a variety of
     communities including coastal coniferous forest, oak and conifer woodlands,
     grasslands and deserts. Most common in mesic sites. Habitat must include
     appropriate roosting, maternty, and hibernation sites free form human distubance.
     Townsend's big-eared bats are known to abandon roost sites after one visit by humans
     and to not return.
Palld bat (Antrozotls pallidus). SA. Occupies a wide variety of habitats, including
     grasslands, shrblands, woodlands and forests at all elevations except the highest parts
     of the Sierra Nevada. Most common in open, dry habitats with rocky areas
                                                                                          for
     roosting. Not migratory, but some post-breeding dispersal is noted, and daily
     movement to and from hibernacula occurs.
Salt mash harvest mouse (R/zeit/zrodontomys ravivel1tris) FE, CEo Found omy in salie,
     emergent wetlands of San Francisco Bay and its tributaries. Nearly restricted to
     Salicornia habitat, but may use adjacent grasslands is cover is dense. Primary food
     source is Salicornia and saltgrass. Requires higher ground to escape periodic floodig.
     Records for the Pla Area at Fagan Slough.
Ringtail (Bassariscus astutus). CPo Widely distributed permanent resident of various
     riparian habitats and in brush stands of most forests. Rarely encountered and little is
     known about its abundance and distribution.
Badger (Taxidea taxus). CSc. Occupies a diversity of habitats, especially grasslands,
     savans, and mountain meadows. Distribution is limited by the presence of
     adequate food (burrowing rodents), friable soils, and open, uncultivated ground.
     Declies are likely due to a combination of factors including trapping, poisonig of
     ground squirels, hunting, loss of habitat, and habitat fragmentation.
          THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                                                                       8-16
 ,
                                              8.0 NATURAL AND HISTORIC/CULTURAL RESOURCES ELEMENT
         Objective
        8.5 Protect the designated oak savannah, mixed hardwood forest and coastal
 ,,
                   saltmarsh within American Canyon's Plannng Area.
        Policy
 . .
     .
        8.5.1      Require that development plans fully consider the presence of biological
                   resources and take all reasonable measures to avoid signficant impacts
                   within designated oak savannah, mixed hardwood forest and coastal
                   saltmarsh zones as indicated on Figure 8.1. (I         8.12)
  .¡    Objective
        8.6 Educate the public about American Canyon's biological resources.
        Policy
        8.6.1     Encourage educational programs that:
                  a. promote awareness of local biological resources;
. 1
                  b. inform about protection and preservation programs;
                  c. foster community attitudes and behaviors that help protect local plants
---ì                    and wìldlife; and
                  d. encourage community involvement in protection programs. (I 8.S2)
       WATER RESOURCES
       Goal
       SA         Maintain the quality of surface and subsurface water resources within the
                  City of American Canyon and its Planning Area.
       Objective
       8.7 Ensure that the natural character of streams and creeks is maintained.
       Policies
       8.7.1 Preserve American Canyon Creek, Fagan Creek and Sheehy Creek withi
                 their natural waterways. (I 8.32 and I 8.43)
       8.7.2 Incorporate the region's streams and creeks into proposed development
                 plans to help impart a unique character to the City and Plannng Area.
                 (I 8.32, I 8.42, and I 8.43)
       Objective
       8.8 Prevent degradation of surface water quality due to erosion.
               THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                                                                  8-17

                                                                                        -1
                                                                                             I
                                  8.0 NATURAL AND HISTORIC/CULTURAL RESOURCES ELEMENT   . i
Policy
8.8.1     Minimize the impacts of land erosion on water resources withi the City       . ~;
           and on locations downstream within the Planning Area, including the              ,
          Napa River and wetlands, by requiring the channeling of site runoff into     , J.
           appropriate drainage systems and the stabilzing of soils in accordance       ~ ,
          with policies 8.14.1 through 8,14.5 and soils hazards policies 9.4.1 through
          9.4.8. (I 8.14, 18.15, I 8.24, 18.27, and I 8.31)
                                                                                       ~1
Objective
8.9 Prevent development from degrading the ground water and surface water
          resources in American Canyon's Plannng Area.                                 .I
                                                                                          ,\
Policies
8.9.1 Require that new development be connected and served by the sanitation
          collection and treatment system in accordance with the wastewater
          disposal and solid waste sections of the Utilties Element. (l8.2S)
8.9.2 Prohibit the discharge of toxins and other pollution into watershed
          drainages and groundwater basins. (I 8.1, 18.24, and I 8.25)
8.9.3 Prohibit private well driling within the American Canyon city limits.            ;. .
          (l 8.20)
SOIL RESOURCES                                                                         . 1
Goal
8B Promote the preservation of American Canyon's soil resources by
          protecting areas that are suitable for agricultural uses or buffer zones.
Objective
8.10 Encourage the preservation of existing agricultural operations except
          where designated for urban uses.
Policies
8.10.1    Establish minimum parcel size standards that retain and are compatible
          with viable agricultual         land uses, (I     8,41)
8.10.2    Capitalize on local agricultural resources, assets, and history. (I 8.34 and
          18,41)
8.10.3    Encourage the expansion of agriculture in general and the wine industry
          in particular withn American Canyon's Plannng Area. (I 8.34 and I 8,41)
Objective
8.11 Minize conficts between agricultural and urban land uses.
        THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                                                      8-18
                                         8.0 NATURAL AND HISTORIC/CULTURAL RESOURCES ELEMENT
  Policies
 8.11.1      Limit incompatible uses (including schools, hospitals, and high density
             residential development) near agriculture. (I
                                                                                      8.16)
 8.11.2      Require new development to have structural setbacks that respect
             agricultural operations. (I                       8.16)
 8.11.3      Developers shall be responsible for mitigating impacts upon nearby
             agriculture. Setbacks and buffers shall be provided by the developer and
             projects shall not encroach upon productive agricultural areas. (I
                                                                                            8.16)
 Objective
 8,12 Minimize impacts of development on agricultural uses.
 Policies
 8.12.1     Adopt a policy requirng home buyers to be notified of agricultural
            operations on nearby sites. (I                           8.18)
 8.12.2     Consider agricultural productivity when reviewing general plan
            amendments and rezoning proposals. (I
                                                                                8.19)
Objective
8.13 Maintain an open space buffer around the City.
8.13.1      Encourage the preservation of agricultural uses on the City's periphery
            through the creation of a permanent greenbelt. (I 8.11, I 8.17, r 8.26, I 8.28, and
            r 8.41)
8.13.2     Locate buffer zones between urban areas and agriculturally designated or
           utilized land, (I 8.11, r 8.21 18.26, and I 8.28)
Objective
8.14 Minimize soil erosion problems resulting from development activities.
Policies
8.14.1     Require that development applicants submit an erosion control plan
           which demonstrates that the "integrity" of the soil resources wil be
           maintained and that no advance impacts on adjacent properties or
           downstream water resources wil occur either during or after construction.
           (I 8.13, 18.14, r 8.15, I 8.24, r 8.27, and r 8.31)
8.14.2     Require that erosion control measures be implemented and maintained
           prior to the rainy season. (I                        8.13)
         THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                                                                     8-19
                                      8,0 NATURAL AND HISTORIC/CULTlIRAL RESOURCES ELEMENT
8.14.3      Require the implementation of construction erosion control measures
            prior to initiation of grading activities. Additionally, require that these
            measures remain in place until permanent measures are installed (I 8.14)
8.14.4      Periodically revise the grading and subdivision ordinances with regard to
            special precautions that minimize soil erosion by incorporating provisions
            relating to surface drainage and restoration of the natural drainage surface,
            the attenuation of slope instability, reductions in the amount of
            impermeable surface, and technques that enhance local water recovery.
            (I  8.15)
8.14.5      Establish standards for permanent revegetation of graded areas, including
            manufactured slopes. (I              8.15)
MINERAL RESOURCES
Goal
8C Maintain proper management of designated mineral extraction areas to
            meet the needs of the City while ensuring adequate reclamation of
            those sites.
Objective
8.15 Permit extraction of significant mineral resources, such as borrow
            material, as an interim use prior to development.
Policies
8.15.1      Permit the extraction of mineral resources in designated resource areas
            (see Figure 8-3). (I           8.44)
8.15.2      Require that specific development proposals for mineral extraction,
            including borrow material, be subject to discretionary approval by the City.
            (I 8,2)
8.15.3      Require that all proposed mineral extraction projects be consistent with
            the Surface Miing and Reclamation Act. (I 8.45, I 8.46, and 18.47)
8.15.4      Ensure that resource extraction operations are designed to maintain the
            integrity of significant view              sheds, hilsides and aesthetic resources as
             designated by the City in the Aesthetic Resources Policies (see Section D of
            this Element). (I 8.45, 18.46, and 18.47)
8.15.5      Require that access roads to resource extraction areas meet noise, dust,
            erosion and grading standards to minimize adverse impacts to adjacent
            residential and commercial areas. (I 8.45, I 8.46, and 18.47)
2   Borrow material: earth material taken (excavated) from one location (borrow pit) and transported
    to another location for use as a construction materiaL.
          THE CIT y OF A MER I CAN C A NY 0 N G ENE R A L PLAN
                                                        8-20
                                                                                  ~~~~
                                     --~- ~----------~??
                                 CllYOFNAPA
                                                                                                                      ¡-' ~
                                                                                                                                       ,
                                                                                                                                        i
                                                                                                                                          ~
          f
                                                    IJ
                                                       ii' 5OUlEYARo
                                                                                   l'iNQlROoD
                                                                                                n  .
                                                                                                                                            i
                                                                                                                                             \
                                                 AVITi WAY
                                                                                                                                           )\
                                                                                                                                              \
          \
                                                                                                                          "
                                                                                                                             .,$~ #l'
                                                                                                                                fjl,t
                                                                                                                       /
                                                                                I                                                \
                                                                                1
                                                                                                                                f
                                                                                I
                                                                               1
                                                                              I
                                                                              I
                                                                              I
                                                                              I
                                                                              L._____.... "
                                                                                                   "
                                                                                                          f
                                                                                                           I
                                                                                                            ,      ()
                                                                                                                    ,
                                                                                                                    \'~..~
                                                                                                                    )
                                                                                                        I
                                                                                                        I
                                                                                                        '-,
                                                                                                          I
                                                                                                         f
                                                                          .-                          I
                                                                                                       I
                                                                        . ",'                      I
                                                                                                     I
                                                                                                                   II
                                                                                                I
                                                                                                 I
                                                                                         AMRlCAON No~D
                                                                                           I
                                                                                             "-                                       '\  i
                           I
                            1
                                                                                         I
                                                                                          (
                                                                                           \
                                                                                           I
                                                                                                       NAA COU
                                                                                                                              Â_(
                                                                                                  - siAN CONT
                                                                   CIT OF VALLEJO
LEGEND
ø City of American Canyon
                                      IJ Sand, Gravel and Rock Products
ø Planning Area
                                      lI SaitOperations
L/~ I Proposed City Urban Limit Line  ~ Mercury. Mine
ø Southern Pacific Raiiroad
SOURCE Envi Copollon, 1993                                                                                     '-'
                                                                                                               L~ Envlcom Cororatlon Graphics
MINERAL DEPOSITS
                                                                     "
                                                                     ;10          10.5 11~ I ~ ~8-3
                                                              8-21

                              8.0 NATURAL AND HISTORIC/CULTURAL RESOURCES ELEMENT
Objective
8.16 Ensure compatibilty between mineral extraction activities and adjacent
          uses.
Policy
8.16.1    Ensure that mineral resources production activities are compatible with
          adjacent uses by reviewing and applying appropriate conditions that:
          a. prohibit truck-hauling trips through residential neighborhoods, unless
               there are no feasible alternatives (in which case require covered loads);
          b. mitigate noise, odor, and dust impacts;
          c. mitigate visual impacts on surrounding uses (e.g., incorporate onsite
               landscape buffers and decorative walls);
          d. provide for the restoration and reuse of the site upon completion of
               the production activities in a manner that does not adversely disrupt
               the character and integrity of adjacent uses and the environment.
               (I 8.45, 18.46, and I 8.47)
Objective
8.17 Ensure adequate reclamation of mineral resource extraction areas.
Policies
8.17.1    Require that all mineral extraction reclamation plans be subject to the
          requirements of the California Environmental Quality Act and consistent
          with the Surface Mining and Reclamation Act. (I 8.45, I 8.46, and I 8.47)
8.17.2    Require that permits for mineral reclamation projects specify compliance
          with state, federal and local standards and attainment programs with
          respect to air quality, protection of rare, threatened or endangered species,
          conservation of water quality, watersheds and basins, and erosion
          protection. (I 8.45, I 8.46, and I 8.47)
8.17.3    Require that the City have discretionary approval of all reclamation plans.
          (I 8.2)
AESTHETIC RESOURCES
Goal
8D Maintain the natural visual character of the City.
Objective
8.18 Maintain American Canyon's visual quality and character by preserving
          significant hillside and aesthetic resources.
         THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                                                 8-22
                           8.0 NATURAL AND HISTORIC/CULTURAL RESOURCES ELEMENT
Policies
8.18.1    Prohibit development along ridgelines and related signif.iant land forms
          within the City and (in consultation with the County) the Planng Area:
          a. Site development to prevent disruption of skyline topography as seen
              from lower lying viewsheds. Points of reference should be based on
               the following criteria:
               1) preservation of significant public views from areas along major
                  arterial roadways;
              2) preservation of significant view sheds from prominent public
                  viewing areas;
              3) preservation of signifcant public views from the Town Center,
                  parks, and other major public open spaces; and
              4) preservation of significant public view corridors to the Eastern
                  Foothils and Coastal Brackish Marsh. (l 8.3 and r 8.22)
8.18.2   Require that development in hilside areas comply with the following
         principles (in addition to Geology Element Policy 9.4.2):
         a. Density of development shall be reduced as the steepness of
              slope increases.
         b. When grading is necessary, slope tops and bottoms shall be rounded
              and a smooth transition made where built and natural slopes intersect
              (contour grading). Highly visible manufactured slope faces shall be
              varied and made to appear as natural as possible, avoiding flat planed
              surfaces, long straight embankments and repetitive terracing. The use
             of state-of-the-art landform grading concepts is encouraged.
         c. Prohibit mass grading on slopes greater than 25 percent; except where
             such slopes are isolated anomalies within a generalized slope pattern.
         d, Minimize the size of flat pads in site grading, limitig flat areas to the
             building footprint and a reasonable amount of related outdoor space, in
             areas where natural grades are 15 percent or greater.
         e. The natural topographic character of hillsides shall be maintained,
             including ridgelines, rounded hill forms and angled slopes.
         f. Significant natural systems and resources shall be maintained and
             restored, including existing vegetation, wildlife habitat, special
             geological features, canyons and natural drainage swales, steep slopes
             and important historic or cultural features.
         g. Encourage the use of materials that complement their setting.
         h. Buildings in hillside areas shall be designed to a scale and form that
             complement hilside character. Building forms, including roof lines,
             shall step with hil forms to minimize the visibility of building profiles
             on slopes. As a general rule, gabled roof ridgelines should be angled to
             follow the same direction of contour lines, thus reducing the exposure
       THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                                          8-23
                           8.0 NATURAL AND HISTORIC/CULTURAL RESOURCES ELEMENT
               of gable roof ends and the primary building mass when viewed from
               a distance.
          i. Design retaining walls with smooth, flowing forms that follow
               topographical lines, thereby minimizing long straight stretches and
               sharp angular forms. Minimize the height of retaining walls by
               terracing hilsides.
          J. Plant all hillside slopes with drought-tolerant species to soften the
               visual impact of grading, retaining walls, buildings and roads. All
               manufactured slopes shall be revegetated with ground cover, shrubs
               and trees, and follow a planting pattern similar to the natural
               vegetation patterns in the area.
          k. Arrange trees and shrubs in informal masses to produce a textured
               slope similar to natural chaparral. (I 8.3 and I 8.4)
8.18.3    Map the Planning Area's slopes and designate parcels with slopes over 15
          percent for inclusion in a new Hilside Development Ordinance. (I 8.3 and
          I 18.4)
CULTURAL RESOURCES
Goal
8E To promote the preservation and restoration of the sites, structures and
          districts that have architectural, historical, archaeological and/or cultural
          signicance to the City of American Canyon.
Objective
8.19 Ensure that the City's historically and archaeologically significant
          resources are protected in a manner that preserves and/or enhances the
          resources' inherent historic value,
Policies
8.19.1    Conduct a comprehensive survey of archaeological and cultual resources
          and historic vegetation that is based on established criteria and
          encompasses the entire City and its Sphere of Inuence. (I 8.40)
8.19.2    Adopt a Preservation Ordinance that wil authorize the City to designate
          appropriate vegetation or archaeological sites deemed to be of historic,
          archaeological, or cultural significance an American Canyon City Historic
          Point, Site or District. Such an ordinance shall conform to state and
          federal criteria for establishing a preservation ordinance. (I 8.5, I 8.48, and
          I 8.49)
8.19.3    Explore various methods for the future preservation of historic vegetation
          and archaeological and cultural resources. For example, consider
          establishing "receiver site" and "adopt a building" programs to preserve
         THE CIT Y 0 F A MER I CAN CAN YO N G ENE R ALP LAN
                                            8-24
                                     8.0 NATURAL AND HISTORIC/CULTURAL RESOURCES ELEMENT
           historic structures that must be removed from their sites. Additionally,
            consider utilzing the Secretary of the Interior Standards for Historic
           Rehabiltation and standards and guidelines prescribed by the State Office
           of Historic Preservation as the architectural and landscape design
           standards for rehabilitation, alteration, or additions to sites containing
           historic resources in order to preserve these structures in a manner
           consistent with the sites' architectural and historic integrity. (J 8.48 and
           I 8.49)
 8.1904    Though the design review process, encourage compatibility between new
           development and existing adjacent historic structures in terms of scale,
           massing, building materials and general architectural treatment. (J 8.29)
 8.19.5    Require that all City-owned properties designated as historic resources are
           maintained in a manner that is aesthetically and/or functionally
           compatible with such resources. (J 8.29 and I 8.48)
Objective
8.20 Provide incentives to private owners of historic resources to maintain
          and/or enhance their properties in a manner that wil conserve the
          integrity of such resources in the best possible condition.
Policies
8.20.1 Establish a program of historic preservation incentives that incorporates
          elements such as tax benefits provided by the 1981 Tax Revenue Act or any
          amended version of said act; the waiver of building permit fees for small
          property owners of historic resources; and flexible building code
          requirements. (J 8.49)
8.20.2 Consider the waiver of building permit fees for small property owners
          with historic resources who are unable to benefit from other government
          programs for the rehabilitation, alteration or reuse of their structure(s),
          provided that they rehabilitate their historic resources in accordance with
          established historic preservation guidelines. (J 8.49)
8.20.3 Consider allowing flexibility in building code requirements for the
         rehabiltation of historic structures as specified in State Historical Building
         Code Part 8, Title 24 if these structures are rehabiltated in accordance with
         established historic preservation guidelines. (J 8.5 and I
                                                                       8.49)
8.2004 Prohibit demolitions if other alternatives exist that enable a property
         owner to sensitively add to the existing structure, or develop an
         accompanying building on the site that allows property development
         rights to be realized. Variances of setbacks, heights and parking
         requirements should be given to make the preservation of an existing
         historic building feasible when no other reasonable alternative exists.
         (J 8.49)
        THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                                                                  8-25
                                     8.0 NATURAL AND HISTORIC/CULTURAL RESOURCES ELEMENT
8.20.5     Encourage appropriate adaptive reuse of historic resources such as the
           Basalt Plant in order to prevent misuse, disrepair and demolition, taking
           care to protect surrounding neighborhoods and/or agricultural land from
           incompatible uses. (I 8.49)
Objective
8.21 Promote community appreciation of American Canyon's unique history
           and communty involvement in its retention and preservation.
Policies
8.21.     Promote the formation and maintenance of neighborhood organizations
          'and foster the creation of neighborhood conservation programs, giving
           special attention to transitional areas. (I 8.50 and 18.53)
8.21.2    Encourage the creation of a Chamber of Commerce to promote the City's
          historic resources in visitor and tourist oriented brochures as the City
           grows and develops. (I
                                                       8.50)
ENERGY RESOURCES
Goal
8F         Reduce consumption of nonrenewable energy sources and support the
           development and utilzation of new energy sources.                             !-
Objective
8.22 Minimize transportation-related energy consumption.
Policies
8.22.1    Encourage the development of mixed use, pedestrian friendly
           employment/residential centers that help minimize vehicle trips in
          American Canyon and contribute to a reduction in energy consumption.
           (I 8.7 and 18,10)
8.22.2     Encourage the clustering of residential structures. (I 8.7 and  I 8.10)
8.22.3     Require that Development Plans provide for linkages between bicycle and
           pedestrian circulation systems and transit and employment centers, in
           accordance with established areawide plans. (I 8.7 and I 8.10)
8.22.4     Maintain a system of traffic signals and controls that minimizes waiting
           time and vehicle speed changes on through routes. (l 8.37)
8.22.5     Require that Development Plans provide for High-Occupancy Vehicles
           (HOV) and public transportation, where feasible, through the provision of
         THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                                                                    8-26
                                        8.0 NATURAL AND HISTORIC/CULTURAL RESOURCES ELEMENT
             appropriate transit areas and park-and-ride locations along public
             transportation routes. (I 8.8 and 18.10)
 Objective
 8.23 Reduce energy consumption in buildings.
 Policies
 8.23.1 Require that developers employ energy-effcient subdivision and site
            plannng methods as well as building design. Measures to be considered
            include building orientation and shading, landscaping, building
          . reflectance, use of active and passive solar heating and hot water system,
            etc. In establishing these energy related design requirements, the City shall
            balance energy effcient design with good plannng principles. (I 8.7, I 8.9,
            and 18.10)
 8.23.2 Require that new City buildings be energy effcient. (I 8.7 and I8.3S)
 Objective
 8.24 Increase public awareness of energy conservation needs and means in
            order to encourage informed choices about energy conservation by the
            general public.
 Policies
8.24.1      Cooperate with local utilities to provide energy conservation inormation
            to the public. (I 8.35 and I 8.51)
8.24.2      Develop public and/or public-private energy conservation educational
           programs for City employees and the public. (I 8.3S and I8.S1)
Objective
8.25 Increase the energy efficiency of City operations to save energy, reduce
           muncipal costs, and provide an example to the private sector.
Policies
8.25.1     Introduce concepts of energy efficiency and life cycle costing to City
           planning and operating decisions and to the design of all major City
           facilties. (18.7, I 8.8, 18.9, and 18.35)
8.25.2     Work with other agencies and utility companies to develop safe,
           economical and renewable energy resources. (I
                                                                    8.35)
8.25.3     Consider participating in energy conservation demonstration projects and
           promoting the use of treatment technologies that provide for the reuse of
           waste and water treatment by products, such as sludge and methane gas.
           (I 8.51)
        THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                                                         8-27
                                    8.0 NATURAL AND HISTORIC/CULTURAL RESOURCES ELEMENT
IMPLEMENTA nON PROGRAMS
The following programs implement the Natural and Historic/Cultural Resources
policies contained in the preceding subsection of this element. The capital "I" and
the number preceding each program are referenced by the policies that they
implement.
CODES/ORDINANCES
18.1 Enforce American Canyon's building and zoning codes that prohibit any
          projects within the City's jurisdiction to discharge toxins and other
          pollutants into watershed drainages and ground water basins.
          Responsibilty: City of American Canyon Planning Department and
                                           County Department of Environmental Management
          Funding Source: City of American Canyon General Fund
          Schedule: Ongoing, as. reqùired
18.2 Revise City ordinances to require that all mineral extraction and
          reclamation proposals undergo a discretionary review process by the City.
          Responsibilty: City of American Canyon Plannng Department
          Funding Source: City of American Canyon General Fund and/or any
                                           other available funding sources approved by the City
          Schedule: Within 18 months of the General Plan's adoption or as
                                           funding permits
18.3 Create and adopt a Hilside Development Ordinance that incorporates
          density standards and ridgeline preservation, site design, slope
          revegetation and architectural guidelines that are consistent with those
          found in policies 8.18.1 and 8.18.2.
          Responsibilty: City of American Canyon Plannng Department
          Funding Source: City of American Canyon General Fund and/or any
                                           other available funding sources approved by the City
          Schedule: Within 18 months of the General Plan's adoption
18.4 Revise the municipal code and/or establish pertinent design guidelines to
          implement aesthetic resource standards and policies.
          Responsibilty: City of American Canyon Planning Department
          Funding Source: City of American Canyon General Fund and/or any
                                           other available funding sources approved by the City
          Schedule: Within 18 months of the General Plan's adoption
18.5 Create and adopt a Natural and Historic/Resources Preservation
          Ordinance that conforms to existing state and federal criteria and allows
          the City to protect resources deemed to                 be historically, archaeologically or
          culturally significant.
        THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                                                        8-28

                          8.0 NATURAL AND HISTORIC/CULTURAL RESOURCES ELEMENT
          Responsibilty: City of American Canyon Planning Department
          Funding Source: City of American Canyon General Fund and/or any
                               other available funding sources approved by the City
          Schedule:            Within 18 months of the General Plan's adoption
 18.6 Consider adopting the State of California Historic Building Code to
          accommodate the rehabiltation of historic and older structures.
          Responsibilty: City of American Canyon Plannng Department
          Funding Source: City of American Canyon General Fund and/or any
                              other available funding sources approved by the City
          Schedule: Within 18 months of the General Plan's adoption or as
                              funding permi ts
18.7 Require energy efficient site and building design in all new development
          consistent with the requirements of Title 24 of the California
         Administrative Code.
         Responsibilty: City of American Canyon Community Development
                              Department
         Funding Source: Developer
         Schedule: Ongoing as development projects are submitted or as
                              funding permits
18.8 Allow for the use of alternative energy systems provided that they meet
         all public safety, health, welfare and design requirements and are proven
         to be reliable. If necessary, backup systems should be required.
         Responsibilty: City of American Canyon Community Development
                              Department
         Funding Source: Developer
         Schedule: Ongoing as development projects are submitted or as
                             funding permi ts
18.9 Enforce existing energy conservation provisions and establish additional
        energy performance requirements in the building code as new
        information becomes available. Measures to be considered include:
        building orientation and shading, active and passive solar heating and hot
        water systems, insulation of water heater and pipes, roof, wall and floor
        insulation, solar swimming pool heater, setback thermostats, double-pane
        windows, etc.
        Responsibilty: City of American Canyon Community Development
                             Department
        Funding Source: City of American Canyon General Fund and/or
                             development application fees
        Schedule: Ongoing as development projects are submitted or as
                             funding permits
      THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                                          8-29
                                8.0 NATURAL AND HISTORIC/CULTURAL RESOURCES ELEMENT
18.10   Revise the Zoning Ordinance to reflect energy related development
        standards and allow for            mixed use development where appropriate.
        Responsibilty: City of American Canyon Community Development
                                     Department
        Funding Source: City of American Canyon General Fund and/or any
                                     available funds approved by the City
        Schedule: Within 18 months of the General Plan's adoption
i 8.11  Require that developments sited along natural drainages and riparian
        corridors dedicate easements to the City, master homeowners association,
        or other responsible party to establish a network of open spaces
        throughout American Canyon. These open spaces shall assure that
        significant biological habitats are linked together and protected from
        degradation and shall be used only for recreational use (e.g.,
        pedestrian paths).
        Responsibilty: City of American Canyon Plannng Department
        Funding Source: City of American Canyon General Fund
        Schedule: Ongoing as applications for development are submitted
18.12   The building, zoning and grading codes shall be amended to prohibit
        development within designated oak savannah, mixed hardwood forest
        and coastal saltmarsh zones.
        Responsibilty: City of American Canyon Plannng Department
        Funding Source: City of American Canyon General Fund
        Schedule: Review and modify, where appropriate, the building,
                                     zoning and grading codes within 18 months of General
                                     Plan adoption
18.13   Amend the City's zoning ordinance to require the implementation of
        erosion control measures prior to the rainy season, which is defined as
        November through ApriL.
        Responsibilty: City of American Canyon Plannng Department
        Funding Source: City of American Canyon General Funds
        Schedule: Within 12 months of the General Plan's adoption
18.14   Amend the City's building and grading codes so they require the
        installation of construction erosion control measures prior to initiation of
        grading activities. Additionally, the building codes shall be amended to
        require that these erosion control measures remain in operation until
        permanent erosion control measures are in place.
        Responsibilty: City of American Canyon Plannng Department
        Funding Source: City of American Canyon General Funds
        Schedule: Within 12 months of the General Plan's adoption
       THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                                                  8-30
                          8.0 NATURAL AND HISTORIC/CULTURAL RESOURCES ELEMENT
  18.15     Amend the City's grading and subdivision ordinances so they include
           provisions relating to surface drainage, the reduction of impermeable
           surface area, the restoration of the natural drainage surface, the
           attenuation of slope instabilty, the permanent revegetation of graded
           areas such as manufactured slopes, and technques that enhance local
           water recovery.
           Responsibilty: City of American Canyon Planng Department
           Funding Source: City of American Canyon General Funds
           Schedule:          Within 12 months of the General Plan's adoption
 18.16     Mitigate developments' negative impact upon adjacent agricultural land
          by establishing appropriate setback standards.
           Responsibilty: City of American Canyon Plannig Department
          Funding Source: City of American Canyon General Funds
           Schedule: Within 12 months of the General Plan's Adoption
 18.17    Amend the Zoning Code to limit incompatible uses near dèsignated
          agricultual land.
          Responsibilty: City of American Canyon Plannng Department
          Funding Source: City of American Canyon General Funds
          Schedule: Within 12 months of the General Plan's adoption
18.18     Revise the municipal code to ensure that home buyers are notified of
          agricultural operations on nearby sites.
          Responsibilty: City of American Canyon Plannng Department
          Funding Source: City of American Canyon General Funds
          Schedule: Within 12 months of the General Plan's adoption
18.19    Agricultural productivity shall be considered when the general plan and
         zoning ordinance is under review. This is particularly important when
         land use decisions are being made for areas adjacent to designated
         agricultural  land.
         Responsibilty: City of American Canyon Plannng Departihent
         Funding Source: City of American Canyon General Funds
         Schedule: Ongoing, as required
18.20    Adopt an ordinance that prohibits private well driling within the
         American Canyon City limits.
         Responsibilty: American Canyon City Council
         Funding Source: City of American Canyon General Funds
         Schedule: Within 12 months of the General Plan's adoption
        THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                                        8-31

                               8.0 NATURAL AND HISTORIC/CULTURAL RESOURCES ELEMENT .1
DEVELOPMENT REVIEW
18.21   As part of the City's application review process, require proposed
        development projects to determine the feasibilty of improving the
        natual biological value, integrity and corridor function of the City and
        Planning Area's Undeveloped Areas, through vegetation restoration,         i .,
        control of alen plants         and animals, and landscape buffering.       i J
        Responsibilty City of American Canyon Plannng Department
        Funding Source: Development fees provided by project applicant
        Schedule: Ongoing as development projects are submitted or as              . ¡
                                   fuding permits
                                                                                   ,.~
18.22   A viewshed analysis examining impacts on public views to the Eastern
        and Southern Foothils and Bay Marsh shall be required for new              . ,
        development where applicable.
        Responsibilty: City of American Canyon Plang Department
        Funding Source: Development application fees
        Schedule: As applications for development are submitted
                                                                                   . ,
18.23   Review all projects that encompass designated oak savannah, mixed
        hardwood forest and coastal saltmarsh zones to assure that the applicant
        for a proposed development:
               . maintains a minimum buffer of 50 feet from the edge of the        . 1
                    designated zone; and
               . maintais connectivity to surrounding habitats, where they exist.
        Responsibilty: City of American Canyon Plannng Department
        Funding Source: Development application fees
        Schedule: Ongoing as applications for development are submitted.
18.24   Through the development review process, require that the design of any
        development within the City and its Sphere of Infuence incorporates
        measures to adequately mitigate the impacts of runoff, siltation, erosion,
        and toxic pollutants.
        Responsibilty: City of American Canyon Planng Department
        Funding Source: Development application fees
        Schedule: Ongoing, as requied
18.25   Through the development review process, require that new
        developments be connected and served by the wastewater disposal and
        treatment system and solid waste disposal system.
        Responsibility: City of American Canyon Plannng Department
        Funding Source: Development application fees
        Schedule: Ongoing, as required
      THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                                              8-32

                         8.0 NATllRAL AND HISTORIC/CULTURAL RESOURCES ELEMENT
  18.26    Whenever possible, require that open space buffer zones be located
           between adjacent developed sites as a condition of the approval process.
           Responsibilty: City of American Canyon Plannng Department
           Funding Source: Development application fees
           Schedule: Ongoing, as required
  18.27   Requie that applicants for new developments submit an erosion control
          plan which demonstrates that the "integrity" of the soil resources are
          maintained and that no advance impacts on either adjacent properties or
          downstream water reSOUlces occur dUling and after construction.
          Responsibilty: City of American Canyon Plannng Department
          Funding Source: Development application fees
          Schedule: Ongoing, as requied
 18.28    Require that open space easements be dedicated to the City, master
          homeowners association, or other responsible party as a condition of the
          approval process for all new projects proposed adjacent to "natural" open
          space areas.
          Responsibilty: City of American Canyon Planning Department
          Funding Source: City of American Canyon General Fund, development
                             fees/conditions and/or other approved funding sources
          Schedule:          Ongoing as applications for development are submitted
 18.29    Develop Urban Design Guidelines for the City that build upon the Goals,
          Objectives and Policies found within the Land Use Element and Natural
          Resources Elements of the General Plan.
          Responsibilty: City of American Canyon Planng Department
          Funding Source: City of American Canyon General Fund and/or
                            development fees
          Schedule: Ongoing as applications for development are submitted
AGENCY COORDINATION
18.30    Consult with the California Department of Fish and Game and USFWS.
         on any project that could affect a species that is listed or in fact rare,
         threatened or endangered (CEQA Guideline Section 15380, as identified by
         the biological sUlvey).
         Responsibilty: City of American Canyon Planning Department
         Funding Source: Development fees provided by project applicant
         Schedule: Ongoing as needed or as funding permits
18.31    Coordinate with the appropriate drainage maintenance entity
         (Homeowners Association, City of American Canyon, Napa County Flood
         Control District) to establish erosion control and drain maintenance
         programs.
        THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                                         8-33
                      8.0 NATURAL AND HISTORIC/CULTURAL RESOURCES ELEMENT
       Responsibilty: City of American Canyon Planning and Public Works              . I
                          Departments
       Funding Source: City of American Canyon General Fund and
                          development fees
       Schedule: Ongoing, as required
                                                                                     .l
18.32  Examine proposed developments to determine whether they wil
       encroach upon Riparian Corridors. Determine the necessity for a Stream
       Alteration Agreement with the California Department of Fish and Game,
       and/or a federal permit from the US Army Corps of Engineers for
       developments that appear to affect corridors directly through grading,        ,,
       construction, vegetation removal, or other activities.
       Responsibilty: City of American Canyon Plannig Department in
                          cooperation with appropriate Federal and State agencies    . ,
       Funding Source: Development fees provided by project applicant
       Schedule: Ongoing, as required
18.33  The City shall coordinate with county, state and federal agencies to protect
       the Napa River Wetlands and riverine system. Additionally, the City
       shall keep abreast of any studies produced by these agencies that are related
       to the Napa River Wetlands and riverine system.
       Responsibilty: American Canyon Planning and' Public Works
                          Departments
       Funding Source: American Canyon General Fund
       Schedule: Ongoing, as required
18.34  Work with local farmers, Vintners and the Napa County Farm Bureau to
       promote the City as an appropriate place for the expanion of wine related
       industry, including agriculture (wine grape growing).
       Responsibilty: City of American Canyon
       Funding Source: City of American Canyon General Fund
       Schedule: Ongoing, as funding permits
18.35  Initiate and faciltate programs that allow for energy audits of existing
       structures and public education programs aimed at promoting energy
       conservation. The programs should define the current levels of use,
       compare these to current standards for similar types of structures, and
       prescribe corrective methods to improve conservation. The City should
       also seek ways to develop and utilize safe and renewable energy sources
       that could provide an economically viable alternative to existing energy
       options.
       Responsibilty: City of American Canyon Building Department in
                          cooperation with energy providers
       Funding Source: City of American Canyon General Fund and/or any
                          available funds approved by the City
      THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                                       8-34
                           8.0 NATURAL AND HISTORIC/CULTURAL RESOURCES ELEMENT
             Schedule:          Develop a citywide energy conservation program withi
                                two (2) years of the General Plan's adoption, or as
                                funding permits
    18.36   Work with Caltrans to assure that traffc signals along Highway 29 and
            other primary through routes minimize waiting time and vehicle
            speed changes,
            Responsibilty:      City of American Canyon Public Works Department in
                                cooperation with Caltrans
            Funding Source: City of American Canyon General Fund
            Schedule:          Ongoing, as required
-1
    DATA COMPILATION
   18.37    Obtai a database report of sensitive biological elements, including plants,
            animals, and natural communities as identified by the California
            Department of Fish and Game's Natural Diversity Data Base (CDFG
            NDDB). The area of coverage required shall include the City Lirrt, the
            Sphere of Inuence, and the land within the Urban Limit Line. This
            report can be obtained directly from the CDFG.
            The Data Base Report for the City shall be made available in the Plannng
            Department and referenced by staff where applicable during the Initial
            Study of project applications, The Data Base Report wil help determine
           whether known sensitive biological elements wil be impacted by the
           proposed development.
           The City shall also conduct an extensive biological survey for each subarea,
           including the preparation of maps. This data shall be updated annually
           through brief surveys on each subarea. Data on sensitive biological
           resources wil be maintained at the City's offces for review by landowners.
           Responsibilty: City of American Canyon Plannng Department
           Funding Source: City of American Canyon General Fund and/or
                               development application fees
           Schedule: Ongoing as data become available or as funding permits
   18.38   The Biological Assessment Report required of developers who are
           proposing projects in designated habitats (as identified in policy 8.2.1) shall
           be prepared by consultants selected by the City and not hired directly by the
           applicant, shall not be reviewed or discussed with an applicant prior to
           submittal to the City, in order to ensure that all of the pertinent findings
           are disclosed, and shall:
           a, address the proposed project's impact on state and federally listed and
               candidate plants and animals; California Department of Fish and Game
               (CDFG) Special Animals; natural communities of high inventory
               priority with the CDFG's Nongame Heritage Program, and any other
          THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                                           8-35
                                                                                      " -1
                        8.0 NATURAL AND HISTORIC/CULTURAL RESOURCES ELEMENT
            special interest species or communities identified in the General Plan
            Technical Background Report, or those hereafter named by state or
            federal trustee agencies; . ,
        b. assess project conformance to speciic habitat objectives 8.3, 8.4, and 8.5
            above.
        c. identify mitigation measures necessary to eliminate significant adverse
            impacts to sensitive biological resources;
        d. define a program for monitoring and evaluating the effectiveness of
            the specified mitigation measures.
        Responsibilty: City of American Canyon Plannng Department
        Funding Source: Development fees provided by project applicant
        Schedule: Ongoing, as required
18,39   Conduct a study of potential. funding mechanisms for the long-term
        maintenance and protection of significant biological resource areas. Adopt
        the mechanism that proves most effective and appropriate.
        Responsibilty: City of American Canyon Plannng Department and City
                            Council
        Funding Source: City of American Canyon General Fund
        Schedule: Within 24 months of the General Plan's adoption or as               ,1
                            funding permits
18.40   Conduct a comprehensive survey of archaeological and cultural resources
        and historic vegetation within the City and its Urban Limit Line that
        brings together data from existing sources, such as the American Canyon
        Incorporation EIR (1991) and the Napa County Airport Area Specific Plan
        and EIR (1986), and includes new data generated by the California
        Archaeological Inventory at Sonoma State University and/or any other
        institution or agency with knowledge of the region's resources.
        Responsibilty: City of American Canyon Plannng Department and City
                            Council
        Funding Source: City of American Canyon General Fund
        Schedule: Within 24 months of the General Plan's adoption or as
                            funding permits
RESOURCE MONITORING AND MANAGEMENT
18.41   When developing a new Zoning Ordinance, establish a Zone District for
        agriculturally designated areas that require minimum parcel sizes large
        enough (40 acres or larger) to ensure the long term viabilty of agricultual
        land uses.
        Responsibilty: City of American Canyon Plannng Department
        Funding Source: City of American Canyon General Fund, development
                            fees/conditions and/or other approved funding sources
        Schedule:           Ongoing as applications for development are submitted
      THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                                         8-36
~
                                8.0 NATURAL AND HISTORIC/CULTURAL RESOURCES ELEMENT
~,
    18.42    Permit resource dependent and public service-related land uses within
             riparian corridors such that they are consistent with biological resource
             protection.
             Responsibilty: City of American Canyon Plannng Department
..           Funding Source: City of American Canyon General Fund and/or any
                                    other available funding sources as approved by the City
             Schedule:              Ongoing as such projects are proposed or as funding
                                    permits
    18.43   Consider modifying the boundary of riparian corridors if adequate
            evidence indicates that the existing boundary inappropriately reflects
            biological, topographical, or hydrological conditions.
            Responsibilty: City of American Canyon Planning Department in
                                    cooperation with appropriate Federal and State agencies
            Funding Source: City of American Canyon General Fund and/or any
                                    other available funding sources as approved by the City
            Schedule: Ongoing, as necessary
   18.44    Indicate potential areas of mineral resource extraction in accordance with
            the California Division of Mines and Geology, Bulleti 204, Plate 1.
            Responsibilty: City of American Canyon Planng Department
            Funding Source: City of American Canyon General Fund and/or any
                                   other available funding sources approved by the City
            Schedule: Within 24 months of the General Plan's adoption or as
                                   funding permits
   18.45   For any proposed mineral extraction project, conduct an Intial Study and
           contact responsible local, sta te, and federal agencies to establish
           development compliance criteria, health hazard safeguards, and necessary
           onsite monitoring programs to assure mitigation of potential
           environmental impacts (such as dust and noise).
           Responsibilty: City of American Canyon Plannng Department
           Funding Source: Development application fees
           Schedule: Ongoing as                     applications for mineral resource
                                   exploration are submitted
   18.46   For any proposed mineral extraction project, include a reclamation plan
           pursuant to the Surface Mining and Reclamation Act.
           Responsibilty: City of American Canyon Plannng Department
           Funding Source: Development application fees
           Schedule: Ongoing as applications for mineral resource
                                   exploration are submitted
          THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                                                8-37
                                                                                    '!
                       8.0 NATURAL AND HISTORic/CULTURAL RESOURCES ELEMENT . ¡
18.47  The reclamation plan for an approved mineral extraction project shall be
       sent to the Division of Mines and Geology.                                   ~ j
       Responsibilty: City of American Canyon Plannng Department
       Funding Source: Development application fees
       Schedule: After mineral extraction and reclamation plans have
                           been approved
18.48  Maintain on file the Secretary of Interior Standards for Historic
       Rehabiltation and the standards and guidelines of the State Office of
       Historic Preservation as guidelines on restoring, altering or adding to      . !
       designated historic structures. .
       Responsibilty: City of American Canyon Planng Department
       Funding Source: City of American Canyon General Fund and/ or any
                           other available funding sources approved by the City     , ;
       Schedule: Within 18 months of the General Plan's adoption or as
                           funding permits
18.49  Study the feasibilty of enacting a program to provide incentives for           i
                                                                                    . ,
       preservation, restoration, rehabiltation or relocation of historic resources
       through purchase of facade easements, waiver of fees, flexible building
       requirements, adaptive re-use, rehabiltation loans and grants, and           . ,
       techncal advice by persons qualified in historic preservation, restoration
       techques, and loans and grant programs, receiver site and building and
       siting regulations.
       Responsibilty: City of American Canyon Plannng Department
       Funding Source: City of American Canyon General Fund and/ or any
                          other available funding sources approved by the City
       Schedule: Within 24 months of the General Plan's adoption or as
                          funding permits
18.50  Work with local business leaders and interested residents to develop
       brochures promoting the natural and historic resources of the City. The
       City should also encourage the creation of a Chamber of Commerce as it
       grows and develops.
       Responsibilty: City of American Canyon Planng Department
       Funding Source: City of American Canyon General funds and any other
                           available funding source approved by the City
       Schedule: Within 18 months of the General Plan's adoption or as
                          funding permits
18.51  Solicit state and federal funds to implement the City's energy conservation
       programs, and explore the use of innovative technologies that allow for
       the reuse of waste and water treatment byproducts.
      THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                                        8-38

                          8,0 NATURAL AND HISTORIC/CULTURAL RESOURCES ELEMENT
",
             Responsibilty: City of American Canyon Community Development.
                               Department
             Funding Source: City of American Canyon General Fund and/or any
                               available funds approved by the City
             Schedule: Ongoing as funding opportunties become available
    EDUCATION
                                                                    ,
   i 8.52   Establish a natural resources learning center in the Napa River Wetlands
            that serves as an archive and clearinghouse of artifacts and resource
            documentation, educates the public about the region's biodiversity, and
            works with local colleges and the school board to develop a natual
            resources awareness program geared towards teaching American Canyon's
            young people about the region's plants, animals and habitats.
            Responsibilty: City of American Canyon Planning Department
            Funding Source: City of American Canyon General Fund
            Schedule: Within 24 months of the General Plan's adoption or as
                              funding permits
   18.53    Support the formation and maintenance of neighborhood and
.,
            community organizations that can help educate the public about
            American Canyon's historic and natural assets and devise ways to
            conserve those resources.
            Responsibilty: City of American Canyon Planng Department
            Funding Source: City of American Canyon General Fund and/or any
                              available funds approved by the City
            Schedule:        Within 18 months of the General Plan's adoption or as
                             funding permits
          THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                                           8-39
                    8.0 NATURAL AND HISTORIC/CULTURAL RESOURCES ELEMENT
                               GLOSSARY
Anadromoiis Fish              A marine fish that ascends rivers to spawn.
Artificial Wetlands           Wet or swampy lowland not existing in
                              their natural form, but constructed to
                              appears so.
Bedrock Landslides            The fallng or sliding down of a mass of
                              earth and/or rock which cuts at the
                              underlying solid rock foundation.
Coastal Sage Scrub            A plant community common to the coastal
                              areas of California and supporting a wide
                              diversity of biological resources considered
                              sensitive.
Intermittent Streamflow       A watercourse with flows which are
                              periodic and are commonly dry during
                              summer seasons.
Permanent Streamflow          A watercourse with flows which are
                              constant through the dry (sumer) season.
Permanent Wetlands            Areas which are permanently wet or
                              covered by shallow water, such as saltwater
                              and freshwater marshes, open or .closed
                              brackish marshes, mud flats, and fens.
Ridge lines                   A long or narrow land elevation where
                              sloping surface meet.
Riparian Habitat              The land and plants bordering a water
                              course or lake.
Vernal Wetlands               Wet or swampy lowlands which occur only
                              seasonall y (springtime).
    THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                                  8-40
                                                                       ,.
                                                                                                              .(
                                                                                           1Ø~&ú~
        . i¡
                                                                                                                                                   ,
                                                                                                G E N, ERA L P 7~
,,                                                                      ,l
                                                          i.
                                         -ii
, ,
    ,
                                                                                   Geò~~igy element        ,                           .,
                                                                                                             '/"
                                                                                                                                              .,
, .
"
              1
           ~,
                                 I'"
                                                                                                                                           ,,
                                                                 \1
                                                                         i'             \\                          .,              .. /
                                     .i'
                                                                          r~,
                                                                                                                1-:
                                                                                           \.
                                                                                              '\ \' .-1
                                                                                    "¡,
                                                                                                                       "
                                                ,                 I
                                                  . /1                                                                                           I
                "                                                                                                              \                   \
                     c'
                                                                                                                            ,r
                                                                                                        /,
                        '.(
                                                                             ',' t
         I                                                          -,                                  ".                              I,
                                                                                                         ,'
          I                                                                                                                      .l
                                                                       .,
                                             '-                                                                          .1
      "                                                                                           1.'1,
                                                             '.,
                                                                                                                                                     ;,:
                  'I
                            --.'
                                                                            /,
                                                       .'
                                       ,'
                                                                 ..
                                                                                   I'

I                                                                     9.0 GEOLOGY ELEMENT
 -,
   ,
     STATUORY REOUIREMENTS
     Government Code Section 65302(g) states the following:
            The General Plan shall include a safety element for the protection of
            the community from any unreasonable risks associated with the effects
ci         of seismically induced suiface rupture, ground shaking, ground failure,
           tsunami, seiche, and dam failure; slope instability leading to mudslides
           and landslides; subsidence and other geologic hazards known to the
, ,        legislative body; flooding; and wild land and urban fires.
     Trus section of the General Plan addresses geologic, seismic, and soils hazards.
." !
-i
.i
- .
   ,
. ,
   ,
           THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                                             9-1
                                                               9.0 GEOLOGY ELEMENT
OPPORTUITIES AND CONSTRAINTS (iSSUES)
The City of American Canyon and its Planning Area are located in a part of             ". l
northern Calornia that is subject to both regional and local sources of geologic and
seismic hazards. The potentially signcant geologic and seismic hazards affecting
this area are seismic shaking, fault rupture, landsliding (slope instabilty) and
liquefaction. These geologic and seismic hazards can affect the structual integrity of
buildings and utilities, and in turn cause severe property damage and the possible
loss of life.
The potential hazards affecting the City lead to a series of opportunities and
constraints that need to be considered in the Geologic, Seismic and Soil Hazards
Element of the General Plan. These issues include the following:
1. The West Napa fault, which runs diagonally through American Canyon and has
   been designated as an Alquist-Priolo Special Study Area by the State, may
    constrain futue development.
2. The potential for landslides is present both withn the City limits and the eastern
   portion of the Planning Area.
3. Several of the known regional faults can cause liquefaction within the Plannng
   Area.                                                                               . ,
4. Although the Planning Area does not contain any darns or reservoirs, several do
   exist close enough to the City that failure of their structural integrity could
   adversely impact the Planning Area.
5. The City has the opportunity to reduce the risk of earthquake related death,
   injury and property damage by mitigating known seismic hazards when
   plannng new development within identified liquefaction hazard zones and
   areas adjacent to "major" faults. .
        THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                                         9-2
~   ,
                                                                    9.0 GEOLOGY ELEMENT
I" 1
      OVERVIW OF SEISMIC GEOLOGIC AND SOIL HAZARDS POLICIS
      The Seismic, Geologic and Soil Hazards Element establishes goals, objectives,
      policies and implementation programs that provide for the protection of human
      life, the reduction of property damage and the minimization of economic and social
      dislocation from such hazards. The following policies are also intended to enhance
~ ì
      the preparedness of City agencies and the community in general to survive, respond
      to, and recover from a major earthquake or other seismically related event.
; ~
      Effective implementation of seismic policies requires a continuing awareness and
      expanding knowledge of the seismic hazards affecting the city; strong, enforceable
"1
      seismic standards for the siting, design and review of proposed development; and
      progressive cityide programs for disaster preparedness and recovery plannng.
, 1
      The Seismic, Geologic and Soil Hazards policies address the following:
      1. Protecting human life and reducing damage resulting from fault rupture, slope
          instabilty, landslides and liquefaction.
'!
      2. Preparing and maintaining an effective response system to a seismic event
          impactig the City.
, ,
      3. Implementing effective seismic design standards.
      4. Continuing the functions of essential (critical, sensitive and high-occupancy)
          facilties following a disaster.
      S. Miniizing major social and economic disruption potentially created by severe
          community damage resulting from a seismic event.
      6. Enuring the community is adequately prepared for emergencies.
              THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                                                 9-3

                                                                  9.0 GEOLOGY ELEMENT
GOALS, OBJECTS AND POLICIES
The following presents the goals, objectives, policies, and programs for geologic,    ,,-~
seismic and soil hazards in the City. Implementing programs are referenced at the
conclusion of each policy by a capital "I" and a number in parentheses, and are
described in the last subsection of the element.
Goals
9 Reduce the potential level of death, injury, property damage, economic
           and social dislocation (i.e., business closures and homelessness due to
           structural damage) and disruption of vital services that could result from
           earthquake damage.                                                            ,
                                                                                      . j
9A Ensure the availabilty and effective response of emergency services
           following an earthquake.
9B Prepare the City for an effective response to, and rapid, beneficial recovery
           from, an earthquake and related seismic events.
9C Ensure that seismic, geologic, and soils hazards that might affect areas
           designated for human use or habitation are properly mitigated or avoided
           entirely prior to development.
9D Ensure that the City's public infrastructure is designed in a manner that
           reduces the risk of system failure in the event of an earthquake.
FAULT RUPTURE
The San Andreas, Healdsburg-Rodgers Creek, and Hayward faults are the known
regional hazards that pose the most significant seismic threat to the City of
American Canyon. Additionally, several smaller local faults, such as the West Napa
fault (identified as an Alquist-Priolo Special Study Zone) the Green Valley fault and
the Concord fault, are potential fault rupture sources in the City and/or
Planning Area.
Objective
9.1 Protect life, ensure public safety, substantially reduce the damage to and
           ensure the orderly evacuation of building occupants following a
           seismic event.
Policies
9.1.1 Promote the collection of relevant data on fault location and the rustory of
           fault displacement as a basis for future refinement of fault zone policies
           and development standards. Particular attention should be paid to the
           West Napa Fault that is generally depicted in Figure 9-1 and should be
           evaluated in conjunction with proposed development. Based on
         THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                                           9-4
                                                                                         9.0 GEOLOGY ELEMENT
r' !
                         predevelopment studies, limitations on new development shall be
                         imposed if necessary in the identified fault areas. (I 9.19, I 9.26, and 19.27)
       9.1.2             Implement mandatory development restrictions and investigation
                         requirements (by the state, under the Alquist-Priolo Act, or by the City) on
,,                       that portion of the West Napa fault zone located witrun American Canyon
                         and its Plannng Area. (I 9.1, /9.18, and /9.27)
      9.1.3              Require that any building intended to have occupancy be located at least SO
.i
                        feet from either side of an active or potentially active fault. (I 9.4)
      STRONG SEISMIC GROUNDSHAKING
.i
      Due to the active faults that exist in and around American Canyon, it is likely that
      large seismic events and strong ground motions wil signficantly impact the City in
, I
      the foreseeable future. Should these large events occur, their impacts to health,
      safety and property could be substantiaL.
. ,
      Objective
      9.2 Protect health and life safety, and reduce the level of potential property
. 1
                        damage from the adverse effects of strong seismic ground shaking by
                        implementing effective, state-of-the-art standards for seismic design of
                        structures in the City.
      Policies
      9.2.1 Require that development be designed in accordance with seismic
                       requirements of the Uniform Building Code. (I               9.12)
     9.2.2 Expedite the review process of any seismic revisions to the State's
                       Uniform Building Code, in order to speed their adoption and
                       implementation by the City. (19.1, / 9.4, /9.5, /9.12, /9.14, / 9.19, / 9.20, and /9.26)
     LIQUEACTON
     The earthquake shaking intensity and duration conditions necessary to cause
     liquefaction in the Plannng Area can be met by several of the known regional
     faults. Liquefaction wil likely affect limited portions of the Planning Area,
     however, since most of trus land is underlain by bedrock. The likelihood of
     occurrence is directly related to the potential for strong seismic ground                         shaking,
     ground water depth, and the composition and characteristics of the soiL.
     Objective
     9.3 Protect life and essential lifelines (e.g., gas, electricity, water), reduce the
                       risk of property damage due to liquefaction, and promote the collection of
                       more complete information on liquefaction susceptibilty thoughout the
                      Plannng Area.
                  THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                                                                               9-5

=    ,
                                                                                            9.0 GEOLOGY ELEMENT
:rl
         Policies
         9.3.1       A void development in areas with known liquefaction risk. If these areas
~ 'i
                     cannot be avoided, require a qualified geologist, hydrologist, or civil
                     engineer to determine the liquefaction potential at proposed development
                     sites. (I 9.1, I 9.10, I 9.19, 19.21, I 9.23, 19.26, and 19.29)
'1
        9.3.2        Require the submittal of liquefaction mitigation plans for proposed
                     developments located in areas determined to have a high level of
, 1                  liquefaction risk. (l 9.10, 19.19, and 19.26)
        9.3.3       Require that natural gas, electric, water, sewer and communication
! .1                systems located in areas of liquefaction risk be designed to mitigate
                    potential hazards. (I                  9.15)
        9.3.4       Promote the collection and compilation of the most current data on
                    groundwater levels and liquefaction susceptibilty. The information
                    should be used to identify areas that are susceptible to liquefaction and to
                    modify, when necessary, liquefaction related policies or procedures. (I
                                                                                                           9.10,
                    19.11, I 9.19, and 19.24)
        9.3.5 Encourage the development of a means by which the liquefaction
                   potential of developed sites may be identified and reduced. (l 9.10 and 19.13)
       SLOPE STABILITY, LANDSLIDES AND SOILS
       Objective
       9.4 Protect life, ensure safety, and substantially reduce the potential level of
                   property damage from landslides, mudflows, slope failures and soil
                   hazards. Promote the collection and utilzation of more complete
                   information on slope instabilty potential throughout the City and
                   Plannng Area.
       Policies
       9.4.1 Require the determination of the landslide, slope instability, and erosion
                   potential of all proposed development sites with a grade of 10 percent or
                   greater and incorporate pertinent measures in the project design to
                  mitigate trus potentiaL. Exceptions to these mitigation requiements shall
                  be considered for agricultural areas. (I 9.1, I 9.6, I 9.25, 19.27, and I
                                                                                                  9.28)
       9.4.2 Require the determination of liquefaction (lateral spreading) potential for
                  all development sites in coarse and medium-grained alluvium areas
                  (Qhbm, Qham, and Qhac) of slopes with grades of less than 15 percent and
                  incorporate pertinent measures in the project design to mitigate trus
                  potential. Exceptions to these mitigation requirements shall be considered
                  for agricultural areas. (I 9.1, I 9.6, I 9.25, I 9.27, and 19.28)
               THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                                                                           9-7
                                                                                                  1
                                                                       9.0 GEOLOGY ELEMENT        . J
9.4.3 Prohibit the mass gradig of slopes with a grade of 25 percent or greater
           and development on slopes with a grade of SO percent or greater. For
           projects built upon slopes with a grade of between 15 and 25 percent,
           cluster the units and reduce overall density in accordance with
           Natural/Cultural Resources Policy 8.18.2. (I 9.1 and 19.2)
                                                                                                  , ì
9.4.4      Require an assessment of potential damage to essential
                                                                            lifelines (e.g., gas,
                                                                                                  , ,
           water, electric, communcation, sewer) due to landslides and implement
           appropriate mitigation measures. (19.6, 1 9.24, I 9.28, and 19.27)
                                                                                                  , i
9.4.5      Review proposals for new development and' expansion of existing
           development in areas that are susceptible to collapsible or expansive soils
           and require adequate mitigation of these hazards. (I 9.1, I 9.6, and 19.28)
9.4.6      Require that proposed developments in landslide hazard areas submit                    . ,
           information regarding pertinent conditions prepared by a qualified
           geologist or civil engieer. (I 9.16, 19.28, and I 9.29)
9.4.7      Require that proposed developments in landslide hazard areas submit
           plans to adequately stabilze slopes and unstable soils onsite and prevent              . ,
           impacts on adjacent properties. (19.16, I 9.28, and I 9.29)
9.4.8 Encourage the use of landscape materials in areas of landslide hazard and
           unstable soils that promote stabilty. (19.16 and 19.17)
9.4.9 Require that drainage systems be designed to prevent geologic and soils
           slippage. (I          9.17)
CRITICAL, SENSITIVE, AND HIGH-OCCUANCY FACILITIES
Critical, Sensitive, and High-Occupancy facilities are shown on Figures 9-2a and 9-2b,
discussed in Table 9-1, and defined withn the City as follows:
        THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                                                                  9-8


                                                                                                                                                     1
                                                                              ~~~~
                                    CIT   OF NAPA
                                                      :-_--                      -----~~,,"                               1-' ~
                                                                                                                                          ,
                                                                                                                                           i
                                        I
                        ~ÚL
       i
        i
          //                                           :\ tiOUlEARD
                                                                  (9 "
                                                                                                   n
                                                                                         lYHCHROAD . m
                                                                                                                                             '\.
                                                                                                                                               )
                                                                                                                                                f
                                                                                                                                                 \
                                                                                                                                          /
                                                                      !;
                                                                                           ~C1                                                  \
                                                                      ~                            "''l                                           \
       \                                                                                                                      "
                                                                                                                                   ~~/L
                                                                                                                                    c c
  i
    "                                                                                                                             PJ ~
                                                                                                                           /
                                                                             i
                                                                               I                                                   \
                                                                               i                                                   I
 \ \
                                                                             I
                                                                             i
                                                                              i
                                                                               i
    \
                                                                                                                      \)
                                                                             i
                                                                             i._______.._......
                                                                             i
 ~\
  '1 "
             ~
          RIVER ~'~
                                                                                                           I
                                                                                                           i
                                                                                                           "
                                                                                                           I
                                                                                                             I
                                                                                                             I
                                                                                                              I
                                                                                                               I         "
                                                                                                                      \'~J
                                                                                                                         i
                                                                                                         ¡
                                                                                                        I
                                  i                                                                    I
                                 I
                                                r---
                                               ....-.
                                                                                      \.
                                                                                                    /
                                                                                                     ¡
                                                                                             Ml~.?NCANYON RcA-Q
                                                                                               /
                                                                                                                                           "\ /
                                                                                                                                                i
                                                                                             I
                                I                                                      \.      \
LEGEND
                              I
                              I                                           ____.1              (
                                                                                               ¡
                                                                                                           NAi\COUmY
                                                                                                      -s&o COUNl
                                                                                                                                           ~
                                                                   CIT OF VALLEJO
ø City of American Canyon
ø Planning Area
L~"'''I Proposed City Urban Umi! Line
ø Southern Pacific Railroad
   o Building Sites
         (Refer to Table 9.1)
                                                                                                                     1"'
SOURCE: Oty of American Canyon                                                                                       l~ Envlcom Corporation Graphics
CRITICAL¡ SENSITIVE & HIGH
OCCUPANCY BUILDINGS / SITES                                         ~Io          1°.5         11.0            I ~ ~9-2b
                                                                   9-10

~
                                                                                9.0 GEOLOGY ELEMENT
,. ,
                                               TABLE   9.1
                          Critical, Sensitive and High Occupancy Facilties
:r .,
       Licensed Care Facilities
           1. AbdaIa and Tamayo Home Care                    16. Little Hug A Bunch
               1501 Rio Grande                                     10 Del Ray Court
           2. Abdala and Tamayo Group Home                   17.   Lyn's Adult Residential Facilty II
               247 West Carolyn                                    308 Marla Street
, 1        3. Agdipa Care Home                               18.  Mira Linda Board and Care Home
               134 Landana Street                                 613  Denrose
           4. Alpha Omega IV                                 19. Naoma's Care Home
t ~
               426 Lucina Drive                                    106 Wilson Way
           5. Barrett Family Home                            20. Nelson Group Home
               218 Ladana                                         416 Damose
           6. Camutin Rest Home                              2I. Portugal Care Home
, ,            329 Kimberly Drive                                 403 Marla Street
          7. Cheryl Kay Memorial Home                       22. Quee Cottage
               526 Donaldson Way                                  136 Brophy
          8. Cora's Rest Home #2 0-4                        23. Ragagio Care Home
               241 Landana Street                                 225,229, and 233 Landana Street
          9. Golden Age Haven                               24. Rio Grande Care Home
              56 James Road                                       1509 Rio Grande Street
         10. Golden Age Homes                               25. Scared Heart Care Home #2
              75 James Road                                       1513 Rio Grande Street
         II. Grace Hils Manor                               26. Starline Care Home
              115 Thayer                                          107 Corbin Drive
         12. Griffin Family Care Home                       27. TLC Group Home D-3
              2330 Ellot Drive                                   238 Landana Street
         13. James Road House                               28. V & R Facility
              126 James Road                                     420  Damose
         14. Lackey Care Home                               29.  Wright Care Home
              109 Kimberly Drive                                 401 Damose
         15. Lamb's Personalized Care Home
              33 Monterey Drive
      Hazard Sites
        30.   ICI Resines
              501 Gree Island Road
      Schools
        3I. Napa Junction                                  32. Donaldson Way
              300 Napa Junction Road                             430 Donaldson Way
      Civic
        33. American Canyon Fire Department                37. American Canyon Waste Water Treatment
             225 James Road                                      Plant
        34. American Canyon City Hall                      38. American Canyon/Napa County Water
             2185 Ellott Drive                                   Facility and Storage
        35. American Canyon/Napa County                    39. Oat Hil Water Storage Tank
             Treatment Plant
       36. Nana County Airport
      Other
       40. The Doctors Company
             185 Greewood Road
            THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                                                  9-11
                                                                                                 i
                                                                                                 . ¡
                                                                           9.0 GEOLOGY ELEMENT   ; í
     e "Critical facilities" are those whose continued functioning is necessary to               , ;
        maintain public health and safety following a disaster, and those where                  , ,
        damage or failure could pose hazards to life and property well beyond their
        immediate vicinity. Examples include police and fire command and
        equipment centers, hospitals, and emergency shelters.
     e "Sensitive facilities" include those used for the manufacture, storage or sale
                                                                                                 , ;
        of hazardous materials, as well as socially signficant facilties such as schools,
        nursing homes, and housing for the elderly, disabled, or mentally il.
    e "High-occupancy facilities" are public or private structures used for housing
        or the assembly of large groups.
Objective                                                                                        ; ;
9.5 Ensure the continued functioning of essential (Critcal, Sensitive and
            High-Occupancy) facilities following a disaster; help prevent loss 6f life
            from the failure of Critical and Sensitive facilities in an earthquake; and
            help prevent major problems for post-disaster response, such as difficult
            or hazardous evacuations or rescues, numerous injuries, and major
            cleanup or decontamination of hazardous materials.                                   , ~
Policies
                                                                                                 . ,
9.5.1       Require that earthquake survival and effcient post-disaster functioning
            are primary concerns in the siting, design and construction standards of             . ,
            essential facilities. (/9.1, I 9.4, I 9.19, and 19.25)
9.5.2 Require that proposed essential facilities apply the most current
            professional standards for seismic design and be subject to seismic review,
            including detailed site investigations for faulting, liquefaction, ground
            motion characteristics, and slope stabilty. (I 9.1, I 9.4, 19.5, I 9.19, and I 9.20)
9.5.3 Prohibit the location of Critical Facilities within the Alquist-Priolo Special
            Study Zone or other active or potentially active fault, unless it is
            determined by a qualified geologic engineer that a closer location wil not
            result in undue risks based on detailed site investigations. (l 9.1, I 9.4,
            and 19.20)
9.5.4 Prorubit the location of Sensitive and High-Occupancy facilities within iao
            feet of the West Napa Fault or other active or potentially active faults,
            unless it is determined by a qualified geologic engineer that a closer
            location wil not result in undue risks based on detailed site
            investigations. (l 9.1, I 9.5, and I 9.20)
9.5.5 Attempt to locate Critcal and Sensitive structures in areas with
            continuous road access where utilty services can be maintained in the
            event of an earthquake. (I        9.1 and 19.15)
         THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                                                   9-12

=;
                                                                                          9.0 GEOLOGY ELEMENT
; Ì
     9.5.6      Encourage owners of existing Critical and Sensitive Facilities with
                signiicant seismic vulerabilties to upgrade, relocate or phase out the
, ,             faciities as appropriate. (19.7, I 9.8, and I                       9.25)
     9.5.7      Incorporate planning for potential seismic incidents affecting Critical,
. ,             Sensitive and High-Occupancy Facilities into the City's contigency plans
               for disaster response and recovery. (19.25, I 9.32, and I 9.35)
, i
     9.5.8     Require that all existing essential facilities located in areas of potential
               geologic, seismic and soils hazards maintain emergency response plans,
               with contigencies for all appropriate hazards. (I 9.25, 19.35, and I                  9.38)
     HAZARDOUS STRUCTURES
     Examples of hazardous structures include: Non-ductile concrete frame buidings;
.,
    inadequately designed pre-cast/tilt-up construction; multi-story buidings with soft
    structures; inadequately designed structures with geometric irregularities, mobile
    homes, residential buildings or other structues not properly secured to their
. i foundations; dilapidated buildings; buildings with unusual interior and exterior
    nonstructual hazards; bridges, overpasses, tunnels; darns and water tan.
    Objective
    9.6 Miniize to the greatest extent feasible the loss of life, serious injuries,
               and major social and economic disruption caused by the collapse of, or
               severe damage to, vulnerable structures (e.g., buildings, bridges, water
               storage facilities, key railroad components) resulting from an earthquake.
    Policies
    9.6.1 Re-evaluate the seismic review procedures for tilt-up structures and other
              potentially hazardous buildings in the City at appropriate points in the
              structures' rustory to ensure their seismic integrity. (I 9.9 and I                9.22)
    9.6.2 Establish incentives for owners of potentially hazardous buildings that
              would serve to encourage the seismic retrofitting of vulnerable structues.
              (I 9.7 and 19.8)
    DAM/RESERVOIR FAILURE
    Objective
    9.7 Protect Critical Fac.ilties from damage, loss of function or inaccessibilty in
              the event of damage to a darn or reservoir; protect sensitive facilities from
              detrimental consequences of inundation; and help ensure the rapid and
              orderly evacuation of populations in the potential inundation area,
              if necessary.
           THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                                                                     9-13

                                                                                                                                     7ï
                                                                                                                                          ¡
                                                                                                           9.0 GEOLOGY ELEMENT       .: ì
Policies                                                                                                                              , ¡
9.7.1 Prorubit the location of new Critical Facilities within the potential
          inundation area that lies below the Conn and Miliken Dams and/or the
          Rector and Summit Reservoirs, all of wruch are located outside and to the
          north of American Canyon's Plannng Area (see Figure 9-3). (I
                                                                                                                     9.1 and I 9.3)
                                                                                                                                     1l
9.7.2     Avoid the development of Sensitive and High-Occupancy uses with the                                                        . ,
          potential inundation area below a dam or reservoir. Any exceptions, and
                                                                                                                                     .1
          any exception of Critical Facilities, shaH require discretionary approval by
          the Plannng Commission and shall be granted only where the use is not                                                      j ¡
          in confict with Objectives 9.5,9.7 and 9.8. (I 9.1 and I
                                                                                                          9.4)
9.7.3     Require that zoning, street planning, and other land use decisions be                                                      . I
          consistent with the need for the effcient and orderly evacuation of the                                                    ~ 1
          potential inundation area. (I 9.1, I 9.3, and I
                                                                                        9.32)
9.7.4     Ensure that emergency preparedness plans and procedures provide for the
          efficient and orderly notification and evacuation of the potential                                                         i t
                                                                                                                                         ,
          inundation area in the southern portion of the City. (I 9.1, 9.31, and 9.32)                                               ,J
                                                                                                                                     . ,
EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS
                                                                                                                                     . J
Objective
                                                                                                                                     . ,
9.8 During a disaster, provide an effective emergency response that limits the                                                           ¡
          loss of life and curtails property damage and social dislocation (i.e.
          homelessness); enhances emergency preparedness through community
          education and self-help programs; and minimize to the greatest extent
          feasible serious damage and injuries through effective hazard mitigation.                                                  . ,
Policies
9.8.1 Ensure that emergency preparedness is the mutual responsibility of City
          agencies, residents and the business community. (I 9.31, I 9.33 though I
                                                                                                                               9.35,
          and I    9.39)
                                                                                                                                     i ¡
9.8.2 Incorporate three elements into the City's emergency preparedness
          program: hazard mitigation, disaster response, and resident, business and
          industry self-sufficiency /mutual support. (I                                    9.31 and I 9.33 through I   9.40)
9.8.3 Periodically evaluate the appropriateness and effectiveness of the City's
          disaster response plans and update these as necessary. (I 9.31, I 9.39, and I
                                                                                                                               9.40)
         THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                                                                   9-14


                                                                                              c-
                                                                        9.0 GEOLOGY ELEMENT , I
POST-DISASTER RECONSTRUCTON
Objective
9.9 Encourage the preparation of a plan to facilitate the rapid and effective
          recovery of the City following an earthquake. Identify alternative
          financing sources for the repair and reconstruction of disaster
          related damage.
                                                                                              " I
Policies
9.9.1     Participate in the development of programs and procedures that
          emphasize coordination between appropriate public agencies and private
          entities, promote the rapid reconstruction of the City following an
          earthquake, and facilitate an upgrading of the built environment, as
          opportunities allow. (I 9.31, I 9.39, and 19.40)
9.9.2 Establish the mitigation of earthquake hazards as a rugh priority for City
          programs, both before and after an earthquake. (I 9.1, I 9.3, I 9.30 though I 9.40)
9.9.3     Ensure the development of plans and procedures that allow the City to
          declare itself a disaster area and receive its fair share of federal and state      . ,
          emergency funds in the event of a serious earthquake. . (I
                                                                           9.40)
                                                                                              . 1
         THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                                                                   9-16
                                                                      9.0 GEOLOGY ELEMENT
. .~
      IMPLEMENTATION PROGRAMS
      The following lists the programs that implement the geologic, seismic and soil
      hazard policies contained in the preceding subsection of ths element. The capital
      "I" and number preceding each program are referenced by the policies that
      they implement.
      CODES/ORDINANCES
     19.1 The building, zoning and grading codes shall be amended, where
               appropriate, to reflect standards modified by the policies herein.
               Specifically, they shall incorporate standards for a) the siting, seismic
               design, and review of Critical, Sensitive and High-Occupancy Facilities;
               and b) the review of slope stabilty and soil hazards for new developments
               prior to discretionary review.
               Responsibilty: City of American Canyon Planng Department
               Funding Source: City of American Canyon General Fùnd and/or other
                                   available funding sources approved by the City
               Schedule: Review and modify, where appropriate, the building,
                                   zoning and grading codes within 12 months of the
                                   General Plan's adoption or as funding permits
     19.2 The building, zoning and grading codes shall be amended, where
               appropriate, to prohibit construction on slopes exceeding SO percent and
               mass gradig on slopes exceeding 25 percent. The codes shall also requie
               the clustering of units and the reduction of density for proposed
               developments sited on a 15-25 percent grade.
               Responsibilty: City of American Canyon City Council
               Funding Source: City of American Canyon General Fund
               Schedule: Review and modify, where appropriate, the building,
                                  zoning and grading codes within 12 months of the
                                  General Plan's adoption or as funding permits
     19.3 Zoning and building codes shall be amended for the dam failure
              inundation area to require discretionary approval of the Planning
              Commission and applicable review criteria for:
              a. The limited expansion of Critcal Facilities. New construction of
                  Critical Facilities in a potential dam failure inundation area shall be
                  prorubited;
              b. Sensitive Facilites including: nursing homes, senior citizen housing
                  and other low-mobility uses, where rapid evacuation capabilties may
                  be inhibited; and commercial and industrial facilities housing
                  hazardous materials, or potentially hazardous operations requiring safe
                  shutdown procedures; and
            THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                                               9-17

                                                                                        1
                                                                  9.0 GEOLOGY ELEMENT . I
                                                                                        "' 1
         c. High-occupancy Facilities and all assembly occupancies of 100 or more
             occupants.
         Responsibilty: City of American Canyon Planng Department
         Funding Source: City of American Canyon General Fund
         Schedule:           Review and modify the zoning codes witlii 18 month
                             of the General Plan's adoption or as fuding permits
I 9.4 Zoning regulations shall be amended to prevent Critical Facilities from
         being located witrun 150 feet of an active fault identified by the City's
         database or from field investigation. Trus distance may be modified if it is
         determined by a qualified geologic consultant that no adverse risk would
         occur based on field surveys, borings, and other relevant data and analysis.
         Any building intended for human occupancy shall be constructed at least
         fifty feet from either side of an active or potentially active fault.
         Responsibilty: City of American Canyon Planng Department
         Funding Source: City of American Canyon General Fund
         Schedule: As required with the identification of new geologic data
                             or as funding permits .
I 9.5 Sensitive and High-Occupancy Facilities shall require the discretionary
         approval of the Planning Commission if they are to be sited within 150
         feet of an active or potentially active fault. In any case Sensitive and High
         Occupancy Facilties shall not be allowed within 100 feet of either side of
         an active or potentially active fault. This distance may be modified if it is
         determined by a qualified geologic consultant that no adverse risk would
         occur based on field surveys, borings, and other relevant data and analysis.
         Responsibilty: City of American Canyon Plannig Department
         Funding Source: Development application fees
         Schedule: Ongoing as project applications are submitted
I9.6 Developers shall be responsible for supplying a preventative maintenance
         program for all manufactured (cut and fill) slopes. Additionally, the City
         shall consider the creation of slope maintenance districts as well as the
         implementation of a developer-sponsored 10-year slope failure warranty
         requiement. Inspection and maintenance of slopes during this period,
         including grading, planting and irrigation, wil be provided for by
         association fees and CC&Rs.
         Responsibilty: City of American Canyon Plannng Department
         Funding Source: Funds from development applicants
          Schedule: As necessary or as funding permits
I9.7 Consider the adoption of an ordinance, wruch includes incentives, for the
         upgrading of seismically hazardous structures that would include
         priorities for the sequence of enforcement; structural standards for seismic
       THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                                          9-18
q
                                                                       9.0 GEOLOGY ELEMENT
,--,
                upgrading; options or requirements for early anchoring of buildings to
                provide an initial level of reinforcement at an early stage of seismic
                retrofit; incorporation of concepts and provisions of the State Code for
                rustoric buildings to provide additional flexibility for preservation of
                historic buildings while protecting them from significant earthquake
   ,            damage; a time schedule for enforcement; and procedures for the posting
                and maitenance of warning signs on hazardous structures.
                Responsibilty: City of American Canyon Plang Department
                Funding Source: City of American Canyon General Fund and/or other
                                  available funding sources approved by the City
                Schedule: Review and modify, where appropriate, the building,
                                  zoning and grading codes as funding permits
     19.8      Consider the establishment of a special incentive and recognition program
  ~1
               for buildings reinforced under the hazardous buidings ordinance, which
               could employ plaques or certificates that can be displayed on or in a
               reinforced building,
               Responsibilty: City of American Canyon Planng Department
               Funding Source: City of American Canyon General Fund and/or other
                                  available fundig sources approved by the City
               Schedule: Evaluate the merits of program witrun 24 months of the
                                  General Plan's adoption or as fuding permits
     19.9 Maintain an awareness of other types of structures that may be considered
              by engineers, over time and through the use of state-of-the-art techniques,
              to be seismically hazardous and develop programs for the reduction of
               these seismic hazards. For example, the City may consider the
              modification of the current ordinance to require concrete tilt-up and
              concrete frame buildings built before enactment of the current seismic
              codes to meet basic seismic standards before a change in use or occupancy
              level is approved, or when significant alteration or repair is proposed.
              Responsibilty: City of American Canyon Plang Department
              Funding Source: City of American Canyon General Fund and/or other
                                 available fuding sources approved by the City
              Schedule: Evaluate the merits of establishing a program within 24
                                 months of the General Plan's adoption or as funding
                                 permits
     19.10 Require development applicants to prepare a liquefaction report for
              proposed projects located in liquefaction susceptibilty zones. Liquefaction
              reports shall be prepared prior to the preparation of development plans or
              tentative tract maps. These r.eports wil be utilzed to help assure that
              adequate liquefaction mitigation is possible, and that the proposed
              mitigation is buit into the initial project layout and design.
           THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                                               9-19
                                                                                     ~
                                                              9.0 GEOLOGY ELEMENT
       Responsibilty: City of American Canyon Plannng Department
       Funding Source: Development application fees
       Schedule:           Ongoing, as project applications are submitted
19.11  High groundwater problems related to any old, improperly abandoned
       water wells shall be mitigated by the current owner wherever possible,
       through use of proper sealing and abandonment procedures.
       Responsibilty: City of American Canyon Planng Department
       Funding Source: Property owner/developer funds
       Schedule: Ongoing as wells are discovered or as fuding permits
19.12  Seismic revisions to the State Uniform Building Code shall be reviewed
       and implemented in the City's Building Code.
       Responsibilty: City of American Canyon Planning Department
       Funding Source: City of American Canyon General Fund and/or other
                           available funding sources approved by the City
       Schedule: Review and modify, where appropriate, the building,
                          and grading codes on an on going basis as funding
                          permits
19.13  The City's building and grading codes shall be modified to reflect
       investigation requirements for designated potential liquefaction zones. A
       liquefaction susceptibilty investigation shall be required for Critical
       Facilities, Sensitive Facilities, High-Occupancy Facilities, and other select
       structues that have more than three stories and are of a size that shall be
       determined by City staff using criteria established by the City Engineer.
       Studies for all other human occupancy buildings should be at the
       discretion of the City Engineer and the City's Engineering Geology
       Consultant.
       Responsibilty: City of American Canyon Plannng Department
       Funding Source: City of American Canyon General Fund and/or other
                          available funding sources approved by the City
       Schedule:          Review and modify, where appropriate, the building,
                          and grading codes within 18 months of the General
                          Plan's adoption or as funding permits
19.14  Review the current building code enforcement procedures for concrete
       tilt-up and composite pre-stressed concrete construction for consistency
       with effective principles of seismic design, and revise as appropriate to
       maintain the seismic integrity of new construction.
       Responsibilty: City of American Canyon Planning Department
       Funding Source: City of American Canyon General Fund and/or other
                          available funding sources approved by the City
       Schedule: Revise, where appropriate, the building code
                          enforcement procedures for consistency within 24
      THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                                        9-20
                                                                      9.0 GEOLOGY ELEMENT
, ,
                                  months of the General Plan's adoption or as funding
                                  permits
  ,
     19.15     Require public service agencies to prepare a Utilties Report for proposed
               projects located in liquefaction susceptibilty zones. Utilities Reports wil
,,            be used to help ensure that natural gas, electric, water, sewer and
               communication systems are designed to mitigate potential hazards arising
              from their location in liquefaction zones.
              Responsibilty: City of American Canyon Public Works Department
              Funding Source: Funds from development applicants
              Schedule: Ongoing as project applications are submitted
     19.16    Promote hilside stabilty in landslide hazard areas characterized by
              unstable soils by amendig the zoning and building codes to requie the
              preparation of a landslide report by a qualified geologist or civil engineer
              for any proposed development located in a landslide hazard area. These
              landslide reports shall be written prior to the preparation of development
              plans or tentative tract maps.
              Responsibilty: City of American Canyon Public Works Department
              Funding Source: Funds from development applicants
              Schedule: Withn 12 months of the General Plan's adoption, and
                                 thereafter as project applications are submitted
    1.9.17    Amend the building and zoning codes to ensure that proposed
              developments incorporate drainage systems and appropriate landscape
              materials that prevent geologic and soils slippage.
              Responsibilty: City of American Canyon Planning Department
              Funding Source: City of American Canyon General Fund
              Schedule: Within 12 months of the General Plan's adoption or as
                                funding permits
    19.18    Require the preparation of a site specific geological report for all proposed
             development witrun the Alquist-Priolo Special Study Zone, to ascertain
             the precise location of, and appropriate setbacks from, the active West
             Napa fault.
             Responsibilty:     City of American Canyon Planning and Public Works
                                Departments
             Funding Source: Funds from development applicants
             Schedule:          Wi thin 12 months of the General Plan's adoption or as
                                funding permits
    SPECIAL STUDIES
    19.19    Detailed site specific studies for ground shaking characteristics,
             liquefacton potential, and fault ruptue potential shall be required prior to
           THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                                              9-21
                                                              9.0 GEOLOGY ELEMENT
        discretionary review as background to the development/approval process
       for Critical, Sensitive and High-Occupancy Facilties.
       Responsibilty: City of American Canyon Plannng Department -1
       Funding Source: Public Initiated: City of American Canyon General Fund;
                           Private Initiated: Development application fees
        Schedule: Ongoing as project applications are submitted or as
                          funding permits . i
19.20  Fault activity investigation reports shall have a standard format
       developed though consultation among the California Division of Mines
       and Geology, the City's Engieering Geology Consultant and relevant City       , ,
       Departments (e.g., Planning, Public Works). An agreed upon design shall
       be formulated by trus group for the San Andreas, Healdsburg-Rodgers
       Creek, Hayward, West Napa and Green'Valley faults and utilized in the
       reports to determine ground shaking potential. Reports shall be reviewed
       for adequacy by the City's Engineering Geology Consultant. At such tie
       that the City's Sphere of Infuence or other lands witrun the Urban Limt
       Line are annexed, the City (Planning Department) shall require that areas
       planned for development within 500 feet of the West Napa fault be
       studied to document age of last movement.
       Responsibilty: City of American Canyon Planning and Building                  ¡ ;,
                          Departments
       Funding Source: City of American Canyon General Fund and/or other
                          available funding sources approved by the City
       Schedule: Update master geologic file with new field data annually
                          or as funding permits
19.21  Al construction excavations and trenches of five feet or deeper, created in
       conjunction with human occupancy structures and public works
       infrastructure, shall be inspected by the City's Engineering Geology
       Consultant for any evidence of faulting if the subject property is identified
       as lying witrun 500 feet of the Alquist-Priolo Special Study Zone in
       previous soils, or geologic reports conducted for subject sale.
       Responsibilty: City of American Canyon Plannng Department
       Funding Source: Private development funds
       Schedule: Ongoing, as funding permits
19.22  At the earliest opportunity, a data base shall be compiled of all structural
       building types in the City that may be considered potential seismic
       hazards, including. tilt-up structures and non-ductile concrete frame
       buildings.
       Responsibilty:     City of American Canyon Planning and Building
                          Departments .
       Funding Source: City of American Canyon General Fund and/or other
                          available funding sources approved by the City
      THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                                        9-22

~i
   I                                                                9.0 GEOLOGY ELEMENT
r-1
                Schedule: Ongoing as the inventory needs updating, or as fuding
                                   permits
,,     19.23    Request the California Division of Mines and Geology or the U.S.
                Geological Survey to perform an initial study to define the groundwater
                levels in areas where liquefaction potential is estimated to be high. For
"               areas of very rugh groundwater (witrun 30 feet of the ground surface), the
                City shall consider the appropriateness of requiring potential developers
               in these areas to investigate means of lowering the groundwater level, and
II
               consider appropriate programs to that end.
               Responsibilty: City of American Canyon Plannig and Public Works
, 1
                                  Departments in cooperation with the California
                                  Division of Mines and Geology or U.S. Geological
                                  Survey
"              Funding Source: City of American Canyon General Fund and/or other
                                  available funding sources approved by the City
               Schedule: Groundwater study shall be updated every five (5) years
                                  or as funding permits
      19.24    Ensure the community has an adequate information base on the level and
               extent of the City's water table. Require project proponents to conduct
               water resource analysis should data prove to be insufficient.
               Responsibilty: City of American Canyon Planning and Public Works
                                  Departments in cooperation with a consulting
                                  geologists / engineer
               Funding Source: City of American Canyon General Fund and/or any
                                 other available funding sources approved by the City
               Schedule: Ensure the City has adequate information within 12
                                 months following the General Plan's adoption or
                                 contract a consulting firm to provide detail inormation
                                 of the City's water resources within 24 months or as
                                 funding permits
     FACILITIES MONITORING
     19.25    Existing City-owned, City-leased or City-rented Critical, Sensitive and
              High-Occupancy facilities, including the American Canyon Fire
              Department, the City Hall, and the Oat Hill Water Tank, shall be reviewed
              for any significant siting, design or construction problems that would
              make them vulnerable in an earthquake. The findings shall be
              incorporated into emergency operations plans as well as addressed in
              longer-term programs of facilties upgrading or relocation.
              Responsibilty: City of American Canyon Plannng Department
              Funding Source: City of American Canyon General Fund and/or other
                                available funding sources approved by the City
             THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                                               9-23
                                                                                       J
                                                                9.0 GEOLOGY ELEMENT ' ¡
        Schedule:          Review siting, design and construction of critical,
                            sensitive and high-occupancy facilities within two (2)
                            years of the General Plan's adoption
DEVELOPMENT REVIEW
                                                                                       ': -y
19.26   Liquefaction susceptibilty and fault zone designations and related land
        use and construction policies shall be reviewed and updated periodically
        to reflect current information and technology.
        Responsibilty: City of American Canyon Planng Department
        Funding Source: City of American Canyon General Fund and/or other
                           available funding sources approved by the City
        Schedule: Review and modify, where appropriate, liquefaction                   ~ j.
                           susceptibilty and fault zone designations as current data
                           and technology becomes available or as funding permits      ¡ l!
19.27   Seismic design for proposed Critical, Sensitive and High Occupancy
        Facilities and other select structures that have more than four stories and
        are of a size determined by City staff using criteria established by the City
        Engineer shall be handled by City-retained structural engineers.
        Alternatively, seismic .design may be conducted through a third-party
        review process, whereby qualified engineers report to the City Engineer        , ,
        and are paid directly by the developer.
                                                                                       . ,
        Responsibilty: City of American Canyon Planning Department                          ,
        Funding Source: Project developer
        Schedule: Ongoing as project applications are submitted
19.28   All geologic and soils reports submitted to the City shall be reviewed for
        their adequacy and completeness by a qualified, Certified Engineering
        Geologist and/or Registered Soils Engineer.
        Responsibilty: City of American Canyon Department of Public Works
        Funding Source: City of American Canyon General Fund and/or
                           development application fees
        Schedule: Ongoing as project applications are submitted and as
                           funding permits
19.29   A central repository shall be established in the Engieering Department,
        for the collection and compilation of geologic and soils engineering
        inormation related to faults and fault zone studies, groundwater levels,
        soils characteristics, susceptibilty to landslides and liquefaction, and other
        data as appropriate. This information shall be used to increase the
        knowledge and insights of City reviewers and applicants alike, in support
        of hazard mitgation.
        Responsibilty: City of American Canyon City Engieer
        Funding Source: City of American Canyon General Fund and/or other
                            available funding sources approved by the City
      THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                                         9-24

=
     I                                                                    9.0 GEOLOGY ELEMENT
'-1
                    Schedule:          Establish geologic repository immediately following the
                                       General Plan's adoption and update as necessary or as
r 1                                    funding permits
          STRUCTURAL REVIEWS
         19.30     Special structural reviews shall be conducted on any multi-story or
                   concrete buildings receiving significant damage in an earthquake, prior to
                   their re-occupancy, repair or demolition. Structural review would be the
, 1
                   responsibilty of the owner.
                   Responsibilty: Property owner
                   Funding Source: Property owner
fi                 Schedule: As soon as possible after the earthquake, but before re-
                                      occupancy of structure
,i       EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS
         19.31     Appropriate disaster response and earthquake response plans shall be
, 1
                   maintained and updated.
                   Responsibilty: City of American Canyon Planning and Fire
                                      Departments in cooperation with the other appropriate
, J
   ,
                                      City departments
                  Funding Source: City of American Canyon General Fund and/or other
                                      available funding sources approved by the City
, I               Schedule: Annually review the "appropriateness" of plans and
                                     modify when necessary or as funding permits
       I  9.32    Criteria for efficient and orderly evacuation capabilities shall be
                  incorporated into zoning, street plannng, and other land use procedures
                  for the potential inundation area below the darn or reservoir.
                  Responsibilty: City of American Canyon Planng Department
                  Funding Source: City of American Canyon General Fund
                  Schedule: Review and modify the zoning codes within 18 months
                                     of the General Plan's adoption or as funding permits
       19.33     Disaster response plans shall include adequate capabilties for heavy search
                 and rescue, major medical response, interim morgue, emergency shelter,
                 traffic and utilty impacts, debris removal and disposal, as well as
                 hazardous materials response for any chemicals stored or used in or
                 adjacent to the hazardous buildings. Disaster response plans shall also
                 include procedures for access, traffc control, emergency evacuations, and
                 security of damaged areas.
                 Responsibilty: City of American Canyon Planning and Fire
                                     Departments in cooperation with the other appropriate
                                     City departments
               THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                                                  9-25
                                                                 9.0 GEOLOGY ELEMENT l
                                                                                     t -?
       Funding Source: City of          American Canyon General Fund and/or other     . i
                               available fuding sources approved by the City
       Schedule: Annually ensure program includes at a minimum items                 '1-~
                               listed above as fuding permits                         , ;
19.34  Maintain effective mutual aid agreements with other agencies and/or
       municipalities for fire, police, medical response, public works, building
       inpection, mass care, and heavy rescue.
       Responsibilty: City of American Canyon Planning and Fire
                               Departments in cooperation with the other appropriate . l
                               City departments and County agencies                  . j
       Funding Source: City of American Canyon General Fund and/or other
                               available funding sources approved by the City        . ¡
       Schedule: Ongoing as necessary or as funding permits
19.35  Emergency response exercises shall be conducted by the City in cooperation
       with other pertinent agencies. Exercises shall be designed to test and
       upgrade various disaster response plans.
       Responsibilty: City of American Canyon Fire Department and County
                               Sheriff's Department in cooperation with the other
                               appropriate City departments and County agencies
       Funding Source: City of American Canyon General Fund and/or other
                               available funding sources approved by the City        ,l
       Schedule: Exercises shall be conducted at least every two (2) years            ~ ¡
                               or as funding permits
                                                                                      , 1
19.36  Public participation shall be sought in the development of hazard
       mitigation and disaster recovery programs.
       Responsibilty: City of American Canyon Planng Department
       Funding Source: City of American Canyon General Fund and/ or other
                               available fundig sources approved by the City
       Schedule: Ongoing as hazard mitigation and disaster recovery
                               programs are developed and as funding permits          ~ ¡
19.37  A program of public education and preparedness shall be a continuing
       component of the emergency preparedness program. It should include, at
       a minimum:
       a. the existence and approximate locations of major regional and local
             faults, landslide and liquefaction susceptibilty areas;
       b. the potential for strong ground shaking in the area, and means of
             strengthening buildings and protecting furnisrungs, equipment and
             other building contents from damage;
      THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                                            9-26

-;
                                                                   9.0 GEOLOGY ELEMENT
.i
             c. the need for businesses and residents to be self-sufficient for several
                 days following an earthquake, including food, water, medical
,,               assistance, and limited firefightig; and
             d. specifc information describing what an individual should do during
                 and immediately following an earthquake, whether at horne, in a car,
. ,              at work, or in an unfamilar building.
             Responsibilty: City of American Canyon Planning and Fire
                                Departments in cooperation with the other appropriate
. i
                                City departments
             Funding Source: City of American Canyon General Fund and/or other
                                available funding sources approved by the City
. i
  ,          Schedule: Annually ensure program includes at a mium items
                                listed above as funding permits
,i  19.38   Solicit the cooperation of the business community for public education
            and mutual assistance. Businesses shall be encouraged to develop their
            own disaster response plans and have provisions for food, water, first aid
            and shelter of employees who may not be able to return home for several
            days following a major earthquake.
            Responsibilty: City of American Canyon Planning and Fire
                                Departments in cooperation with the other appropriate
                                City departments
            Funding Source: City of American Canyon General Fund and/or other
                                available funding sources approved by the City
            Schedule: Ongoing, as funding permits
    PLANNING FOR POST-DISASTER RECOVERY
    19.39   Guidelines shall be developed by the City wruch provide a clear direction
            for the exercise of authorities following an earthquake related disaster for
            such purposes as:
            a. rapid designation of redevelopment areas;
            b. revision of land use, circulation and parking requirements, and
                institution of other programs for improving the community
                environment;
            c. adaptation and institution of special programs for disaster recovery;
            d. funding of disaster recovery measures;
            e. moratoria on reconstruction in any rugh-hazard areas where damage
                could be repeated in after shocks or in futue earthquakes;
            f. upgradig of the building code if deficiencies are believed to exist;
            g. establishment of Geologic Hazard Abatement Districts, as appropriate;
                and
          THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                                             9-27
                                                            9.0 GEOLOGY ELEMENT
                                                                                     . 1
       h. designation of sites for temporary housing (e.g., travel trailers and pre-
           fab construction) of households made homeless in the disaster, in
           cooperation with the Disaster Housing Program of the Federal
           Emergency Management Agency.
       Responsibilty: American Canyon Disaster Recovery Committee in
                         cooperation with the Planng Department
       Funding Source: City of American Canyon General Fund and/or other
                         available funding sources approved by the City
       Schedule: Within 24 months of the General Plan's adoption or as
                         funding permits ' ¡
19.40  In order to prepare for post earthquake recovery, the City shall establish
       procedures for declaring itself a disaster area and for receiving Federal
       Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) and comparable state disaster
       relief funds.
       Responsibilty: American Canyon City Council
       Funding Source: City of American Canyon General Fund                          , 1
       Schedule:         Witrun 12 months of the General Plan's adoption             , ¡
                                                                                     -,
                                                                                     , i
                                                                                     , 1
      THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                                      9-28

                                                      9.0 GEOLOGY ELEMENT
                            GLOSSARY
 Active Fault           A fracture or zone of closely associated fractues
                        along which rocks on one side have been
                        displaced with respect to those on the other side;
                        has exrubited surface displacement within the
                        Holocene time (approximately the past 11,000
                        years.
Bedrock Landslide       The fallng or sliding down of a mass of earth
                        and/ or rock wruch cuts at the underlain solid
                        rock foundation.
Critical Facility      Facilities which either provide emergency
                        services or house or serve many people who
                        would be injured or kiled in a case of disaster
                        damage to the faciity.(e.g., hospitals, emergency
                        service, communcation and utility facilities).
Erosion                The process by wruch soil and rock are detached
                       and moved by runnng water, wind, ice and/or
                       gravity.
Flooding               A rise in the level of a water body or the rapid
                       accumulation of runoff, including related
                       mudslides and land subsidences, that result in
                       the temporary inundation of land that is usually
                       dry.
Ground Failures        Mudslide, landslide, liquefaction or soil
                       compaction.
High-Occupancy Facilty A public or private facility for housing or
                       assembling large populations.
Landslide              A general term for a fallng mass of soil or rocks.
Liquefaction           A process by which water-saturated granular
                       soils transform from a solid to a liquid state
                       during strong ground shaking.
    THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                               9-29
                                                         9.0 GEOLOGY ELEMENT
Potentially Active Fault A fractue or zone of closely associated fractures   , ,
                                                                                !
                         along which rocks on one side have been
                         displaced with respect to those on the other side;  , 1
                         shows evidence of surface displacement during
                         Quaternary time (the last 2 milion years).
                                                                             , 1
                                                                                i
Sensitive Facility       A facility used for the manufacture, storage or     " j,
                         sale of hazardous materials as well as schools,
                         nursing homes and housing for the elderly,
                         handicapped or mentally ilL.                        . t
Subsidence               The gradual, local settling or sinking of the
                         earth's surface with little or no horizontal
                         motion (subsidence is usually the result of gas,
                         oil, or water extraction, hydro      compaction, or r r
                         peat oxidation, and not the result of a landslide
                         or slope failure).
Surface Rupture          A break in the ground's surface and associated      ~ 1
                         deformation typically resulting from the
                         movement of a fault.
    THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON GENERAL PLAN
                                      9-30
 City of American Canyon
       2015-2023
2015-2023 HousingHousing
                  ElementElement
                              Update
              Adopted March 17, 2015
            Administrative Review
              Certified March      Draft
                               26, 2015
                          October 2014
This page is intentionally left blank
                  2015-2023
AMERICAN CANYON
 HOUSING ELEMENT
     POLICY DOCUMENT
            Adopted March 17, 2015
          City of American Canyon
          4381 Broadway, Suite 201
        American Canyon, CA 94503
CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON                2015-2023 HOUSING ELEMENT
This page is intentionally left blank.
ii                                             Adopted March 17, 2015
2015-2023 HOUSING ELEMENT                                      CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON
 I. Goals and Policies
The Housing Element Policy Document includes nine goal statements. Under each goal
statement, the element sets out policies to help the City achieve the goal. Implementation
programs are listed at the end of the Policy Document and describe the specific actions the
City will take to achieve its housing goals. The implementation programs also identify the
City agencies or departments with primary responsibility for carrying out the program and
the time frame for accomplishing the program.
The following definitions describe the nature of the statements of goals, policies,
implementation programs, and quantified objectives as they are used in the Housing
Element Policy Document:
      Goal: The ultimate purpose for an effort stated in a way that is general in nature and
       immeasurable.
      Policy: A specific statement to guide actions and implies a clear commitment to
       achieve the Goal.
      Implementation Program: An action, procedure, program, or technique that carries
       out the policy. Implementation programs also specify primary responsibility for
       carrying out the action and an estimated timeframe for its accomplishment. These
       timeframes are general guidelines and may be adjusted based on City staffing and
       budgetary considerations.
      Quantified Objective: The number of housing units that the City expects to be
       constructed, conserved, or rehabilitated; or the number of households the City
       expects will be assisted through Housing Element programs and based on general
       market conditions during the eight-year timeframe of the Housing Element (January
       31, 2015, to January 31, 2023).
Adopted March 17, 2015                                                                       1

CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON                                         2015-2023 HOUSING ELEMENT
Goal 2A: Housing Supply
                Provide sufficient residential land with adequate infrastructure to
  GOAL 2A       accommodate the City’s fair share of projected growth, and to facilitate
                mobility within the ownership and rental markets.
Objective 2.1: Maintain a supply of developable land in Residential and Commercial
Districts adequate to accommodate the amount and type of projected household and job
growth, and to facilitate vacancy rates that allow turnover with relative ease.
Policy 2.1.1   The City shall designate sufficient vacant land and underutilized sites with
               maximum densities high enough to facilitate the development of housing
               affordable to lower-income households.
Policy 2.1.2   The City shall protect residentially designated sites from reclassification to
               nonresidential designations or downzoning to lower densities.
Policy 2.1.3   The City shall facilitate the provision of infrastructure needed to support
               anticipated residential development, and ensure the continuation and proper
               integration of all services.
Policy 2.1.4   The City shall continue to assess development fees, establish assessment
               districts, and consider alternative financing methods to provide adequate
               infrastructure for residential development.
2                                                                       Adopted March 17, 2015

2015-2023 HOUSING ELEMENT                                        CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON
Goal 2B: Balance of Housing Types
                Provide a range of housing types within the community to accommodate a
 GOAL 2B        variety of incomes and lifestyles, and to enable residents to remain in
                American Canyon throughout their lives.
Objective 2.2: Promote a diversity of housing types, including large-lot development, single
family detached and attached residences, mobile homes, manufactured homes, townhomes,
multi-family rental and ownership units, second units, and units combined with
nonresidential uses.
Policy 2.2.1   The City shall allow flexibility in the type of units developed on vacant,
               residentially-designated properties in master-planned communities and
               other planned developments.
Policy 2.2.2   The City shall require larger projects to include a mix of housing types.
Policy 2.2.3   The City shall encourage the development of residential uses in association
               with compatible nonresidential uses.
Policy 2.2.4   The City shall permit development of second or accessory units on owner-
               occupied lots with single family detached units through appropriate
               regulatory action.
Goal 2C: Livable Neighborhoods
                Create neighborhoods that have a high degree of livability, and protect
 GOAL 2C
                existing neighborhoods from the adverse effects of development.
Objective 2.3: Promote residential design that is functional, people and pedestrian-oriented,
aesthetically pleasing, and contributes to a sense of community through the sensitive
arrangement of buildings, open space (public and private), and circulation (vehicular and
pedestrian). Encourage innovative and creative design in residential projects.
Policy 2.3.1   The City shall ensure that new residential development fulfills the above
               objective by meeting adopted design guidelines and development standards.
Policy 2.3.2   The City shall ensure that development is integrated with existing residential
               neighborhoods in a way that minimizes adverse impacts on privacy, noise
               levels, and traffic.
Policy 2.3.3   The City shall encourage physical design elements of development (e.g.,
               scale, street and circulation design, architectural elements) to complement
               and respect that of existing residential neighborhoods.
Adopted March 17, 2015                                                                      3
CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON                                         2015-2023 HOUSING ELEMENT
Objective 2.4: Maintain a high quality environment in existing neighborhoods.
Policy 2.4.1   The City shall use appropriate regulatory tools to maintain neighborhood
               quality.
Policy 2.4.2   The City shall endeavor to maintain             the   infrastructure of   older
               neighborhoods in good condition.
Policy 2.4.3   The City shall endeavor to maintain the quality of life within neighborhoods
               by maintaining an adequate level of community facilities, such as day care
               centers, and municipal services.
Policy 2.4.4   In choosing among financing and design alternatives for public
               improvements in existing neighborhoods, the City shall select those that
               minimize, to the extent practical, financial costs on existing affordable
               housing and low-income households.
Goal 2D: Housing Maintenance and Rehabilitation
  GOAL 2D       Maintain and improve the condition of the existing housing stock.
Objective 2.5: Encourage the maintenance and improvement of the existing housing stock.
Policy 2.5.1   The City shall promote the reduction of fire hazards and the correction of
               unsafe living conditions.
Policy 2.5.2   The City shall continue programs that lead to rehabilitation in older
               residential neighborhoods.
Policy 2.5.3   The City shall use Federal and State funding assistance for residential
               rehabilitation to the fullest extent possible.
Goal 2E: Affordable Housing
                Address the housing needs of all economic segments of the existing and
  GOAL 2E       future community, including the City’s fair share of the regional housing
                need.
Objective 2.6: Expand the availability of affordable housing in American Canyon.
Policy 2.6.1   The City shall give highest priority in the processing and approval of projects
               that include housing affordable to extremely low-, very low-, and low-income
               households.
4                                                                        Adopted March 17, 2015

2015-2023 HOUSING ELEMENT                                          CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON
Policy 2.6.2   The City shall expedite decisions on housing projects to the extent feasible by
               minimizing the discretionary aspects of project review through
               implementation of clear and detailed development guidelines.
Policy 2.6.3   The City shall provide regulatory and financial incentives to offset costs
               associated with the development of housing that is affordable to lower-
               income households. Such incentives could include, but are not limited to:
               density bonuses; use of the City’s Affordable Housing Fund; below market
               price for City-owned land; expedited permit processing; waived, reduced, or
               deferred fees; and/or negotiation of alternative development standards.
Policy 2.6.4   The City shall prioritize local financial assistance for affordable rental
               housing.
Policy 2.6.5   In providing City assistance to projects involving the development of
               affordable housing, the City shall give priority to those with the most suitable
               sites.
Policy 2.6.6   The City shall use Federal, State, local, and private funding assistance, to the
               extent that these opportunities exist, and are appropriate to American
               Canyon’s needs, to encourage the development of affordable housing.
Policy 2.6.7   The City shall strive to fully use the resources and abilities of nonprofit
               housing corporations in the provision and construction of affordable
               housing.
Policy 2.6.8   The City shall continue to enforce the inclusionary housing ordinance, as
               legally permissible, to ensure a certain percentage of new residential units will
               be made affordable to lower-income households.
Policy 2.6.9   The City shall consider new methods for generating local funding for
               affordable housing.
Policy 2.6.10 The City shall explore possible programs, incentives, and/or requirements for
               increasing employee housing close to major employers in American Canyon.
Goal 2F: Preservation of Affordability
                Preserve the City’s existing affordable housing stock, and ensure the long-
 GOAL 2F
                term affordability of subsequent affordable units.
Objective 2.7: Preserve the affordability of the City’s existing affordable housing stock.
Adopted March 17, 2015                                                                        5

CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON                                          2015-2023 HOUSING ELEMENT
Policy 2.7.1   The City shall strive to preserve the affordability of subsidized rental housing
               to extremely low-, very low-, and low-income households.
Policy 2.7.2   The City shall require applicants to replace housing as a condition of
               development approval when discretionary development applications convert
               or remove housing units occupied by, and affordable to, very low- or low-
               income households. The City shall consider regulatory and other incentives
               to increase the feasibility of providing replacement housing.
Policy 2.7.3   The City shall continue to control the conversion of apartments to ownership
               units through the Rental Housing Conversion Ordinance (Municipal Code
               Chapter 18.32).
Policy 2.7.4   The City shall take feasible measures to protect mobile home park residents
               from involuntary displacement and unreasonable rent increases.
Policy 2.7.5   The City shall continue to impose resale or rent controls for not fewer than 30
               years on all units that receive City financial assistance or affordable housing
               density bonuses.
Goal 2G: Housing for Special Needs
                Promote housing opportunities for special needs groups and for all people
  GOAL 2G       regardless of race, color, religion, gender, sexual orientation, disability,
                marital status, ancestry, or national origin.
Objective 2.8: Promote the provision and maintenance of housing for special needs groups.
Policy 2.8.1   The City shall strive to address the physical, financial, and supportive service
               housing needs of seniors, persons with disabilities, large households, female-
               headed households, extremely low-income residents, farmworkers, and the
               homeless.
Policy 2.8.2   The City shall encourage the construction of rental units containing adequate
               numbers of bedrooms to accommodate large households with children.
Policy 2.8.3   The City shall encourage the development, rehabilitation, and preservation of
               senior housing, particularly in areas that are accessible to public transit,
               commercial services, and health and community facilities.
Policy 2.8.4   The City shall continue to provide reasonable accommodation for persons
               with disabilities.
Policy 2.8.5   The City shall encourage the development of housing accessible to people
               with disabilities, including developmental disabilities.
6                                                                         Adopted March 17, 2015
2015-2023 HOUSING ELEMENT                                      CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON
Policy 2.8.6   The City shall support adequate housing for farmworkers in the region.
Policy 2.8.7   The City shall support the efforts of State and local agencies to achieve and
               maintain acceptable living conditions in residential care homes.
Policy 2.8.8   The City shall allow small group homes of six or fewer occupants in all zoning
               districts allowing single family development consistent with State law.
Policy 2.8.9   The City shall support the efforts of local agencies in preventing
               homelessness and providing housing for the homeless.
Policy 2.8.10 The City shall facilitate the development of emergency and transitional
               shelters.
Policy 2.8.11 The City shall continue to support female-headed households with the
               permitting of child day care facilities as outlined in Chapter 19 of the
               Municipal Code.
Objective 2.9: Discourage discriminatory housing practices.
Policy 2.9.1   The City shall report complaints of unfair housing actions to the appropriate
               agencies.
Policy 2.9.2   The City shall coordinate with Fair Housing Napa Valley to publicize fair
               housing programs throughout the community.
Goal 2H: Energy Conservation and Sustainable Development
                Encourage sustainable residential development and energy conservation in
 GOAL 2H
                new and existing housing.
Objective 2.10: Promote the use of energy conservation features in existing homes and the
design of new residential development.
Policy 2.10.1 The City shall encourage sustainable development and ensure, at a
               minimum, that the design of development is consistent with State laws
               regarding energy conservation.
Policy 2.10.2 The City shall promote tree planting in residential areas to provide cooling
               during the summer months.
Policy 2.10.3 The City shall encourage innovative site designs and orientation techniques
               that incorporate passive and active solar designs and natural cooling
               techniques.
Adopted March 17, 2015                                                                      7
CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON                                          2015-2023 HOUSING ELEMENT
Policy 2.10.4 The City shall promote energy efficient land use planning by incorporating
               energy conservation as a major criterion for future decision making.
Policy 2.10.5 The City shall promote a weatherization and retrofit program for existing
               housing units that fall below current state performance standards for energy
               efficiency.
Policy 2.10.6 The City shall promote opportunities for the use of solar energy by assuring
               solar access and expediting solar installation through a ministerial review.
Policy 2.10.7 The City shall promote energy conservation through education and
               innovative financial partnerships, such as Property Assessed Clean Energy
               (PACE) programs.
Goal 2I: Administration and Implementation
                Maximize attainment of housing goals and ensure Housing Element
  GOAL 2I
                programs are implemented in a timely manner.
Objective 2.11: Maximize attainment of the Housing Element’s goals and programs.
Policy 2.11.1 The City shall provide an active leadership role in fulfilling the programs of
               the Housing Element.
Policy 2.11.2 The City shall review and hold a public meeting annually to report on the
               City’s progress to implement the Housing Element.
8                                                                        Adopted March 17, 2015

 2015-2023 HOUSING ELEMENT                                                                           CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON
 II. Implementation Programs
                                                                        Policies                     Funding
                    Implementation Program                           Implemented      Responsibility Source        Schedule
GOAL 2A: HOUSING SUPPLY
Program I.2.1: No-Net-Loss Evaluation Procedure
To ensure sufficient residential capacity is maintained to
accommodate the RHNA need, the City will develop and
implement a formal ongoing (project-by-project) evaluation
procedure pursuant to Government Code Section 56863.
Should an approval of development result in a reduction of
capacity below the residential capacity needed to
accommodate the remaining need for lower-income
households, the City will identify and re-zone sufficient sites to                                              Project review is
accommodate the shortfall.                                                             Community
                                                                      Policies 2.1.1,                General     ongoing with
                                                                                       Development
In particular, if one of the five commercially-zoned sites                2.1.2                       Fund      annual report to
                                                                                       Department
identified as allowing for exclusively residential uses (i.e., sites                                                  HCD
20, 22, 23, 25, or 34) is developed with uses other than
residential or the site is developed with fewer residential units
than counted in the sites inventory, the City will identify
additional sites within the city that will allow for exclusively
residential uses. The outcomes of this evaluation and
monitoring shall be contained within the City annual housing
reports submitted to HCD as required pursuant to GC Section
65400.
 Adopted March 17, 2015                                                                                                        9
 CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON                                                                    2015-2023 HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                 Policies                   Funding
                  Implementation Program                       Implemented   Responsibility Source          Schedule
Program I.2.2: Maintain Inventory of Developable Sites
To ensure adequate sites are available throughout the planning
period to meet the City's RHNA, the City shall continue to
annually update an inventory that details the amount, type,
and size of vacant and underutilized parcels to assist                        Community
                                                                                            General
developers in identifying land suitable for residential         Policy 2.1.1  Development                Update annually
                                                                                             Fund
development. The inventory shall also describe in detail the                   Department
number of extremely low-, very low-, low-, and moderate-
income units constructed annually. The City shall post the
inventory on the City website and make it available at the
Planning Department counter.
Program I.2.3: Priority Sewer and Water Service for
Affordable Housing                                                            Community
                                                                              Development
The City shall adopt policies and procedures to provide                                     General
                                                                Policy 2.1.3  Department,                 December 2015
priority sewer and water service for developments that include                               Fund
                                                                              Public Works
lower income housing units, consistent with State law
                                                                               Department
(Government Code Section 65589.7).
 10                                                                                                 Adopted March 17, 2015
 2015-2023 HOUSING ELEMENT                                                                    CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON
                                                                   Policies                   Funding
                   Implementation Program                        Implemented   Responsibility Source         Schedule
GOAL 2B: BALANCE OF HOUSING TYPES
Program I.2.4: Incentives for Second Units
The City shall explore and adopt, as appropriate, programs
and incentives for encouraging second units. Possible
                                                                                                            Explore and
approaches may include, but are not limited to, preparing an                    Community
                                                                                              General     adopt programs
informational manual that describes the permitting procedures     Policy 2.2.4  Development
                                                                                               Fund      and/or incentives
for second units, a pre-approved design template for second                     Department
                                                                                                              by 2018
units, reduced fees for second units, and technical or financial
assistance for homeowners who agree to rent their second
units at affordable rates.
GOAL 2C: LIVEABLE NEIGHBORHOODS
Program I.2.5: Neighborhood Preservation Program
                                                                                Community
The City shall continue to enforce Neighborhood Preservation
                                                                                Development
(Chapter 9.04 of the Municipal Code), which is designed to
                                                                                Department,
ensure that individual properties within neighborhoods are                                    General
                                                                  Policy 2.4.1   Planning                    Ongoing
maintained at levels that protect property rights of both                                      Fund
                                                                                Commission
individual property owners and general neighborhoods, and to
                                                                                  and City
minimize potential nuisances and impacts to the public health,
                                                                                  Council
safety, and welfare.
 Adopted March 17, 2015                                                                                                11
 CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON                                                                          2015-2023 HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                   Policies                      Funding
                   Implementation Program                       Implemented      Responsibility   Source          Schedule
GOAL 2D: HOUSING MAINTENANCE AND REHABILITATION
Program I.2.6: Residential Rehabilitation Loan Program
Working in collaboration with the City of Napa Housing
Authority, the City shall apply annually for CDBG funding to
support the Residential Rehabilitation Loan Program, which                        City of Napa
provides no interest loans to low-income homeowners to                              Housing
finance home repairs. Funding is available to repair or replace  Policies 2.5.1,   Authority,   CDBG funds        Apply for
deficiencies to residential structural, mechanical, plumbing,     2.5.2, 2.5.3    Community                    funding annually
and electrical systems, roofing, water damage, energy                             Development
conservation, correction of health and safety issues and                          Department
accessibility/mobility modifications. The City shall also
subsidize permit fees for units rehabilitated through the
Residential Rehabilitation Program.
Program I.2.7: Code Enforcement
The City shall continue to use its code enforcement efforts to
                                                                                  Community
improve the existing housing stock. The City shall provide       Policies 2.5.1,
                                                                                  Development   General fund       Ongoing
owners of residential housing units identified as needing code       2.5.2
                                                                                  Department
enforcement actions with information on the Residential
Rehabilitation Loan Program.
 12                                                                                                       Adopted March 17, 2015
 2015-2023 HOUSING ELEMENT                                                                    CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON
                                                                  Policies                    Funding
                   Implementation Program                       Implemented    Responsibility Source        Schedule
GOAL 2E: AFFORDABLE HOUSING
Program I.2.8: City-owned Land for Affordable Housing
The City shall sell City-owned land, as available and feasible
                                                                                City Council
for residential development, at a reduced cost to developers to
                                                                                    and                       Review
build affordable housing. The City shall notify developers of                                 General
                                                                 Policy 2.6.3   Community                  opportunities
opportunity sites and incentives through the City website,                                     Fund
                                                                                Development                  annually
informational brochures available at City Hall, and the
                                                                                Department
distribution of Requests For Proposals as sites become
available.
Program I.2.9: Employee Housing Program
The City shall explore and adopt, as appropriate, possible
programs, incentives, and/or requirements for increasing
employee housing close to major employers in American
Canyon. Possible approaches may include, but are not limited                    City Council             Begin exploring
to, identifying funding for a first time homebuyer program tied                     and                  options by 2017
                                                                                              General
to place of work, identifying surplus land for the development   Policy 2.6.10  Community                  and adopt, as
                                                                                               Fund
of workforce housing, developing employer incentives based                      Development               appropriate by
on the percentage of their employees living close to work,                      Department                     2019
and/or requiring major employers to plan for employee
housing. In developing the program, the City shall reach out to
major employers to gain an understanding of the needs of their
employee base.
 Adopted March 17, 2015                                                                                                13
 CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON                                                                       2015-2023 HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                   Policies                    Funding
                    Implementation Program                       Implemented   Responsibility  Source          Schedule
Program I.2.10: Affordable Housing Fund
The City shall provide financial assistance from the Affordable
Housing Fund, as available, for the construction of affordable
housing and/or to subsidize development impact fees for
affordable housing. The City shall review and prioritize
potential projects based on the following criteria:
    1. Convenient access to transit (or provision of transit by
       the project to meet the needs of its prospective
       residents).
                                                                                Community
    2. Convenient access to neighborhood services and                           Development
       facilities, as needed by the prospective residents.                      Department,   Affordable         Review
    3. Convenient access to neighborhood recreation facilities,   Policy 2.6.5   Planning      Housing        opportunities
       or onsite provision of adequate facilities.                              Commission,     Fund            annually
                                                                                  and City
    4. Minimal environmental constraints or cost-effective                        Council
       mitigation of constraints.
    5. Cost-effective provision of services and utilities to the
       site and onsite.
    6. Adequate site area to provide sufficient parking, open
       space, setbacks, and building separations.
 The City shall hold informational meetings bi-annually, based
on funding availability, to inform affordable housing
developers of available funding.
 14                                                                                                    Adopted March 17, 2015
 2015-2023 HOUSING ELEMENT                                                                      CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON
                                                                   Policies                     Funding
                   Implementation Program                       Implemented      Responsibility Source        Schedule
Program I.2.11: Incentives for Affordable Housing
The City shall facilitate the development of affordable housing
in conjunction with market rate rental housing through the
following:
    1. Use of housing set-aside funds for mixed income
        housing projects that include units affordable to
        extremely low-, very low-, and low-income households;
    2. Regulatory incentives, such as expediting permit
        processing, deferred fees, and/or reduced parking
                                                                                  Community
        requirements based on the bedroom mix of the project;    Policies 2.6.3,                General
                                                                                  Development                 Ongoing
        and                                                          2.6.5                       Fund
                                                                                  Department
    3. Providing up to a 35 percent density bonus and three
        concessions/incentives for developments that include
        affordable housing, consistent with State density bonus
        law.
The City shall publicize the above incentives for market rate
housing to developers and/or other interested parties by
providing informational fliers at the Community Development
Department counter and in the general development
application packet.
 Adopted March 17, 2015                                                                                                15
 CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON                                                                         2015-2023 HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                    Policies                     Funding
                   Implementation Program                        Implemented      Responsibility Source          Schedule
Program I.2.12: Density Bonus Program
The City shall continue to offer density bonuses consistent with
                                                                                   Community
State law for qualifying affordable housing and senior housing                                   General      Prepare brochure
                                                                   Policy 2.6.3    Development
development. The City shall prepare and distribute an                                             Fund             by 2016
                                                                                   Department
informational brochure describing the density bonus
provisions.
Program I.2.13: Planned Development Process
To promote the development of affordable housing units, the
                                                                                   Community
City shall use its planned development process to negotiate                                      General
                                                                   Policy 2.6.3    Development                    Ongoing
alternative development standards, such as alternative parking                                    Fund
                                                                                   Department
standards, street improvement standards, maximum density,
lot coverage, and height limits.
Program I.2.14: Assist in Accessing Grant Funding
The City shall offer assistance in accessing local, State, and
Federal funding for affordable housing by applying for such                        Community                  Review funding
                                                                  Policies 2.6.5,                General
funding, when feasible, on behalf of the affordable-housing                        Development                  opportunities
                                                                   2.6.6, 2.6.7                   Fund
developer, or by providing technical assistance or                                 Department                     annually
documentation necessary to support an application for
funding.
 16                                                                                                      Adopted March 17, 2015
 2015-2023 HOUSING ELEMENT                                                                    CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON
                                                                 Policies                     Funding
                    Implementation Program                     Implemented   Responsibility   Source        Schedule
Program I.2.15: Incentives for Lot Consolidation
The City shall offer incentives, such as reduced or deferred                                                 Identify
fees, expedited processing, or modified development                                                        appropriate
                                                                              Community
standards to owners of small and underutilized properties for                                 General     incentives and
                                                                Policy 2.6.3  Development
the consolidation and/or re-use of small lots to create larger                                  Fund     post information
                                                                              Department
parcels with greater affordable housing development potential.                                            on website by
The City will post information on its website about available                                                  2017
incentives for lot consolidation.
                                                                              Community
Program I.2.16: Partner with the Housing Authority                            Development
The City shall continue to partner with the City of Napa                      Department,
                                                                                              General
Housing Authority or similar entity to take advantage of        Policy 2.6.6   Planning                      Ongoing
                                                                                                Fund
administrative resources and receive a reasonable share of                    Commission,
Federal, State, and private funding for housing.                                and City
                                                                                Council
Program I.2.17: Inclusionary Housing Program
The City shall continue to require all residential ownership
                                                                              Community       General
projects of five or more above moderate-income units to
                                                                              Development    Fund and         Amend
include affordable units consistent with the Inclusionary
                                                                Policy 2.6.8  Department    Inclusionary   Ordinance in
Housing Requirements (Municipal Code Chapter 19.28). The
                                                                                and City      Housing          2015
City shall amend the Inclusionary Housing Requirements
                                                                                Council       Program
Chapter of the Municipal Code to remove inclusionary
requirements for rental housing.
 Adopted March 17, 2015                                                                                                17
 CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON                                                                         2015-2023 HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                    Policies                     Funding
                   Implementation Program                         Implemented   Responsibility   Source          Schedule
Program I.2.18: Conduct Nexus Study for Affordable                               Community
Housing Fees                                                                     Development     General
The City shall conduct a nexus study to determine an                             Department,    Fund and          Consider
appropriate and feasible affordable housing impact fee and         Policy 2.6.9   Planning      Affordable     adopting fee in
shall consider adopting fees, as appropriate, for rental housing                 Commission,     Housing            2015
developments and for non-residential developments (i.e.,                           and City       Fund
commercial linkage fee).                                                           Council
GOAL 2F: PRESERVATION OF AFFORDABILITY
Program I.2.19: Preserve At-Risk Housing
The City shall contact property owners of units at-risk of
converting to market rate housing within one year of
affordability expiration to discuss the City’s desire to preserve
complexes as affordable housing. The City shall seek                             Community
participation from agencies interested in purchasing and/or        Policy 2.7.1  Development   CDBG Funds         Ongoing
managing units at-risk. The City shall require property owners                   Department
to give a nine-month notice of their intent to opt out of low-
income use restrictions. The City shall work with tenants to
provide education regarding tenant rights and conversion
procedures pursuant to California law.
 18                                                                                                      Adopted March 17, 2015

 2015-2023 HOUSING ELEMENT                                                                       CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON
                                                                     Policies                    Funding
                   Implementation Program                         Implemented     Responsibility Source        Schedule
Program I.2.20: Monitor Section 8 Status
In partnership with the Housing Authority, the City shall
                                                                                   Community
monitor apartments for Section 8 status and prepare a plan for
                                                                                   Development
the preservation of these units as affordable rental housing.                                    General
                                                                    Policy 2.7.1   Department                  2007-2014
The plan will state the City’s proposed actions for assisting the                                 Fund
                                                                                     and City
current property owner in preserving these affordable units, or
                                                                                     Council
assisting in the acquisition by a non-profit entity dedicated to
permanently preserving the affordability of these rental units.
Program I.2.21: Mobilehome Park Rent Stabilization Program
The City shall continue to protect the interests of residents                      Community
living in existing mobile home parks by enforcing the                              Development
Mobilehome Park Rent Stabilization Program (Chapter 15.04 of                       Department,   General
                                                                   Policies 2.7.4                               Ongoing
the Municipal Code, adopted 1995), which includes measures                          Planning      Fund
for rent stabilization, strict conversion standards, and                           Commission,
relocation assistance and compensation to residents if parks                       City Council
are converted to another use.
Program I.2.22: Rental Assistance Program
                                                                                                            Seek funding for
The City shall continue support for the Rental Assistance                                        General
                                                                    Policy 2.7.1   City Council             rental assistance
Program at the State and local level by maintaining                                               Fund
                                                                                                            when available.
membership in the Napa Housing Authority.
 Adopted March 17, 2015                                                                                                    19

 CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON                                                                          2015-2023 HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                   Policies                       Funding
                   Implementation Program                       Implemented      Responsibility    Source         Schedule
GOAL 2G: HOUSING FOR SPECIAL NEEDS
Program I.2.23: Rehabilitation Loan Program Outreach to
Elderly Homeowners                                                                Community
                                                                                                               Prepare outreach
The City shall conduct targeted outreach to elderly               Policy 2.8.1    Development      CDBG
                                                                                                               materials by 2016
homeowners to inform them of the Residential Rehabilitation                       Department
Loan Program (Program I.2.6) and PACE Program.
Program I.2.24: Facilitate Construction of Housing for
Persons with Disabilities
The City shall facilitate the construction of subsidized rental
housing affordable to extremely low-, very low- and low-
income persons that meet the physical and supportive service
                                                                                                Affordable
needs of persons with disabilities, including developmental
                                                                                  Community       Housing
disabilities, such as: handicapped accessibility; on-site        Policies 2.8.1,
                                                                                  Development   Fund, State        Ongoing
supportive services and/or daily living assistance; and              2.8.5
                                                                                  Department    and Federal
transportation. The City shall continue to publicize financial
                                                                                                 tax credits
and regulatory incentive opportunities to developers interested
in the construction of subsidized rental housing that meets the
needs of persons with disabilities by providing informational
fliers at the Community Development Department and in all
general development application packets.
 20                                                                                                       Adopted March 17, 2015
 2015-2023 HOUSING ELEMENT                                                                      CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON
                                                                   Policies                     Funding
                   Implementation Program                       Implemented      Responsibility Source        Schedule
Program I.2.25: Outreach to Developmentally Disabled
The City shall work with the North Bay Regional Center to
                                                                                  Community                    Initiate
implement an outreach program informing residents of the         Policies 2.8.1,                General
                                                                                  Development              coordination by
housing and services available for persons with developmental        2.8.5                       Fund
                                                                                  Department                    2016
disabilities. The City shall make information available on the
City website.
Program I.2.26: Zoning for Small Group Homes
In order to comply with State law, the City shall amend the
                                                                                  Community
Zoning Code to add group homes for six or fewer residents
                                                                                  Development
(i.e., residential care homes) as a permitted use in the
                                                                                  Department,
Residential Estate (RE), Medium Residential (RM), and High                                      General
                                                                  Policy 2.8.8     Planning                     2016
Residential (RH) Zoning Districts, in addition to the zones                                      Fund
                                                                                  Commission,
where they are already allowed. Subject to the provision of the
                                                                                    and City
American Canyon Municipal Code, group home/residential
                                                                                    Council
facilities will be held to the same standards and permit
processing as single-family homes.
Program I.2.27: Zoning for Employee Housing                                       Community
In order to comply with State law (i.e., Health and Safety Code                   Development
Sections 17021.5 and 17021.6), the City shall amend the Zoning                    Department,
                                                                                                General
Code to allow employee housing for six or fewer occupants         Policy 2.8.6     Planning                     2016
                                                                                                 Fund
(including farm employee housing) in all zones allowing single                    Commission,
family residential, and shall amend the RE zone to permit                           and City
employee housing of up to 12 units or 36 beds.                                      Council
 Adopted March 17, 2015                                                                                                 21
 CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON                                                                         2015-2023 HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                   Policies                     Funding
                  Implementation Program                         Implemented   Responsibility    Source          Schedule
                                                                                Community
Program I.2.28: Zoning for Single Room Occupancy                                Development
The City shall amend the Zoning Code to allow single room                       Department,
                                                                                                 General
occupancy (SRO) in the Residential High (RH) zone district,       Policy 2.8.1   Planning                           2016
                                                                                                  Fund
subject to development standards that will allow and                            Commission,
encourage the construction of new SROs.                                           and City
                                                                                  Council
Program I.2.29: Facilitate Construction of Large Units
The City shall facilitate the construction of housing that                                    Inclusionary
includes three- and four-bedroom units affordable to extremely                                   Housing
low-, very low-, and low-income households. The City shall                      Community       Program,
                                                                                                              Prepare fliers by
publicize financial and regulatory incentive opportunities to     Policy 2.8.2  Development     State and
                                                                                                                    2017
developers interested in the construction of housing that                       Department     Federal tax
includes larger affordable units by providing informational                                    credits, and
fliers at the Community Development Department and in all                                     CDBG funds.
general development application packets.
Program I.2.30: Farmworker Housing                                                                              Reach out to
The City shall continue to support regional efforts to address                  Community                      developers by
                                                                                                 General
farmworker housing issues. The City shall also offer incentives,  Policy 2.8.6  Development                     2017 and bi-
                                                                                                  Fund
such as fee waivers and reduced development standards, for                      Department                        annually
farmworker housing.                                                                                              thereafter
 22                                                                                                      Adopted March 17, 2015
 2015-2023 HOUSING ELEMENT                                                                      CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON
                                                                   Policies                     Funding
                   Implementation Program                       Implemented      Responsibility Source        Schedule
Program I.2.31: Distribute Homeless Shelter Information
The City shall provide information regarding the Napa Valley                      Community
                                                                                                General
Shelter System to City personnel and others (e.g., newspapers,    Policy 2.8.9    Development                 Ongoing
                                                                                                 Fund
churches) likely to be in contact with those needing shelter.                     Department
Direct personnel to refer such persons as appropriate.
Program I.2.32: Distribute Fair Housing Information
The City shall provide information about Fair Housing of
Napa Valley services to City personnel likely to receive fair
                                                                                  Community
housing complaints, and shall direct employees to refer such
                                                                                  Development
persons as appropriate. The City shall continue to distribute    Policies 2.9.1,                General
                                                                                  Department,                 Ongoing
fair housing information to public agencies and establishments       2.9.2                       Fund
                                                                                   other City
in American Canyon, in City buildings and other public
                                                                                   personnel
locations (e.g., City hall, fire station, library, post office,
community centers), in City mailings to residents, and on the
City website.
Program I.2.33: Fair Housing Event
The City shall annually sponsor a fair housing event in
collaboration with Fair Housing of Napa Valley or any similar                                   General
                                                                  Policy 2.9.2   City personnel               Annually
entity targeted to community organizations serving residents                                     Fund
who may experience housing discrimination, rental property
owners, real estate industry representatives, and lenders.
 Adopted March 17, 2015                                                                                                23
 CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON                                                                          2015-2023 HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                     Policies                     Funding
                   Implementation Program                         Implemented      Responsibility Source           Schedule
GOAL 2G; ENERGY CONSERVATION
Program I.2.34: Encourage Sustainable Building
The City shall continue to encourage new residential
development and rehabilitation projects to incorporate
sustainable building design and siting, construction, and
operation. The City promotes the reduction of energy
consumption through the use of recycled water for new large                         Community
                                                                  Policies 2.10.1,                General
residential, commercial, and industrial landscaping projects;                       Development                    Ongoing
                                                                   2.10.3, 2.10.4                  Fund
requires adherence to the City’s zero water footprint policy                        Department
that requires new development to reduce water consumption
to a level sustainable with the city’s long term water supplies,
or provide off-site water conservation measures to reduce
overall citywide water consumption; and participates in the
regional trash recycling programs.
Program I.2.35: Energy Conservation Fact Sheet
The City shall make available an informational fact sheet for                       Community
                                                                  Policies 2.10.5,                General       Distribute fact
distribution that will describe the energy conservation                             Development
                                                                      2.10.7                       Fund          sheet by 2016
measures that can be instituted in existing homes for little cost                   Department
and will save energy and utility expenses.
 24                                                                                                       Adopted March 17, 2015

 2015-2023 HOUSING ELEMENT                                                                      CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON
                                                                  Policies                      Funding
                   Implementation Program                       Implemented      Responsibility Source         Schedule
Program I.2.36: Adjust Utility Allowances for Green                               Community
Affordable Housing Units                                                          Development
                                                                                  Department,
As an incentive for the development of green affordable                                         General
                                                                 Policy 2.10.1     Planning                       2016
housing projects, the City shall reduce utility allowances for                                   Fund
                                                                                  Commission,
affordable green housing units, allowing developers to charge
                                                                                    and City
more rent.
                                                                                    Council
GOAL 2I: ADMINISTRATION AND IMPLEMENTATION
Program I.2.37: Annual Housing Element Report
The City shall review and report annually on the
implementation of Housing Element programs and the City’s
effectiveness in meeting the program objectives for the prior                     Community
                                                                Policies 2.11.1,
calendar year. The City shall present the annual report to the                    Development                  Annually
                                                                    2.11.2
City Council at a public hearing before submitting the annual                     Department
report to the California Department of Housing and
Community Development (HCD) and the Office of Planning
and Research (OPR).
Program I.2.38: Maintain Adequate Staffing
The City shall maintain City staffing or contracted services at                                 General     Annual review
                                                                 Policy 2.11.1    City Council
levels that are adequate to ensure the continued prompt                                          Fund      of staffing levels
consideration of residential development applications.
 Adopted March 17, 2015                                                                                                   25

CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON                                            2015-2023 HOUSING ELEMENT
III. QUANTIFIED OBJECTIVES
State law requires that the Housing Element contain quantified objectives for the maintenance,
preservation, improvement, and development of housing (Government Code Section 65583b).
The quantified objectives, shown in Table 1, establish the maximum number of housing units by
income category that can be constructed, rehabilitated, and conserved over the eight-year
planning period given available resources in the community. State law recognizes that the total
housing needs identified by a community may exceed available resources and the community's
ability to satisfy this need. Under these circumstances, the quantified objectives need not be
identical to the total housing needs.
                                             TABLE 1
                                  QUANTIFIED OBJECTIVES
                                     CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON
                                              2015-2023
                                            New                            Conservation and
          Income Groups                                  Rehabilitation
                                       Construction                           Preservation
 Extremely Low                                        35              15                    20
 Very Low                                             50              25                    30
 Low                                                  50              25                    35
 Moderate                                            200                0                   20
 Above Moderate                                      400                0                    0
 Total                                               700              65                  105
26                                                                         Adopted March 17, 2015
                  2015-2023
AMERICAN CANYON
 HOUSING ELEMENT
   BACKGROUND REPORT
            Adopted March 17, 2015
          City of American Canyon
          4381 Broadway, Suite 201
        American Canyon, CA 94503
CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON                2015-2023 HOUSING ELEMENT
This page is intentionally left blank.
B-ii                                           Adopted March 17, 2015
2015-2023 HOUSING ELEMENT                                                                 CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON
  I.      INTRODUCTION ......................................................................................................... B-1
      A.  Housing Element Overview ......................................................................................... B-1
      B.  Information Sources for the Housing Element .......................................................... B-2
      C.  The Review Process for Certification .......................................................................... B-3
      D.  Public Participation ........................................................................................................ B-3
      E.  General Plan Consistency ............................................................................................. B-4
      F.  Relationship to Other City Plans and Policies ........................................................... B-5
  II.     EXISTING HOUSING NEEDS .................................................................................. B-7
      A.  Population and Employment Trends .......................................................................... B-7
      B.  Existing Households .................................................................................................... B-16
      C.  Housing Characteristics .............................................................................................. B-34
      D.  Special Housing Needs................................................................................................ B-38
      E.  Opportunities for Energy Conservation ................................................................... B-53
      F.  Analysis of At-Risk Units ............................................................................................ B-57
  III.    PROJECTED HOUSING NEEDS ............................................................................ B-61
      A.  Regional Housing Needs Determination .................................................................. B-61
  IV.     SITES INVENTORY AND ANALYSIS .................................................................. B-62
      A.  Approved Projects and Units Under Construction ................................................. B-62
      B.  Inventory of Land Suitable for Residential Development...................................... B-63
      C.  Housing Needs Met ..................................................................................................... B-80
      D.  Adequate Infrastructure and Environmental Constraints ..................................... B-81
      E.  Zoning for a Variety of Housing Types .................................................................... B-84
  V.      CONSTRAINTS .......................................................................................................... B-92
      A.  Governmental Constraints .......................................................................................... B-92
      B.  Non-Governmental Constraints............................................................................... B-116
  VI.     ADMINISTRATIVE AND FINANCIAL RESOURCES .................................... B-120
  VII.    EVALUATION OF PREVIOUS HOUSING ELEMENT .................................... B-123
Appendix A .....................................................................................................................B-152
Adopted March 17, 2015                                                                                                                 B-iii
CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON                                                                       2015-2023 HOUSING ELEMENT
List of Tables
Table 1 Population Growth Trends............................................................................................... B-7
Table 2 Population Trends ............................................................................................................. B-8
Table 3 Population Projections ...................................................................................................... B-9
Table 4 Population by Age ........................................................................................................... B-10
Table 5 Race and Ethnicity ........................................................................................................... B-11
Table 6 Employment by Industry................................................................................................ B-12
Table 7 Mean Drive Times............................................................................................................ B-12
Table 8 Growth by Industry Sector ............................................................................................. B-14
Table 9 Wages by Occupation...................................................................................................... B-15
Table 10 Household Growth Trends........................................................................................... B-16
Table 11 Number of Persons per Household............................................................................. B-17
Table 12 Household Composition by Type ............................................................................... B-18
Table 13 Persons Per Room in All Occupied Housing Units .................................................. B-19
Table 14 Percent of Households Overpaying for Housing ...................................................... B-21
Table 15 Households by Tenure .................................................................................................. B-22
Table 16 Housing Units ................................................................................................................ B-23
Table 17 Number of Bedrooms by Tenure ................................................................................. B-23
Table 18 Tenure by Age of Householder ................................................................................... B-24
Table 19 Income Definitions......................................................................................................... B-25
Table 20 Income Limits per Household Size ............................................................................. B-26
Table 21 Household Income......................................................................................................... B-26
Table 22 Fair Market Rents ........................................................................................................... B-27
Table 23 Homes for Sale ............................................................................................................... B-28
Table 24 Rental Rates .................................................................................................................... B-28
Table 25 Mobile Home Park Space Rental Rates ....................................................................... B-29
Table 26 Median Value/Rent ........................................................................................................ B-29
Table 27 Ability to Pay .................................................................................................................. B-31
Table 28 Housing Problems ......................................................................................................... B-33
Table 29 Housing Stock ................................................................................................................ B-34
Table 30 Year Structure Built ....................................................................................................... B-35
Table 31 Housing Condition Survey........................................................................................... B-36
Table 32 Housing Occupancy ...................................................................................................... B-37
Table 33 Housing Permits Issued 1999- 2014............................................................................. B-38
Table 34 Persons with Disability by Age and Disability .......................................................... B-41
Table 35 Adult Care Facilities ...................................................................................................... B-43
Table 36 Elderly Care Facilities.................................................................................................... B-45
Table 37 Household by Size and Tenure .................................................................................... B-45
Table 38 Median Household Income by Household Size ........................................................ B-46
Table 39 Summary of Sheltered and Unsheltered Homeless .................................................. B-49
Table 40 Rental Subsidies Required ............................................................................................ B-58
Table 41 Qualified Entities ........................................................................................................... B-59
Table 42 Affordable For-Sale Housing ....................................................................................... B-60
B-iv                                                                                                       Adopted March 17, 2015
2015-2023 HOUSING ELEMENT                                        CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON
I.         Introduction
A. Housing Element Overview
American Canyon’s Housing Element is a comprehensive statement of its current and future
housing needs, including proposed actions to facilitate the provision of housing to meet the
needs of all income levels. The policies contained in this element are an expression of the
statewide housing goal of “attaining decent housing and a suitable living environment for
every California family,” as well as a reflection of the unique concerns of the community. In
addition, the element identifies and analyzes housing needs, resources, and constraints to
meeting those needs while being consistent and compatible with other General Plan
Elements. This is an update of the 2009-2014 Housing Element previously adopted by the
City of American Canyon in 2010.
State law requires that the City of American Canyon’s respective Council of Government
(COG) assign the City its “fair share” of regional housing needs. The Association of Bay
Area Governments (ABAG) is the official COG for the City. In July 2013 ABAG adopted the
Regional Housing Needs Plan (RHNP), which includes a methodology to assign the City its
share of the regional housing need based on population projections. State law requires that
the Housing Element establish specific goals and policies to achieve its “fair share” of
housing needs and to adopt an action plan toward accomplishing this end.
The American Canyon Housing Element consists of a Background Report and a Policy
Document. The purpose of the Background Report is to describe the city’s housing needs,
which are then addressed by the goals, policies, and programs outlined within the Policy
Document. In accordance with State Housing Element Law, this background document
reviews the previous Housing Element and analyzes local housing issues, demographics,
and market conditions to project the City’s future housing needs corresponding to its “fair-
share” of regional housing need.
The Background Report provides an assessment of current City issues, demographics, and
housing needs that are reflected in the goals, policies, and programs within the Policy
Document. This assessment includes all of the following:
     A housing needs assessment of population and employment trends; household
      characteristics, including existing households, households overpaying, and household
      income breakdown; housing conditions, including overcrowding, costs, and vacancy,
      and special housing needs for multiple groups within the community.
     Analysis of opportunities for energy conservation for housing development. This
      includes existing and future housing development, large and small-scale residential
      projects, and other green building practices that involve the conservation of residential
      water, electricity, and gas.
Adopted March 17, 2015                                                                      B-1

CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON                                            2015-2023 HOUSING ELEMENT
     Analysis of existing assisted housing projects at risk of converting to market rate. This
      analysis includes an inventory, assessment of risk, costs to preserve or replace the
      units, and identification of qualified entities and funding.
     An inventory of land suitable for residential development that includes vacant sites,
      areas having potential for redevelopment, and an analysis of the relationship of
      zoning, public facilities, and City services to project a realistic residential capacity to
      meet the regional housing projection within the planning period.
     Analysis of zoning for a variety of housing types including multifamily rentals,
      agricultural employee housing, emergency shelters, transitional housing, supportive
      housing, single room occupancy units, and mobile homes.
     Analysis of potential and actual governmental constraints upon the maintenance,
      improvement, and development of housing for all income levels. This reviews land
      use controls, building codes and their enforcement, site improvements, fees, exactions,
      and local processing of permits and their effects on the timing and cost of residential
      development.
     Analysis of potential and actual non-governmental constraints upon the maintenance,
      improvement, or development of housing for all income levels, including the
      availability of financing, the price of land, and the cost of construction.
     Comparison to other General Plan Elements for internal consistency.
B. Information Sources for the Housing Element
The 2015 American Canyon Housing Element was prepared using a variety of different
sources, including the previous 2009 Housing Element. A majority of the demographics in
this update were taken from the 2010 Census data, the 2008-2012 American Community
Survey (ACS) Estimates, and the State Department of Finance yearly population count.
ABAG prepared a data package for the region with data from the Census and 2007-2011
ACS Estimates. This data package, which was pre-approved by the State, was also used, as
noted in the table sources. Data was also taken from various Napa County documents and
reports, including information from the City of Napa Housing Authority, in which the City
of American Canyon has an existing contract for housing monitoring related services. Other
sources of information include:
     Various local real estate survey, companies, and websites that provide housing market
      information such as amount of sales, pricing, rents, and types of housing available.
     The Association of Bay Area Governments (ABAG) 2014-2022 Regional Housing
      Needs Plan (RHNP), which provides information on existing and projected housing
      needs.
     The Comprehensive Housing Affordability Strategy (CHAS) prepared by the U.S.
      Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD).
     The previous Housing Element Update adopted in 2010.
B-2                                                                          Adopted March 17, 2015

2015-2023 HOUSING ELEMENT                                        CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON
     All other related documents for the City of American Canyon. This includes other
      elements within the General Plan, the Municipal Code, Zoning Ordinance, and other
      pertinent documents regarding development and City guidelines.
C. The Review Process for Certification
In accordance with Government Code Section 65585, the City of American Canyon must
submit copies of their draft and adopted housing elements to the Department of Housing
and Community Development (HCD) for review. HCD will review the draft and report its
findings to the City to discuss the element and their review prior to submitting final written
findings to the City. After adoption of the element, the City is required to submit the
adopted element to HCD for review. There is a 60-day review for a draft element and a 90-
day review period for the adopted element. In the preparation of its findings, HCD may
consult with any public agency, or group, and must consider any third party comments
regarding the draft under review.
D. Public Participation
State law requires cities and counties to make a diligent effort to achieve participation by all
segments of the community in preparing a housing element. To meet the requirements of
State law for public outreach and community involvement, the City of American Canyon
held a community workshop on October 22, 2014, in addition to a public hearing held by the
Planning Commission and City Council on December 2, 2014.
All of these meetings were formally noticed in the local newspaper, the Vallejo Times
Herald. The public workshop notice was also posted at City Hall, on the City’s website, on
Facebook, NextDoor, and in the City Manager’s Friday Update. The businesses and
organizations personally invited by the City included public service providers, churches,
developers, apartment managers, and non-profit housing advocates. These groups were
notified to attend the workshop through an email announcement sent on October 10, 2014,
to over 100 people/organizations.
Community Workshop
The City held a community workshop on October 22, 2014, at the American Canyon Library.
Three people attended the workshop. At the workshop City staff and the Housing Element
consultants from Mintier Harnish presented a brief overview of the Housing Element
Update and facilitated an interactive discussion to solicit ideas from participants about the
most critical housing issues facing American Canyon residents and new ways the City and
community might address these issues. Appendix A contains a summary of the issues and
ideas discussed at the workshop. The input provided at the workshop was used to inform
the housing needs assessment and to shape the Housing Element policies and programs.
Adopted March 17, 2015                                                                      B-3

CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON                                       2015-2023 HOUSING ELEMENT
Planning Commission and City Council Joint Study Session
The Planning Commission and City Council reviewed the Draft Housing Element in a study
session on December 2, 2014. The meeting included a public hearing, providing members of
the public opportunity to comment on the Draft Housing Element. The Commission and
Council provided feedback on the policies and programs and authorized City staff to
submit the Housing Element to HCD for the State-mandated review.
E. General Plan Consistency
State law requires that the Housing Element contain a statement of “the means by which
consistency will be achieved with other general plan elements and community goals”
(California Government Code, Section 65583). There are two aspects of this analysis:
    1. An identification of other General Plan goals, policies, and programs that could
        affect implementation of the Housing Element or that could be affected by the
        implementation of the Housing Element; and
    2. An identification of actions to ensure consistency between the Housing Element and
        affected parts of other General Plan elements.
The City of American Canyon adopted the General Plan in 1994 and amended it in 2006. In
addition to the Housing Element, the other elements comprising the City of American
Canyon General Plan are the following:
     Land Use
     Economic Development
     Circulation
     Utilities
     Public Service and Facilities
     Parks and Recreation
     Natural and Historic/Cultural Resources
     Geology
     Flood Hazards
     Noise
Of all the General Plan elements, the Housing Element is most closely related to the City’s
Land Use Element because the Land Use Element specifies the lands within the city that
may be used for residential development. The Housing Element has been reviewed for
consistency with the City's other General Plan Elements and the policies and programs in
this Element reflect the policy direction contained in other parts of the General Plan. As
portions of the General Plan are amended in the future, the Housing Element will be
reviewed to ensure that internal consistency is maintained.
B-4                                                                   Adopted March 17, 2015

2015-2023 HOUSING ELEMENT                                        CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON
The diversity of significant environmental resources, including foothills and canyons,
woodlands and grasslands, riparian corridors, wetlands, and wildlife habitats were all
contributing factors to the formation of the City’s land use plan adopted in the General Plan
Land Use Element. These factors along with infrastructure availability and a number of
other factors determined which areas would be available for residential development and
the range of residential densities that would be considered. This then lays the foundation for
all of the other policies and programs related to the provision of housing.
Other elements of the General Plan also provide guidance for residential development. For
example, the Economic Development Element includes the following policy: “Adopt a
Specific Plan for the designated Town Center (in conjunction with the Highway 29 Plan) to
serve as a guide for future developments. Provide for a cohesive urban design which reflects
the image and identity the City would like to project.”
F. Relationship to Other City Plans and Policies
Other City plans and policies regulate residential uses and, therefore, affect the Housing
Element. These are briefly described below and include the City's Municipal Code and
Specific Plans.
American Canyon Municipal Code
The American Canyon Municipal Code consists of all the regulatory ordinances and certain
administrative ordinances of the City, codified pursuant to the provisions of Sections
50022.1 through 50022.8 and 50022.10 of the Government Code.
Subdivision Ordinance
The City’s Subdivision Ordinance regulates the design, development, and implementation
of land division and is intended to be periodically reviewed for its consistency with State
law including the California Subdivision Map Act.
Zoning Ordinance
The City’s Zoning Ordinance is the primary tool for implementing the General Plan, and is
designed to protect and promote the public health, safety, comfort, convenience, prosperity,
and general welfare of the people. It includes a zoning map designating various districts
that are described in the text of the document and outlines the permitted, conditionally
permitted, and prohibited uses for each zone district. Finally, the Zoning Ordinance
provides property development standards for each zone district and overall administrative
and legislative procedures.
Specific Plans
Specific plans are customized regulatory documents that provide focused guidance and
regulations for a particular area. They generally include a land use plan, circulation plan,
Adopted March 17, 2015                                                                     B-5

CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON                                         2015-2023 HOUSING ELEMENT
infrastructure plan, zoning classifications, development standards, design guidelines,
phasing plan, financing plan, and implementation plan. Although the City of American
Canyon intends to develop a Master Plan for its industrial area, only one plan exists for a
residential Specific Plan: the Southeast Specific Plan. The specific plan is designed to allow
for development in a manner that is compatible with surrounding areas and the general
character of the city of American Canyon.
B-6                                                                     Adopted March 17, 2015
2015-2023 HOUSING ELEMENT                                                   CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON
II.          Existing Housing Needs
A. Population and Employment Trends
This section relies primarily on population, housing, and employment data published by the
U.S. Census, the California Department of Finance (DOF), and the Association of Bay Area
Governments (ABAG), specifically from the ABAG Pre-Approved Data Package, as
indicated in the table sources.
Background
The city of American Canyon is located at the southern end of Napa County, just north of
Solano County and the city of Vallejo. The city is located approximately 45 miles west of
Sacramento along Interstate I-80 and is approximately 5.5 square miles in size. American
Canyon incorporated in 1992 from Napa County. Since its incorporation, the city has
increased residential development and added a large amount of business and commercial
expansion along the Highway 29 corridor. In 1990 the Census Bureau reported the
population of the American Canyon Census Designated Place (CDP) as 7,706. The city
experienced rapid growth between 2000 and 2008: a 66.7 percent increase with an average
annual growth rate (AAGR) of 8.3 percent. However, population growth has been slow in
recent years as the recession impacted housing development. Since 2010 the AAGR has been
less than 2 percent. DOF estimates that the city had a population of 20,001 in 2014.
                                                        TABLE 1
                                       POPULATION GROWTH TRENDS
                                                   AMERICAN CANYON
                                                        1990-2014
     Year             Population          Numerical Change Average Annual Growth Rate (AAGR)
           1990                     7,706                       NA                                   N/A
           2000                     9,774                     2,068                                  2.7%
           2001                   10,232                        458                                  4.7%
           2002                   11,678                      1,446                                14.1%
           2003                   13,003                      1,325                                11.3%
           2004                   14,034                      1,031                                  7.9%
           2005                   15,348                      1,314                                  9.4%
           2006                   16,280                        932                                  6.1%
           2007                   17,585                      1,305                                  8.0%
           2008                   18,188                        603                                  3.4%
           2009                   18,731                        543                                  3.0%
           2010                   19,322                        591                                  3.2%
           2011                   19,628                        306                                  1.6%
           2012                   19,734                        106                                  0.5%
           2013                   19,916                        182                                  0.9%
           2014                   20,001                          85                                 0.4%
Source: U.S. Census, 1990 and 2000; Department of Finance (DOF), 2001-2014.
Adopted March 17, 2015                                                                           B-7
CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON                                                    2015-2023 HOUSING ELEMENT
Population Trends
The City of American Canyon is part of the Association of Bay Area Governments (ABAG),
which is comprised of nine counties that include Alameda, Contra Costa, Marin, Napa, San
Francisco, San Mateo, Santa Clara, Solano, and Sonoma Counties. Other cities within Napa
County include Yountville, St. Helena, Napa, and Calistoga. Table 2 illustrates the city’s
population change in comparison to neighboring jurisdictions. Between 2000 and 2010 the
population countywide increased by 9.8 percent. The population of American Canyon
almost doubled between 2000 and 2010, from 9,774 to 19,454. The most populous city in
Napa County is still the city of Napa with a population of 76,915 in 2010.
American Canyon has significantly increased its population without significantly expanding
its boundaries. A large portion of this increase is a result of development within the
Southeast Specific Plan, new housing along the Napa River/estuary site at the west end of
the city, and mixed-use development within the commercial district. Due to a severe drop in
the housing market and related industries, ABAG projects a lower growth rate for the new
housing cycle. Although a severe housing downturn in the nation has left many cities with a
decrease in housing sales, American Canyon has seen an increase of sales recently due to the
drop in sale prices.
                                                  TABLE 2
                                        POPULATION TRENDS
                                        NEIGHBORING JURISDICTIONS
                                                  1990-2010
                                                                              Change (2000-2010)
   Jurisdiction Name              1990         2000           2010          Number          Percent
City of Calistoga                    4,468        5,190             5,155            -35          -0.7%
City of Napa                        64,865       72,585            76,915          4,330           6.0%
City of St. Helena                   4,990        5,950             5,814           -136          -2.3%
City of Yountville                   3,259        2,916             2,933             17           0.6%
Napa County                        110,165      124,279           136,484         12,205           9.8%
City of American Canyon              7,706        9,774            19,454          9,680          99.0%
Source: ABAG Pre-Approved Data Package; U.S. Census, 1990, 2000, and 2010.
B-8                                                                                Adopted March 17, 2015

2015-2023 HOUSING ELEMENT                                                CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON
Table 3 shows the population projections for American Canyon and other jurisdictions in
Napa County prepared by ABAG. Between 2010 and 2040, American Canyon is expected to
grow by about 10 percent each decade, increasing to a population of 21,500 in 2020, 23,700 in
2030, and 26,200 in 2040. Compared to the other jurisdictions in the county, American
Canyon is projected to have the largest percent change in population growth from 2010 to
2040, growing by 34.7 percent. This is much higher than the projected countywide
population growth of 19.9 percent.
                                                 TABLE 3
                                    POPULATION PROJECTIONS
                         AMERICAN CANYON AND JURISDICTIONS IN NAPA COUNTY
                                                 2010-2040
                                                                             Percent Change
                                                                        2010- 2020- 2030- 2010-
    Jurisdiction Name           2010       2020       2030      2040    2020 2030 2040 2040
Napa County Total               136,484 144,200 153,100 163,700           5.7%  6.2%   6.9% 19.9%
American Canyon                  19,454     21,500     23,700    26,200  10.5% 10.2%  10.5% 34.7%
Calistoga                          5,155     5,300      5,500     5,600   2.8%  3.8%   1.8%  8.6%
Napa                             76,915     80,700     85,100    90,300   4.9%  5.5%   6.1% 17.4%
St. Helena                         5,814     6,000      6,100     6,300   3.2%  1.7%   3.3%  8.4%
Yountville                         2,933     3,100      3,400     3,800   5.7%  9.7%  11.8% 29.6%
Source: ABAG Pre-Approved Data Package; ABAG Projections, 2013.
Adopted March 17, 2015                                                                          B-9
 CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON                                                 2015-2023 HOUSING ELEMENT
 Age of Population
 The population of American Canyon is changing. Between 2000 and 2010 there was a 145
 percent increase from 467 to 1,143 young adults (those ages 20 to 24). The number of seniors
 (65 and older) also significantly increased; however, the proportion of seniors decreased
 from 13.3 percent to 9.6 percent of the population.
 Although the population in the workforce doubled, the percentage of the population that
 was in the workforce only increased slightly, from 41.8 percent of the population in 2000 to
 42.5 percent in 2010.
                                                 TABLE 4
                                        POPULATION BY AGE
                                             AMERICAN CANYON
                                                 2000-2010
                                                      2000               2010          2000-2010
                                                                                        Percent
              Age Group                       Number Percent Number Percent             Change
0-9 years (School Age)                            1,436        14.5%  2,858     14.7%        99.0%
10-19 years (School Age)                          1,614        16.6%  3,259     16.8%       101.9%
20-24 years (Young Adults)                           467        4.8%  1,143      5.9%       144.8%
25-55 years (Workforce)                           4,074        41.8%  8,265     42.5%       102.9%
55-64 years (Older Adults)                           877        9.0%  2,064     10.6%       135.3%
65+ years (Seniors)                               1,306        13.3%  1,865      9.6%        42.8%
Total                                             9,774      100.0%  19,454    100.0%        99.0%
Source: ABAG Pre-Approved Data Package; U.S. Census, 2000 and 2010.
 B-10                                                                            Adopted March 17, 2015
2015-2023 HOUSING ELEMENT                                                CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON
Demographics
The composition of American Canyon’s population has historically differed from the
countywide and statewide populations, with a smaller percentage of individuals of
Hispanic/Latino origin and a larger percentage of individuals of Asian/Pacific Islander
origin; however, the Hispanic/Latino population has seen an increase within the last decade
Table 5 compares the racial and ethnic composition of the city’s population to the
countywide and statewide populations. In 2000 Whites (52.6 percent) and individuals of
Hispanic ancestry (17.7 percent) represented the two largest population groups in American
Canyon. In 2010 Asian/Pacific Islanders were the largest population group in American
Canyon (33.0 percent), followed by Whites (28.5 percent) and Hispanics/Latinos (25.7
percent). From 2000 to 2010 the Hispanic/Latino population increased from 17.7 percent to
25.7 percent of the population.
Countywide and statewide, Whites, followed by persons of Hispanic origin, were the two
largest population groups in 2010.
                                                  TABLE 5
                                         RACE AND ETHNICITY
                           AMERICAN CANYON, NAPA COUNTY, AND CALIFORNIA
                                                  2000-2020
                                                   American        American      Napa
                                                                                         California
           Race and Ethnicity                       Canyon          Canyon     County
                                                                                           2010
                                                      2000           2010        2010
White (Non-Hispanic)                                       52.6%        28.5%      56.4%       40.1%
Black/African American (Non-Hispanic)                       7.1%         7.6%       1.8%        5.8%
Native American (Non-Hispanic)                               <1%          <1%        <1%         <1%
Asian/Pacific Islander (Non-Hispanic)                      17.3%        33.0%       6.8%       13.1%
Other Race (Non-Hispanic)                                    <1%          <1%        <1%        0.2%
Two or More Races (Non-Hispanic)                            4.6%         4.6%       2.2%        2.6%
Hispanic or Latino                                         17.7%        25.7%      32.2%       37.6%
Source: ABAG Pre-Approved Data Package; U.S. Census 2000 and 2010.
Adopted March 17, 2015                                                                           B-11

CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON                                                               2015-2023 HOUSING ELEMENT
Employment Trends
As shown in Table 6, of the 8,755 people in American Canyon who were employed in 2011,
the largest percentage held jobs in the educational industry (28.1 percent). Significant
percentages of workers were also employed in manufacturing (12.1 percent); art,
entertainment, and recreation (10.1 percent); professional, scientific, and management (9.7
percent); and retail industries (9.2 percent). Recent projections released by the State
Employment Development Department (EDD) show American Canyon’s unemployment
rate at 6.3 percent in 2013, which is down from an estimated 7.8 percent in 2012.
                                                          TABLE 6
                                          EMPLOYMENT BY INDUSTRY
                                                   AMERICAN CANYON
                                                             2011
                           Industry Type                                         Number                       Percent
Agriculture                                                                                          29                   0.3%
Construction                                                                                       429                    4.9%
Manufacturing                                                                                    1,057                  12.1%
Wholesale trade                                                                                    156                    1.8%
Retail                                                                                             804                    9.2%
Transportation and Warehouse                                                                       648                    7.4%
Information                                                                                        120                    1.4%
Finance, Insurance, Real Estate                                                                    678                    7.7%
Professional, Scientific, Management                                                               853                    9.7%
Educational                                                                                      2,457                  28.1%
Art, Entertainment, Recreational                                                                   880                  10.1%
Other Services (Except Public Administration)                                                      380                    4.3%
Public Administration                                                                              264                    3.0%
Total                                                                                            8,755                100.0%
Note: Table only illustrates the employed workforce for the City of American Canyon for individuals 16 years of age or older.
Source: ABAG Pre-Approved Data Package; ACS 5-year estimates, 2007-2011.
Of the employed workforce, 78.0 percent commuted to work alone, with a mean drive time
of 32.5 minutes one way. Due to the relatively small geographic size of the city, this
indicates many of the city’s residents commute to jobs outside of the city. In fact, only 37.3
percent of American Canyon workers worked in Napa County compared to 77.2 percent of
Napa County workers. These drive times are higher than the countywide average of 23.3
minutes, and seem to indicate a slight jobs-to-housing imbalance for the city (Table 7).
                                                          TABLE 7
                                                MEAN DRIVE TIMES
                                        AMERICAN CANYON AND NAPA COUNTY
                                                             2012
                                           Commute Time (Minutes)                    Land Area (Square Miles)
City of American Canyon                                                     32.5                                            4.8
Napa County                                                                 23.3                                           788
Source: ACS 5-year estimates, 2008-2012.
B-12                                                                                             Adopted March 17, 2015

2015-2023 HOUSING ELEMENT                                          CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON
The largest areas for employment within American Canyon are the Industrial area to the
northwest of the city and the Commercial District along both sides of Highway 29, which
bisects the middle of the community. The major employers of these areas include Wal-Mart;
numerous restaurant services and offices; industrial warehouses for manufacturing, storage,
and wine production; Adobe Lumber; hotel facilities; and various landscaping
establishments. As stated above, the average drive times in relation to geographic size of the
community seems to indicate that most of the population does not work within the city
limits. This indicates that since a majority of the city’s residents do not work in the city, the
labor industries within the city are mostly employing individuals who are not residents of
American Canyon.
Since 2000 the City has begun to fully develop the Southeast Specific Plan with residential
housing in proximity to commercial development east of Highway 29. This commercial area
includes many new businesses such as Wal-Mart, new hotels, and retail sales with adjacent
restaurants. New bike lanes and pedestrian paths have been constructed to encourage the
employees in these businesses to consider living in the residential developments closest to
the commercial areas. These residential developments are higher in density and are suited
to provide housing for lower-income levels. Just north of the Specific Plan is the Town
Center proposal area, which includes mixed-use developments, more affordable housing,
and shared pedestrian areas that seek to foster a more central community center for the city.
Expansion of the Industrial area to include a master plan business district has been a
priority for the City; however, constraints exist that restrict the implementation for an
overall plan for this district. Large-scale improvements to existing infrastructure, aircraft
compatibility restrictions due to proximity to the adjacent Napa County Airport,
environmental constraints, and financing have all restricted the City from formulating a
master plan to fully develop this district. Although a master plan has not been created for
the Industrial area, it continues to expand bringing in new large-scale warehouses that
produce and transport wine throughout Napa County.
According to the EDD 2010-2020 industry employment projections for Napa County,
employment, which includes self-employment, unpaid family workers, private household
workers, farm employment, and nonfarm employment in Napa County, is expected to reach
89,100 by 2020, an increase of 22.1 percent over the 10-year projection period. Total nonfarm
employment is projected to grow by 14,500 jobs by 2020. About 65 percent of all projected
nonfarm job growth is concentrated in four industry sectors:
     The manufacturing sector is projected to add the most jobs (3,100 jobs).
     The leisure and hospitality sector is projected to add 2,900 jobs, the second largest
      increase.
Adopted March 17, 2015                                                                       B-13

CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON                                                        2015-2023 HOUSING ELEMENT
      The professional and business services sector is projected to add 1,700 jobs, led by a
       growth of 1,100 jobs in administrative and support; waste management; and
       remediation services.
      The educational services, health care, and social assistance sector anticipates job gains
       of 1,700.
                                                   TABLE 8
                                    GROWTH BY INDUSTRY SECTOR
                                                  NAPA COUNTY
                                                    2010-2020
                                               2010 Annual         2020 Annual
                                                 Average              Average             Numerical        Percent
                  Industry                    Employment           Employment              Change          Growth
Manufacturing                                            10,700               13,800             3,100       29.0%
Mining, Logging, and Construction                         2,600                3,500                900      34.6%
Transportation, Warehousing, and
                                                          1,500                2,000                500      33.3%
Utilities
Financial Activities                                      2,300                2,900                600      26.1%
Professional and Business Services                        5,300                7,000             1,700       32.1%
Educational Services (Private), Health
                                                          8,300               10,000             1,700       20.5%
Care, and Social Assistance
Leisure and Hospitality                                   9,300               12,200             2,900       31.2%
Wholesale Trade                                           1,500                1,900                400      26.7%
Other Services (excludes Private
                                                          1,900                2,100                200      10.5%
Household Workers)
Source: California Employment Development Department (EDD) Labor Market Information for Napa County, 2013.
Most jobs expected to be created over the next 10 years will be in industries employing low-
and moderate-income individuals in manufacturing, leisure and hospitality, and other
industries. However, because American Canyon’s employment base is relatively small, a
single or small number of large employers moving to or expanding in the city could
significantly affect the local employment mix.
B-14                                                                                      Adopted March 17, 2015

2015-2023 HOUSING ELEMENT                                                       CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON
Employee Wages
Table 9 shows wage data in Napa County in 2013. The median hourly wage was $17.57 an
hour with an annual mean wage of $47,760. This data does not include median wages for
American Canyon; however, it does provide useful wage information for industries similar
to the ones in the city. In 2013 farming, fishing, and forestry had the lowest annual wages
followed by food preparation and serving-related occupations. Management and healthcare
jobs had the highest wages.
                                                         TABLE 9
                                             WAGES BY OCCUPATION
                                                        NAPA COUNTY
                                                           2013
                                                                            Median         Mean        Mean
                           Occupation Type                                   Hourly       Hourly      Annual
                                                                             Wage          Wage        Wage
All Occupations                                                                 $17.57        $22.96     $47,760
Management Occupations                                                          $45.61        $53.35    $110,970
Business and Financial Operations Occupations                                   $31.80        $34.64     $72,050
Computer and Mathematical Science Occupations                                   $35.93        $37.72     $78,460
Architecture and Engineering Occupations                                        $37.55        $39.08     $81,290
Life, Physical, and Social Science Occupations                                  $35.00        $37.16     $77,300
Community and Social Services Occupations                                       $22.71        $24.28     $50,500
Legal Occupations (1)                                                                 --           --          --
Education, Training, and Library Occupations                                    $24.83        $26.58     $55,280
Arts, Design, Entertainment, Sports, and Media Occupations                      $21.49        $23.86     $49,640
Healthcare Practitioner and Technical Occupations                               $44.51        $44.85     $93,290
Healthcare Support Occupations                                                  $16.54        $17.31     $36,010
Protective Service Occupations                                                  $15.13        $21.00     $43,680
Food Preparation and Serving Related Occupations                                $10.89        $12.75     $26,520
Building and Grounds Cleaning and Maintenance Occupations                       $13.50        $14.66     $30,490
Personal Care and Service Occupations                                           $10.55        $12.87     $26,780
Sales and Related Occupations                                                   $15.59        $20.45     $42,540
Office and Administrative Support Occupations                                   $17.50        $18.45     $38,370
Farming, Fishing, and Forestry Occupations                                      $11.28        $12.58     $26,170
Construction and Extraction Occupations                                         $24.70        $25.61     $53,270
Installation, Maintenance, and Repair Occupations                               $22.64        $23.54     $48,950
Production Occupations                                                          $17.45        $18.72     $38,930
Transportation and Material Moving Occupations                                  $15.15        $16.21     $33,720
Notes :(1) =Information not released for this industry.
Source: Bureau of Labor Statistics, Napa County Occupational Employment and Wage Estimates, 2013.
The National Low Income Housing Coalition’s 2014 Out of Reach Report and the Center for
Housing Policy’s Paycheck to Paycheck report indicate Napa County has higher average
wages than the state average ($27.19 compared to $26.04); however, the cost of living is
significantly higher.
Adopted March 17, 2015                                                                                      B-15

CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON                                                         2015-2023 HOUSING ELEMENT
B. Existing Households
The characteristics of the city's household can be further evaluated by examining the
number of households, household size, composition, age, the proportion of family
households (two or more related persons), the proportion of families with children, the
number of single-parent households, and the age of householders. A change in any of the
above characteristics can signify what the current and future demand of housing might be.
These are important indicators in comparing demographic and population growth to
housing demand.
Household Trends
The number of households has dramatically increased in recent years. Table 9 illustrates the
numerical change in household growth, including the annual percentage change within
each year. A majority of this housing growth has come from residential development within
the Southeast Area Specific Plan and the west portions of the city limits along the Napa
River/Estuary site. Although a majority of this development is single family detached
housing, multifamily apartments, townhomes, and higher-density detached housing was
constructed.
As shown in Table 10, according to the DOF, the number of households in American
Canyon increased from 9,640 to 19,945 between 2000 and 2014 (106.9 percent).
                                                    TABLE 10
                                     HOUSEHOLD GROWTH TRENDS
                                                AMERICAN CANYON
                                                    (1990 - 2014)
                                                                                              Annual Percent
     Year                     Households                          Numerical Change               Change
           2000                                      9,640                                                 N/A
           2001                                     10,104                                464              4.8%
           2002                                     11,558                              1,454             14.4%
           2003                                     12,890                              1,332             11.5%
           2004                                     13,929                              1,039              8.1%
           2005                                     15,251                              1,322              9.5%
           2006                                     16,191                                940              6.2%
           2007                                     17,504                              1,313              8.1%
           2008                                     18,114                                610              3.5%
           2009                                     18,665                                551              3.0%
           2010                                     19,398                                733              3.9%
           2011                                     19,572                                174              0.9%
           2012                                     19,678                                106              0.5%
           2013                                     19,860                                182              0.9%
           2014                                     19,945                                 85              0.4%
Source: U.S. Census, 2010, 2000 and 1990; Department of Finance E-5 Report, 2000-2014.
B-16                                                                                    Adopted March 17, 2015
2015-2023 HOUSING ELEMENT                                           CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON
In 2010 two-person households made up the largest percentage of households in the city.
However, household sizes are increasing. Countywide the proportion of single-person and
two-person households was greater than in American Canyon, while the city had a higher
percentage of households with three to seven members. This distribution of households by
size is consistent with other data showing that the city houses more families with children.
The lower proportion of older adults in the city than countywide is also a factor, as older
adults tend to comprise mostly single-person or two-person households.
In 1990 about 12 percent of households in American Canyon contained five or more persons.
Most of these households were family households of two or more related individuals. The
percentage of large households in 2000 decreased slightly from the 1990 level, by about one
percentage point. In 2010 the percentage of large households increased to 25 percent,
compared to 13 percent countywide.
                                                TABLE 11
                              NUMBER OF PERSONS PER HOUSEHOLD
                                     AMERICAN CANYON AND NAPA COUNTY
                                                1990 - 2010
                      City - 1990             City - 2000        City - 2010    County - 2010
  1 Person                           18%                    20%             14%            25%
  2 Persons                          34%                    34%             24%            33%
  3 Persons                          19%                    19%             17%            15%
  4 Persons                          17%                    16%             20%            14%
  5 Persons                           8%                     6%             13%             7%
  6 Persons                           3%                     3%              6%             3%
  7+ Persons                          1%                     2%              6%             3%
  Source: U.S. Census, 1990, 2000, and 2010.
Adopted March 17, 2015                                                                       B-17
CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON                                             2015-2023 HOUSING ELEMENT
According to the 2007-2011 ACS the average household size in American Canyon is 3.43
persons per household, much higher than the countywide average of 2.63. The average
household size in owner-occupied units was 3.41 and the average household size a renter-
occupied unit was 3.49. The 2007-2011 ACS also reported that over two-thirds (80 percent)
of all households in the city were family households, compared to 68 percent countywide
(Table 12). Over half of the households were families with kids, much higher than the
countywide rate of 33 percent.
                                                TABLE 12
                             HOUSEHOLD COMPOSITION BY TYPE
                                  AMERICAN CANYON AND NAPA COUNTY
                                                    2011
                                             American Canyon             Napa County
                                         Households         Percent Households     Percent
     Single Person (living alone)                    951        18%        12,566       25%
     Family, no kids                               1,528        29%        17,415       35%
     Family with kids                              2,712        51%        16,157       33%
     Multi-person, non-family                        153         3%         3,502        7%
     Total Households                              5,344       100%        49,640      100%
     Source: ABAG Pre-Approved Data Package, 2007-2011 ACS.
Overcrowding
The U.S. Census defines overcrowding as a unit with 1.01 persons to 1.5 persons per room
excluding bathrooms and kitchens. Units with more than 1.5 persons per room are
considered severely overcrowded and can lead to increased health and safety concerns.
Increases in the intensity of persons within a given space can also place additional stress on
existing housing stock and infrastructure.
Overcrowding typically results when either: 1) the housing costs of available housing with a
sufficient number of bedrooms for larger families exceeds a family’s ability to afford such
housing, or 2) unrelated individuals (such as students or low-wage single adult workers)
share dwelling units due to high housing costs. Renters are generally more impacted by
overcrowding due to the inability to find large rental units that are reasonably affordable.
Overcrowding has been a statewide issue in the past. Between 1980 and 1990 the percentage
of overcrowded households in California nearly doubled from 6.9 percent to 12.3 percent. In
2000 more than 15 percent of California households were considered severely overcrowded
with rental households three times more likely to be overcrowded. Overcrowding has
begun to decline since 2000 with the construction of primarily single family homes with
three or more bedrooms. According to the 2008-2012 ACS, in 2012 the rate of overcrowding
in California was 8.3 percent.
B-18                                                                        Adopted March 17, 2015

2015-2023 HOUSING ELEMENT                                                              CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON
Although American Canyon had similar percentages of overcrowding in owner-occupied
units compared to Napa County, the county has a significantly higher rate of overcrowding
in rental units (Table 13). The extent of overcrowding is consistent with rising average
household sizes.
                                                             TABLE 13
                        PERSONS PER ROOM IN ALL OCCUPIED HOUSING UNITS
                                            AMERICAN CANYON AND NAPA COUNTY
                                                                   2010
                                                             American Canyon                             Napa County
                                                                             Percent of                          Percent of
                                                                             Occupied                            Occupied
                     Persons                           Households                Total          Households         Total
                                                       Owner Occupied
 Total                                                              1,375           100.0%                 6,061      100.0%
 Overcrowded (1.01 persons to 1.5
                                                                      160            11.6%                   699       11.5%
 persons per room)
 Severely Overcrowded (1.5 persons per
                                                                        30             2.2%                  219         3.6%
 room or more)
                                                       Renter Occupied
 Total                                                                228           100.0%                 3,915      100.0%
 Overcrowded (1.01 persons to 1.5
                                                                        15             6.6%                1,175       30.0%
 persons per room)
 Severely Overcrowded (1.5 persons per
                                                                        30           13.2%                   750       19.2%
 room or more)
 * Totals not calculated because the table includes the total for each household type and their subcategories.
 Source: U.S. Census, 2010.
Overcrowding is less of an issue in newer neighborhoods, which tend to contain more single
family homes with three or more bedrooms. The problem will persist in older
neighborhoods with smaller homes and fewer rooms as long as there are low-income
families who cannot afford to purchase or rent housing of adequate size. Detailed
information is not available by household type or income to further evaluate the nature or
causes of overcrowding.
Since 2000 the City continues to issue building permits for homes within the Southeast Area
Specific Plan. Currently a decline in the market for new housing has increased the surplus of
developed and non-developed (but approved) housing available to interested buyers within
the Specific Plan. The City has also approved rental projects, such as The Lodge at Napa
Junction, Vineyard Crossing, and Vineyard Place, which provide one-, two-, and some
three-bedroom options for renters. Since 2008 the City has seen an increase in the number of
available detached homes for rent as the declining housing market has encouraged
homeowners to rent in order to make extra income and real estate brokers looking to fill
homes they could not sell.
Adopted March 17, 2015                                                                                              B-19
CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON                                        2015-2023 HOUSING ELEMENT
Overpayment
For most households, housing cost is the largest monthly expense. Those who overpay for
housing may have difficulty affording other basic necessities. However, to truly evaluate
housing affordability, individual circumstances and factors must be taken into account.
These factors include long-term debt, mortgage interest rates, the number of children in a
household, and other large, ongoing expenses (such as medical bills). Since it is impossible
to consider each household’s individual circumstances, the 30 percent rule-of-thumb
provides a general measure of housing affordability for the average household.
Households that spend more than 30 percent of their income are generally considered to be
overpaying, while homes that spend 50 percent or more of their gross income are
considered to be severely overpaying. Although families with large incomes can be affected
by overpayment, the impacts are generally greater with low-income households.
B-20                                                                   Adopted March 17, 2015

2015-2023 HOUSING ELEMENT                                         CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON
As shown in Table 14, the percentage of residents overpaying decreases as income increases.
Renters also have a higher percentage of overpayment than owners. One hundred percent of
extremely low-income renter households were overpaying for housing in 2011.
                                             TABLE 14
                   PERCENT OF HOUSEHOLDS OVERPAYING FOR HOUSING
                                          AMERICAN CANYON
                                                2011
                                                        American Canyon         Napa County
                           Income                       Paying     Paying     Paying  Paying
                                                         >30%       >50%       >30%    >50%
                                        Owner Households
  Household Income <=30% HAMFI                             77.2%      57.9%     76.4%    62.7%
  Household Income >30% to <=50% HAMFI                     55.4%      38.5%     59.1%    38.6%
  Household Income >50% to <=80% HAMFI                     48.9%      29.3%     45.4%    23.8%
  Household Income >80% to <=100% HAMFI                    37.0%       4.0%     48.3%    21.3%
  Household Income >100% HAMFI                             41.4%       4.2%     28.5%     6.0%
  Total Owner Households                                   45.6%      14.5%     38.7%    16.6%
                                        Renter Households
  Household Income <=30% HAMFI                            100.0%      80.0%     85.0%    70.0%
  Household Income >30% to <=50% HAMFI                     95.1%      34.1%     80.5%    40.9%
  Household Income >50% to <=80% HAMFI                     60.9%      19.6%     55.4%    15.0%
  Household Income >80% to <=100% HAMFI                    52.9%       0.0%     21.7%     3.6%
  Household Income >100% HAMFI                              4.8%       0.0%     11.3%     1.2%
  Total Renter Households                                  42.4%      13.1%     49.4%    25.1%
                                         Total Households
  Household Income <=30% HAMFI                             79.4%      60.3%     81.8%    67.3%
  Household Income >30% to <=50% HAMFI                     70.8%      35.8%     71.3%    40.0%
  Household Income >50% to <=80% HAMFI                     51.4%      26.8%     49.9%    19.9%
  Household Income >80% to <=100% HAMFI                    52.9%       0.0%     36.5%    13.5%
  Household Income >100% HAMFI                              4.8%       0.0%     24.9%     5.0%
  Total Households                                         44.7%      14.1%     42.6%    19.7%
  Source: CHAS data, 2007-2011.
Some households choose to pay over 30 percent of their income for various reasons, such as
location, aesthetics, or other features. Other households choose to pay higher percentages of
their income on housing because they may receive tax advantages or are investing with the
knowledge that their income will increase, shortening the percentage of payments against
their monthly income on a long-term basis. In contrast some households are forced to pay a
large percentage of their income either because they cannot afford anything less, or they are
limited to certain costs due to a lack of available low-cost housing options.
Household Tenure
Housing tenure is the ratio between homeowners and renters. The decision to rent or own
can be affected by factors such as housing cost, housing financing, housing supply, and
Adopted March 17, 2015                                                                   B-21
CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON                                            2015-2023 HOUSING ELEMENT
other constraints. Table 15 shows households by tenure in American Canyon compared to
Napa County in 2010. American Canyon has a higher proportion of owner households than
Napa County as a whole, with a homeownership rate of 78.5 percent compared to 62.6
percent countywide. This large portion of owners to renters was predominantly due to
single family detached housing within the Southeast Specific plan and residential
subdivisions along the Napa River/Estuary site at the west end of the city. Although the
percentage of renters compared to owners is relatively low, the City has approved higher-
density residential housing, which is affordable to lower-income households. Higher-
density projects such as Vineyard Crossing, Vineyard Place, and The Lodge at Napa
Junction provide one- to three-bedroom units that are available to individuals interested in
renting within the city.
                                                   TABLE 15
                                       HOUSEHOLDS BY TENURE
                                     AMERICAN CANYON AND NAPA COUNTY
                                                       2010
                                American Canyon                        Napa County
                           Households              Percent       Households         Percent
    Owner                               4,443              78.5%             30,597        62.6%
    Renter                              1,214              21.5%             18,279        37.4%
    Total                               5,657             100.0%             48,876       100.0%
    Source: ABAG Pre-Approved Data Package; U.S. Census, 2010.
B-22                                                                       Adopted March 17, 2015
  2015-2023 HOUSING ELEMENT                                                   CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON
  Table 16 shows housing unit growth from 1990 to 2014. The city experienced rapid housing
  growth until 2008 when growth slowed substantially.
                                                  TABLE 16
                                               HOUSING UNITS
                                               AMERICAN CANYON
                                                      2014
                                                                       Average Annual Growth
                Year                   Housing Units                            Rate
                         1990                               2,339                                 --
                         2000                               3,274                             4.0%
                         2001                               3,381                             3.3%
                         2002                               3,811                           12.7%
                         2003                               4,197                           10.1%
                         2004                               4,547                             8.3%
                         2005                               4,969                             9.3%
                         2006                               5,260                             5.9%
                         2007                               5,659                             7.6%
                         2008                               5,591                            -1.2%
                         2009                               5,865                             4.9%
                         2010                               5,982                             2.0%
                         2011                               6,018                             0.6%
                         2012                               6,040                             0.4%
                         2013                               6,061                             0.3%
                         2014                               6,071                             0.2%
        Source: U.S. Census, 1990 and 2000; DOF Estimates, 2000-2014.
  Table 17 shows 2008-2012 ACS data regarding tenure in relation to the number of bedrooms
  per occupied housing unit. The majority of homes in American Canyon are three-bedroom
  homes followed by two-bedroom homes. Rental households make up about 23 percent of
  total occupied units. Rental units tend to be smaller than units available for sale.
                                                    TABLE 17
                                  NUMBER OF BEDROOMS BY TENURE
                                                 AMERICAN CANYON
                                                        2012
  Number             Owner Households                 Renter Households               All Households
     of
Bedrooms          Households          Percent        Households          Percent   Households        Percent
0 BR                            23          0.6%                    12      1.0%               35       0.7%
1 BR                            21          0.5%                   198     16.3%             219        4.1%
2 BR                           466        11.3%                    295     24.2%             761       14.2%
3 BR                         1,527        36.9%                    374     30.7%           1,901       35.5%
4 BR                         1,124        27.1%                    262     21.5%           1,386       25.9%
5+ BR                          979        23.6%                     76      6.2%           1,055       19.7%
Total                        4,140       100.0%                  1,217    100.0%           5,357      100.0%
Source: ACS 5-year estimates, 2008-2012.
  Adopted March 17, 2015                                                                                 B-23
CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON                                              2015-2023 HOUSING ELEMENT
Table 18 illustrates tenure by age of householder. The largest group of owners in the city
was 35 to 44 years of age followed by 45 to 54 and 65 to 74 years of age. Owners were more
evenly distributed in the county. The largest group of renters in the city was individuals 35
to 44 years of age, followed by 45 to 54, and then 55 to 59 years of age. This is similar to the
distribution of renters in the county. The analysis reveals that younger adults tend to rent
whereas older adults tend to own their homes.
                                                TABLE 18
                                 TENURE BY AGE OF HOUSEHOLDER
                                     AMERICAN CANYON AND NAPA COUNTY
                                                  2012
                                                American Canyon              Napa County
                     Age                       Number      Percent       Number        Percent
 Owner occupied                                     4,140    100.0%            30,455     100.0%
  Householder 15 to 24 years                            0       0.0%               78        0.3%
  Householder 25 to 34 years                          247       6.0%            1,777        5.8%
  Householder 35 to 44 years                        1,219      29.4%            4,351       14.3%
  Householder 45 to 54 years                        1,077      26.0%            6,988       22.9%
  Householder 55 to 59 years                          372       9.0%            3,593       11.8%
  Householder 60 to 64 years                          362       8.7%            3,575       11.7%
  Householder 65 to 74 years                          554      13.4%            5,158       16.9%
  Householder 75 to 84 years                          271       6.5%            3,594       11.8%
  Householder 85 years and over                        38       0.9%            1,341        4.4%
 Renter occupied                                    1,217    100.0%            18,754     100.0%
  Householder 15 to 24 years                           27       2.2%            1,085        5.8%
  Householder 25 to 34 years                          177      14.5%            4,763       25.4%
  Householder 35 to 44 years                          395      32.5%            4,001       21.3%
  Householder 45 to 54 years                          267      21.9%            3,432       18.3%
  Householder 55 to 59 years                          200      16.4%            1,645        8.8%
  Householder 60 to 64 years                           74       6.1%            1,200        6.4%
  Householder 65 to 74 years                           40       3.3%            1,208        6.4%
  Householder 75 to 84 years                           29       2.4%              704        3.8%
  Householder 85 years and over                         8       0.7%              716        3.8%
 Source: ACS 5-year estimates, 2008-2012.
Income Characteristics and Needs
The Federal Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) calculates an annual
median family income (MFI) for each area of the country for the purpose of determining
eligibility for Section 8 and other Federal programs. The Napa County 2014 HUD-calculated
median income was $70,300. The State Department of Housing and Community
Development (HCD) calculates income levels slightly differently to determine eligibility for
certain State housing programs. The Napa County 2014 HCD-calculated median income
was $86,100. For purposes of the Housing Element, the State income definitions are used
throughout, except for the data that have been compiled by the Federal Department of
Housing and Urban Development (HUD) and is specifically noted.
B-24                                                                         Adopted March 17, 2015
  2015-2023 HOUSING ELEMENT                                              CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON
  The State of California uses five income categories based on the median income:
        Extremely Low-Income: 30 percent or less of the median family income;
        Very Low-Income: 31 percent to 50 percent of the median family income;
        Low-Income: 51 percent to 80 percent of the median family income;
        Moderate-Income: 81 percent to 120 percent of the median family income; and
        Above Moderate-Income: Greater than 120 percent of the median family income.
  Household Income
  Table 19 provides 2014 household income thresholds based on the HUD median income.
  The table also provides the income breakdown in American Canyon and Napa County.
  American Canyon has a lower percentage of lower-income households than Napa County.
                                                     TABLE 19
                                           INCOME DEFINITIONS
                                      AMERICAN CANYON AND NAPA COUNTY
                                                   2011 AND 2014
                                                       2014 HUD      2011 Percent In 2011 Percent in
 Income Group           Income Definition           Income Limits American Canyon Napa County
Extremely low-
income               30% or more of the Napa                 $24,700             6.3%          11.0%
households           County median income
Very low-income      31% to 50% of the Napa
                                                             $41,200             9.9%          12.3%
households           County median income
Low-income           51% to 80% of the Napa
                                                             $65,900            16.7%          18.1%
households           County median income
Moderate-income      81% to 120% of the Napa
                                                             $84,360
households           County median income
Above moderate-      121% or more of the                                        66.9%          58.5%
income               Napa County median                     >$84,360
households           income
Note: The Napa County 2014 HUD median income was $70,300.
Source: HUD Income Guidelines, 2014; CHAS Data, 2007-2011.
  Adopted March 17, 2015                                                                       B-25

 CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON                                                            2015-2023 HOUSING ELEMENT
 Table 20 illustrates the HCD 2014 income limits per household size (i.e., people per
 household). An income below $46,150 for a single person was considered low income. An
 income of $87,000 for an eight-person household was also considered low income.
                                                          TABLE 20
                                   INCOME LIMITS PER HOUSEHOLD SIZE
                                                         NAPA COUNTY
                                                               2014
                                    Extremely Low-Income                    Very Low-Income           Low-Income
     Household Size
                                              Households                      Households              Households
1 Person                                                         $18,100                 $30,150              $46,150
2 Persons                                                        $20,700                 $34,450              $52,750
3 Persons                                                        $23,300                 $38,750              $59,350
4 Persons                                                        $25,850                 $43,050              $65,900
5 Persons                                                        $27,950                 $46,500              $71,200
6 Persons                                                        $30,000                 $49,950              $76,450
7 Persons                                                        $32,100                 $53,400              $81,750
8 Persons                                                        $34,150                 $56,850              $87,000
Note: The Napa County 2014 HCD median income was $86,100.
Source: HCD Income Guidelines, 2014.
 The American Community Survey provides another estimate of household income. Table 21
 shows household income in American Canyon and countywide. American Canyon has a
 higher median income. Almost a quarter of the households in American Canyon make
 between $100,000 and $150,000; Napa County has a more even income distribution.
                                                         TABLE 21
                                                HOUSEHOLD INCOME
                                        AMERICAN CANYON AND NAPA COUNTY
                                                              2012
                                                          American Canyon                     Napa County
                   Income
                                                       Number              Percent       Number         Percent
 Less than $10,000                                                  78           1.5%           1,696        3.4%
 $10,000 - $14,999                                                 166           3.1%           2,023        4.1%
 $15,000 - $24,999                                                 321           6.0%           3,764        7.6%
 $25,000 - $34,999                                                 319           6.0%           4,063        8.3%
 $35,000 - $49,999                                                 396           7.4%           6,117       12.4%
 $50,000 - $74,999                                              1,130           21.1%           8,750       17.8%
 $75,000 - $99,999                                                 739          13.8%           6,189       12.6%
 $100,000 - $149,999                                            1,286           24.0%           8,623       17.5%
 $150,000 or $199,999                                              494           9.2%           3,821        7.8%
 $200,000 - more                                                   428           8.0%           4,163        8.5%
 Median Household Income                                     $83,609                 --       $69,571           --
 Source: ACS 5-year estimates, in 2012 inflation adjusted dollars, 2008-2012.
 B-26                                                                                       Adopted March 17, 2015
2015-2023 HOUSING ELEMENT                                         CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON
In American Canyon in 2012, 1,413 people, or 7.4 percent of the city, were below the poverty
level, compared to 10.0 percent countywide. About 44 percent of those under the poverty
level were Whites/Non-Hispanic. Almost 20 percent of the impoverished were Hispanics.
Statewide 2008-2012 ACS data revealed that approximately 15 percent of the total
population was below the poverty level.
Housing Costs and Rental Rates
Fair Market Rate
In general the Fair Market Rate (FMR) for an area is the amount needed to pay the gross rent
(shelter rent plus utilities) of privately-owned, decent, safe, and sanitary rental housing of a
modest (non-luxury) nature with suitable amenities. The rents are drawn from the
distribution of rents of all units that are occupied by recent movers. Adjustments are made
to exclude public housing units, newly built units, and substandard units. Fair market rents
for Napa County in 2014 are shown in Table 22.
                                             TABLE 22
                                      FAIR MARKET RENTS
                                            NAPA COUNTY
                                                2014
       Area            Studio        1 Bedroom       2 Bedroom     3 Bedroom       4 Bedroom
 Napa County                  $843          $1,057         $1,414         $2,018         $2,025
 Source: HUD, 2014.
Home Prices
According to DataQuick, the median home price in American Canyon was $350,000 in 2013,
up 14.8 percent from 2012. In Napa County the median home price in 2013 was $442,313.
According to Carey Condy, a Bay Area real estate expert, in a post from December 2013, Bay
Area home prices varied by city. In October 2013 the average price per square foot for a
Napa County home was $330. Homes in American Canyon had the lowest price per square
foot of any city, town, or district in the Bay Area: $160. American Canyon was the only city
in the Bay Area where the price per square foot was below $200.
Table 23 lists prices of homes for sale as of September 2014. There were 46 housing units for
sale with the highest percentage of homes being three- and four-bedroom, single family
units. The average price for all single family homes listed for sale was $471,263. The table
also shows prices for the three manufactured homes listed for sale. The average price of the
manufactured homes was $90,333.
Adopted March 17, 2015                                                                      B-27
CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON                                                             2015-2023 HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                        TABLE 23
                                                 HOMES FOR SALE
                                                    AMERICAN CANYON
                                                             2014
                                                                                      Average        Percent of
      Bedrooms             Units For Sale                      Range                    Price           Total
                                               Single Family Homes
      1                                       --                               --                --             --
      2                                        1                        $299,000        $299,000              2%
      3                                      13              $109,999-$575,000          $345,923             30%
      4                                      14              $325,000-$599,500          $487,764             33%
      5+                                       6            $507,000-$1,495,00          $796,750             14%
     Total                                   43                                --       $471,263            100%
                                                  Modular Housing
      1                                       --                               --                --
      2                                        1                         $71,999         $71,999             33%
      3                                        2               $89,000-$109,999          $99,500             67%
      4+                                      --                               --                --
     Total                                     3                               --        $90,333            100%
     Source: Zillow for single family homes and trulia.com for manufactured homes, September 22, 2014.
Rental Prices
An online survey of rental units in September 2014 found that most units for rent were
single family homes, followed by apartments for rent. All apartment units for rent were in
The Lodge, located in Napa Junction.
Table 24 shows average pricing per bedroom for the apartment units and single family
homes for rent within the city. Monthly apartment rental prices ranged from $1,669 for a
one-bedroom apartment to $2,025 for a two-bedroom. Single family homes ranged from
$1,790 for a four-bedroom to $2,850 for a five-bedroom. The average rental price was $2,045
per month.
                                                        TABLE 24
                                                   RENTAL RATES
                                                    AMERICAN CANYON
                                                             2014
                                             Number of Units per
               Type                                      Rent                                 Amount
 1-bedroom apartment                                                        5                          $1,669 -$1,845
 2-bedroom apartment                                                        3                           $1,957-$2,025
 4-bedroom house                                                            2                           $1,790-$2,500
 5-bedroom house                                                            3                           $2,200-$2,850
 Source: Craigslist, October 2014.
B-28                                                                                         Adopted March 17, 2015
2015-2023 HOUSING ELEMENT                                                    CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON
Table 25 shows an inventory of the existing mobile home parks, the number of units, and
their average monthly rents.
                                                    TABLE 25
                           MOBILE HOME PARK SPACE RENTAL RATES
                                               AMERICAN CANYON
                                                        2014
                    Name                               Total Spaces                Monthly Rents
 American Canyon Mobile Home Park                                        191                       $615
 Fairgrounds Mobile Estates                                              230                 Up to $625
 Las Casitas Mobile Home Park (55+)                                       96                       $517
 Napa Olympia Mobile Lodge                                               201                  $450-$650
 World Marine Estates                                                    125                  $450-$700
 Source: MHVillage, September 2014.
The City permits manufactured homes (on permanent foundations) as a means for
affordable housing in the city. An example of this is the constructed World Marine Estates.
The World Marine Estates is a gated community consisting of manufactured homes with a
swimming pool and clubhouse. There are currently 125 units in this gated community.
Most of the manufactured subdivisions and mobile home parks have been in existence since
the time of incorporation with no current applications for additional mobile home parks.
They are an important source of affordable housing in the city.
Prices Over Time
Table 26 shows how the median home value and median gross rent have changed over time.
Home values and rents have almost doubled since 2000.
                                                    TABLE 26
                                           MEDIAN VALUE/RENT
                                                AMERICAN CANYON
                                                     1990-2012
                                                                                1990-2000   2000-2012
         Value/Rent                   1990             2000           2012
                                                                                  AAGR        AAGR
 Median Home Value                    $135,500          $177,600      $337,900        3.1%          7.5%
 Median Gross Rent                        $760               $924       $1,745        2.2%          7.4%
 Source: U.S. Census, 1990 and 2000; ACS 5-year estimates, 2008-2012.
Adopted March 17, 2015                                                                              B-29
CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON                                            2015-2023 HOUSING ELEMENT
Ability to Pay
Table 27 shows the amount that a household can pay for housing at each income category
without overpaying. The table shows maximum affordable monthly rents and maximum
affordable purchase prices for homes. The affordable prices were calculated using
household income limits published by the California Department of Housing and
Community Development (HCD), conventional financing terms, and assuming that
households spend 30 percent of gross income on housing costs. Households earning the
2014 median income for a family of four in Napa County ($86,100) could afford to spend up
to $2,153 per month on housing without being considered overpaying. For renters this is a
straightforward calculation, but homeownership costs are less transparent.
A household can typically qualify to purchase a home that is 2.5 to 3.0 times the annual
income of that household, depending on the down payment, the level of other long-term
obligations (such as a car loan), and interest rates. In practice the interaction of these factors
allows some households to qualify for homes priced at more than three times their annual
income, while other households may be limited to purchasing homes no more than two
times their annual incomes. These factors–interest rates, insurance, and taxes–are held
constant in Table 27 below in order to determine maximum affordable rent and purchase
price for households of each income category.
B-30                                                                       Adopted March 17, 2015

   2015-2023 HOUSING ELEMENT                                                             CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON
                                                           TABLE 27
                                                      ABILITY TO PAY
                                                      AMERICAN CANYON
                                                                2014
        Extremely Low-Income Households at 30% of 2014 Median Family Income (MFI)
Number of Persons                                       1               2              3              4                5               6
Income Level                                    $18,100          $20,650       $23,250        $25,850          $27,900          $29,950
Max. Monthly Gross Rent1                            $453            $516           $581          $646             $698             $749
Max. Purchase Price2                            $73,111          $83,411       $93,913       $104,415        $112,695         $120,976
                              Very Low-Income Households at 50% of 2014 MFI
Number of Persons                                       1               2              3              4                5               6
Income Level                                    $30,150          $34,450       $38,750        $43,050          $46,500          $49,950
Max. Monthly Gross Rent1                            $754            $861           $969        $1,076           $1,163            $1,249
Max. Purchase Price2                          $121,784         $139,152       $156,521       $173,890        $187,825         $201,761
            Low-Income Households at 70% of MFI For Sale and 60% of MFI for Rental
Number of Persons                                       1               2              3              4                5               6
Income Level for Sale (70% MFI)                 $42,200          $48,200       $54,250        $60,250          $65,100          $69,900
Income Level for Rental (60% MFI)               $36,150         $41,3 50       $46,500        $51,650          $55,800          $59,950
Max. Monthly Gross Rent1                            $904          $1,034         $1,163        $1,291           $1,395            $1,499
Max. Purchase Price2                          $170,457         $194,692       $219,130       $243,365        $262,956         $282,344
                              Median-Income Households at 100% of 2014 MFI
Number of Persons                                       1               2              3              4                5               6
Income Level                                    $60,250          $68,900       $77,500        $86,100          $93,000          $99,900
Max. Monthly Gross Rent1                          $1,506          $1,723         $1,938        $2,153           $2,325            $2,498
Max. Purchase Price2                          $243,365         $278,305       $313,042       $347,780        $375,651         $403,522
                             Moderate-Income Households at 120% of 2014 MFI
Number of Persons                                       1               2              3              4                5               6
Income Level                                    $72,300          $82,650       $93,000       $103,300        $111,600         $119,850
Max. Monthly Gross Rent1                          $2,109          $2,411         $2,713        $3,013           $3,255            $3,496
Max. Purchase Price2                          $340,711         $389,485       $438,259       $486,798        $525,911         $564,789
1
 Assumes that 30 percent of income (35 percent for moderate-income) is available for either: monthly rent, including utilities; or
mortgage payment, taxes, mortgage insurance, and homeowners insurance.
2
 Assumes 96.5 percent loan at 4.5 percent annual interest rate and 30-year term; assumes taxes, mortgage insurance, and
homeowners’ insurance account for 21 percent of total monthly payments.
3
 2014 HCD State Area Median Income for Napa County $86,100.
Source: California Department of Housing and Community Development, 2014; Mintier Harnish, 2014.
   Adopted March 17, 2015                                                                                                       B-31

CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON                                           2015-2023 HOUSING ELEMENT
According to DataQuick, the median home sale price in American Canyon is currently
(2013) $350,000. This price is generally affordable for median-income households but
analysis indicates that lower-income households would encounter difficulty purchasing an
affordable home in American Canyon.
For rental housing the analysis suggests that lower-income households would have
difficulty affording the median rental price of $2,045. However, median-income households
would be able to afford this median rental price without overpaying. Moderate-income
households can afford monthly rents that approximate or exceed average market-rate rents.
As such, these households would have less difficulty finding an affordable rental unit in
American Canyon.
Affordability Trends
Although homes may be difficult to afford for lower-income households, homes in the city
of American Canyon are relatively affordable compared to homes countywide. Figure 1
shows home prices in Napa County. American Canyon has the lowest median home sale
price, lower than the countywide average price of $442,313. Saint Helena has the highest
median home sale price at $825,000.
                                            Figure 1
                      Median Home Sale Price by Jurisdiction
                                          Napa County
                                              2013
  $900,000
  $800,000
  $700,000
  $600,000
  $500,000
  $400,000
  $300,000
  $200,000
  $100,000
         $0
                 American      Calistoga    Napa City  Saint Helena    Yountville  Napa County
                  Canyon
*Affordability based on a three-person household
Source: DQNews, 2013.
B-32                                                                      Adopted March 17, 2015
2015-2023 HOUSING ELEMENT                                      CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON
The U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) periodically receives
"custom tabulations" of data from the U.S. Census Bureau that are largely not available
through standard Census products. These data, known as the "CHAS" data (Comprehensive
Housing Affordability Strategy), demonstrate the extent of housing problems and housing
needs, particularly for low-income households. The CHAS data are used by local
governments to plan how to spend HUD funds, and may also be used by HUD to distribute
grant funds.
Table 28 shows CHAS data on housing problems for households in American Canyon. The
four housing problems are incomplete kitchen facilities, incomplete plumbing facilities,
more than one person per room, and cost burden greater than 30 percent. This data is used
by State and Federal housing agencies to show housing problems for multiple income
groups both renting and owning. It is evident from the table that lower-income households
experience a higher incidence of cost burden and other housing problems. Renters also have
a higher incidence of overpaying and other housing problems; for example, 100 percent of
extremely low-income renters are overpaying for housing compared to less than half of low-
income owners.
                                        TABLE 28
                                  HOUSING PROBLEMS
                                      AMERICAN CANYON
                                            2011
                                                         Total       Total      Total
                                                        Owners     Renters   Households
Extremely Low-Income Households (Income <=30% MFI)            285         50           335
% with any housing problems                                75.4%     100.0%         79.1%
% Cost Burden >30%                                         77.2%     100.0%         80.6%
% Cost Burden >50%                                         57.9%      80.0%         61.2%
Very Low-Income Household (Income >30% to <=50% MFI)          325       205            530
% with any housing problems                                55.4%      95.1%         70.8%
% Cost Burden >30%                                         55.4%      27.6%         70.8%
Low-Income Household (Income >50% to <=80% MFI)               665       230            895
% with any housing problems                                51.9%      67.4%         55.9%
% Cost Burden >30%                                         48.9%      60.9%         51.4%
Median-Income Household (Income >80% to <=100% MFI)           500       170            670
% with any housing problems                                41.0%      52.9%         44.2%
% Cost Burden >30%                                         37.0%      52.9%         41.0%
Above Median-Income Household (Income >100% MFI)            2,380       525          2,905
% with any housing problems                                44.7%      16.2%         39.6%
% Cost Burden >30%                                         79.6%       4.8%         34.8%
Source: CHAS data. 2007-2011.
Adopted March 17, 2015                                                                 B-33
CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON                                         2015-2023 HOUSING ELEMENT
C. Housing Characteristics
Government Code 65583 (a)(2) requires an analysis and documentation of household
characteristics that include housing stock conditions. Table 29 shows housing units by type
in American Canyon from 2000 to 2014. Since 2000 most of the new units constructed in the
city were single family detached housing units. The increase in multifamily between 2000
and 2008 seems to be consistent with the development within the Specific Plan and the three
new multifamily projects that were constructed.
In 2000 nearly a quarter of units in the city were mobile home units. Virtually all of these
mobile homes are located in mobile home parks. In 2014 the Department of Finance
estimates the number of mobile homes in American Canyon to have remained about the
same since incorporation. As the city develops, the percentage of the housing stock
represented by mobile homes will inevitably decline, but the existing mobile homes will
continue to represent a significant percentage of the overall housing stock.
                                          TABLE 29
                                      HOUSING STOCK
                                       AMERICAN CANYON
                                           2000-2014
                  Total           Single Family          Multifamily         Mobile Home
 Year
          Number        Percent  Number   Percent    Number     Percent    Number    Percent
  2000         3,274      100.0%   2,362     72.1%        131       4.0%        781     23.9%
  2001         3,381      100.0%   2,470     73.1%        125       3.7%        786     23.2%
  2002         3,811      100.0%   2,903     76.2%        115       3.0%        793     20.8%
  2003         4,197      100.0%   3,290     78.4%        107       2.5%        800     19.1%
  2004         4,547      100.0%   3,644     80.1%         96       2.1%        807     17.7%
  2005         4,969      100.0%   4,068     81.9%         88       1.8%        813     16.4%
  2006         5,260      100.0%   4,364     83.0%         78       1.5%        818     15.6%
  2007         5,659      100.0%   4,548     80.4%        286       5.1%        825     14.6%
  2008         5,795      100.0%   4,686     80.9%        277       4.8%        832     14.4%
  2009         5,865      100.0%   4,758     81.1%        268       4.6%        839     14.3%
  2010         5,964      100.0%   4,858     81.5%        259       4.3%        847     14.2%
  2011         6,018      100.0%   4,912     81.6%        257       4.3%        849     14.1%
  2012         6,040      100.0%   4,934     81.7%        257       4.3%        849     14.1%
  2013         6,061      100.0%   4,955     81.8%        257       4.2%        849     14.0%
  2014         6,071      100.0%   4,965     81.8%        257       4.2%        849     14.0%
Source: DOF Estimates, 2014.
B-34                                                                    Adopted March 17, 2015
2015-2023 HOUSING ELEMENT                                          CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON
Age and Condition of Existing Housing Stock
The age and condition of the housing stock provides additional measures of housing
adequacy and availability in many communities. Although age does not always correlate
with substandard housing conditions, neighborhoods with a preponderance of homes more
than 30 years old are more likely than newer neighborhoods to have a concentration of
housing problems related to deferred maintenance, inadequate landscaping care, outdated
utilities or interior amenities, and a need for housing rehabilitation.
The year a structure was built can be an indicator of the current condition of the housing
unit. Homes of sound construction typically show signs of deterioration and need repair
after 30 years if not adequately maintained—some even sooner depending on the
construction technique and weather conditions. Table 30 shows that about 75 percent of the
city’s housing stock has been constructed since 1980 and is probably in sound condition.
About 25 percent of the housing stock is more than 30 years old, however, and nearly one in
five homes are more than 50 years old.
These estimates correspond to the Housing Conditions survey which stated a majority of the
housing in American Canyon has been constructed since 1970.
                                              TABLE 30
                                        YEAR STRUCTURE BUILT
                                            AMERICAN CANYON
                                                  2014
                                              Total Housing       Percent of Total Housing
               Year Built
                                                   Units                    Units
 Total Housing Units                                      5,630                         100%
 Built 2010 or later                                         26                          0.5%
 Built 2000 to 2009                                       2,611                        46.4%
 Built 1990 to 1999                                         745                        13.2%
 Built 1980 to 1989                                         864                        15.3%
 Built 1970 to 1979                                         387                          6.9%
 Built 1960 to 1969                                         433                          7.7%
 Built 1950 to 1959                                         482                          8.6%
 Built 1940 to 1949                                          34                          0.6%
 Built 1939 or earlier                                       48                          0.9%
 Source: ACS-year estimates, 2008-2012.
Housing Conditions Survey
The City conducted a housing survey in 2009 of housing conditions in neighborhoods with
concentrations of homes greater than 20 years old and in mobile home parks to document
housing conditions and the magnitude of the city’s housing rehabilitation needs. In
accordance with the definitions of housing condition types listed in the CDBG Grant
Manual, the 2009 parcel-by-parcel windshield survey ranked the housing condition based
on certain criteria. This ranking falls into the following categories:
Adopted March 17, 2015                                                                     B-35

CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON                                           2015-2023 HOUSING ELEMENT
      Sound: A unit that appears new or well-maintained and structurally intact. The
       foundation should appear structurally undamaged and there should be straight roof
       lines. Siding, windows, and doors should be in good repair with good exterior paint
       condition. Minor problems such as small areas of peeling paint and/or other
       maintenance items are allowable under this category.
      Minor: A unit that shows signs of deferred maintenance, or which needs only one
       major component, such as a roof.
      Moderate: A unit in need of replacement of one or more major components and other
       repairs, such as roof replacement, painting, and window repairs.
      Substantial: A unit that requires replacement of several major systems and possibly
       other repairs (e.g., complete foundation work, roof structure replacement and re-
       roofing, as well as painting and window replacement).
      Dilapidated: A unit suffering from excessive neglect, where the building appears
       structurally unsound and maintenance is non-existent, not fit for human habitation in
       its current condition, may be considered for demolition, or, at minimum, major
       rehabilitation will be required.
The survey identified 19 units in sound condition, 36 units in minor condition, and 112 units
in moderate condition. All of these units were single family detached homes within some of
the older developments within the city limits. The survey did not identify any units in need
of substantial rehabilitation or dilapidated units. With the help of the Rental Rehabilitation
Program, the City will be able to work with those residents in need.
                                                 TABLE 31
                                        HOUSING CONDITION SURVEY
                                               AMERICAN CANYON
                                                     2009
                                     Housing                   Number of     Total Number per
    Condition Type                      Type      Condition #    Units        Condition Type
Sound (9 or less)                 Single Family              1         53
                                  Single Family              5         14
                                  Single Family              6         17
                                  Single Family              7          9                       19
Minor (10 to 15)                  Single Family             10          6
                                  Single Family             11          3
                                  Single Family             15          2                       36
Moderate (16 to 39)               Single Family             16          3
                                  Single Family             20          2
                                  Single Family             21          1
                                  Single Family             25          1
                                  Single Family             30          1                      112
Substantial (40 to 55)            N/A                      N/A        N/A                     N/A
Dilapidated (56 and Over)         N/A                      N/A        N/A                     N/A
Source: City Housing Conditions Survey, 2009.
B-36                                                                      Adopted March 17, 2015

     2015-2023 HOUSING ELEMENT                                         CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON
     Vacancy Rates and Housing Occupancy
     Vacancy rates are an indicator of existing housing need. The difference between the current
     vacancy rate and optimal vacancy rate is a good measure of whether the market is
     responding to overall housing needs. Optimal vacancy rates differ between rental housing
     and for-sale housing. The Association of Bay Area Governments has set two rates as the
     regional vacancy objective. For rental housing a 5 percent vacancy rate is considered
     necessary to permit ordinary rental mobility. For for-sale housing a 2 percent vacancy rate is
     considered the threshold to permit ordinary mobility. If vacancy rates are below these
     levels, residents will have a difficult time finding appropriate units and competition for
     units will drive up housing prices.
     According to the California Department of Finance, approximately 330 housing units were
     vacant in 2014, with an overall vacancy rate of 5.4 percent. In 2008 the vacancy rate was 2.0
     percent. By comparison, the countywide vacancy rate was 10.7 percent in 2014 and 6.2
     percent in 2008. The for-sale vacancy rate reported by the Census in 2010 was 2.0 percent,
     about the ideal rate, while the for-rent vacancy rate was 0.8 percent, excluding unoccupied
     dwellings that were not available for sale or rent (e.g., second homes, units already sold or
     rented but awaiting occupancy), much lower than the ideal rate. Table 32 shows that
     American Canyon had a smaller percentage of vacant housing than Napa County.
                                               TABLE 32
                                          HOUSING OCCUPANCY
                                    AMERICAN CANYON AND NAPA COUNTY
                                                 2014
                                          Housing Units
                                                                                   Occupied
                                                                         Mobile                            Percent
                                                                                               Vacant
                  Total             Single             Multifamily
    Area         Housing
                  Units                                         5        Homes                             Vacant
                              Detached    Attached    2 to 4
                                                               Plus
American
                      6,071       4,917         48        23     234       849     5,741        330            5.4%
Canyon
Napa
                     55,155      37,758       2,922    4,104   6,582     3,789    49,231      5,924        10.7%
County
Source: DOF, 2014.
     Adopted March 17, 2015                                                                             B-37
CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON                                                               2015-2023 HOUSING ELEMENT
Building Permit Activity
Table 33 summarizes building permit activity in American Canyon since 1999. The majority
of housing units built in this period are privately-owned single family units. Building
activity has declined steadily, with slight variations from year to year depending on market
demands. These demands can influence the number of building permits in such ways as
when the demand for new housing is down, permit requests for improvements to existing
housing can go up.
                                                        TABLE 33
                                HOUSING PERMITS ISSUED 1999- 2014
                                                   AMERICAN CANYON
                                                         1999-2014
                       Single Family                  Multifamily1                             Total
       1999                                  75                          0                                     75
       2000                                164                           0                                    164
       2001                                547                           0                                    547
       2002                                375                           0                                    375
       2003                                312                           0                                    312
       2004                                439                           0                                    439
       2005                                208                           0                                    208
       2006                                226                           0                                    226
       2007                                  41                       361                                     402
       2008                                   1                           0                                     0
       2009                                   6                           0                                     6
       2010                                  31                           0                                    31
       2011                                  22                           0                                    22
       2012                                  29                           0                                    29
       2013                                   0                           0                                     0
       2014                                   0                           0                                     0
       Total                            2,476                         361                                   2,836
       Note: 1 Amounts based on total units for projects and not the total number of projects constructed.
       Source: Construction Industry Research Board, Building Permit Summary, California Cities and Counties
       Data, Calendar Years 1999-2006; City of American Canyon, 2007-2014.
D. Special Housing Needs
Government Code Section 65583 (a)(3) requires analysis of any special housing needs, such
as those for persons with disabilities, including developmental disabilities, the elderly, large
households, farmworkers, female-headed households, and people in need of emergency
shelters. Special housing needs arise due to physical, economic, social, or cultural
characteristics or conditions that are present in a substantial percentage of the local
population. These characteristics or conditions distinguish individuals from the general
population and lead to housing or supportive service needs that are not (or cannot) be met
by the private market acting alone. Examples of special housing needs include accessibility
for the mobility impaired, transitional housing for those leaving a homeless environment,
and housing specifically designed for the physical and social needs of older adults.
B-38                                                                                             Adopted March 17, 2015
2015-2023 HOUSING ELEMENT                                      CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON
Characteristics such as age or physical limitations may be present in a large portion of the
population. It is important for the community to accommodate a variety of housing types to
serve such special needs groups. For example, disabled-accessible housing or units that are
designed to aid the physical limitations of the elderly may be needed in a community with
large populations of this age group. Conversely, a community may have a population of
large low-income families that need adequately sized housing at a low cost. Affordability
issues are also important to groups such as female-headed households, college students,
farmworkers, or military personnel. Therefore, the City needs to evaluate the types of
special needs groups in order to address the special housing needs. Potential funding
sources for special needs housing can include HOME funds, Low Income Housing Tax
Credits, Federal funds targeted to homeless, and increased assistance from non-profit
groups within the region.
Extremely Low-Income Households
While extremely low-income households are not considered a special needs group by State
law, these households encounter a unique set of housing situations and needs. HCD defines
an extremely low-income household as earning less than 30 percent of the Median Family
Income. In 2014 a family of four earning less than $25,850 would be considered extremely
low-income. Often, these households include any combination of special needs populations
and/or often represent families and individuals receiving public assistance, such as social
security insurance (SSI) or disability insurance.
In 2011 there were approximately 335 extremely low-income households, or 6 percent.
Eighty-five percent of the extremely low-income households were owners. As shown earlier
in Table 28, an estimated 79 percent of extremely low-income households had one of the
four housing problems (i.e., incomplete kitchen facilities, incomplete plumbing facilities,
overcrowding, or overpayment). As shown earlier in Table 14, 77 percent of extremely low-
income owner households and 100 percent of extremely low-income renter households were
overpaying for housing; 61 percent of extremely low-income households are severely
overpaying for housing.
Based on the requirements of AB 2634 (Statutes of 2006), each jurisdiction must also address
the projected need of extremely low-income (ELI) households, defined as households
earning less than 30 percent of the median income. The projected extremely low-income
need can be assumed as 50 percent of the total need for the very low-income households.
Fifty percent of American Canyon’s 116 very low-income RHNA units are assumed to be
needed to serve extremely low-income households. Based on this methodology, the City has
a projected need of 58 units for extremely low-income households.
Persons with Disabilities
Some individuals have ambulatory impairments, self-care limitations, or other conditions
that may require special housing accommodations or financial assistance. Individuals with
Adopted March 17, 2015                                                                  B-39

CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON                                          2015-2023 HOUSING ELEMENT
such disabilities can have a number of special needs that distinguish them from the
population at large, including:
     Individuals with ambulatory difficulties (such as those confined to wheelchairs) may
      require special accommodations or modifications to their homes to allow for continued
      independent living. Such modifications are often called “disabled access.”
     Individuals with self-care limitations (which can include persons with mobility
      difficulties) may require residential environments that include in-home or on-site
      support services ranging from congregate to convalescent care. Support services can
      include medical therapy, daily living assistance, congregate dining, and related
      services.
     Individuals with developmental disabilities and other physical and cognitive
      conditions that prevent them from functioning independently may require assisted
      care or group home environments.
     Individuals with disabilities may require financial assistance to meet their housing
      needs because a higher percentage than the population at large are low-income and
      their special housing needs are often more costly than conventional housing.
The 2008-2012 ACS reported approximately 8.4 percent (1,600 residents) of the city’s non-
institutionalized residents have conditions that may affect their ability to live independently
in conventional residential settings. This is lower than the countywide rate of 10.7 percent.
B-40                                                                     Adopted March 17, 2015

2015-2023 HOUSING ELEMENT                                           CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON
Table 34 shows persons with disability by type of disability and age in American Canyon.
The table illustrates the largest age group with disabilities appears to be individuals over
the age of 65, while the second highest is persons between the ages of 18 and 64. In fact, 42.5
percent of people 65 years and over have a disability compared to 5.7 percent of people 18 to
64 years of age and 2.2 percent of people 5 to 17 years.
                                                       TABLE 34
                          PERSONS WITH DISABILITY BY AGE AND DISABILITY
                                                    AMERICAN CANYON
                                                          2012
                           Type of Disability by Age                            Number
  Total disabilities tallied                                                                 1,600
  Total disabilities tallied for people 5 to 17 years                                           98
   Hearing disability                                                                           28
   Vision disability                                                                             0
   Cognitive disability                                                                         60
   Ambulatory disability                                                                         0
   Self-care disability                                                                          0
  Total disabilities tallied for people 18 to 64 years                                         651
   Hearing disability                                                                          186
   Vision disability                                                                           105
   Cognitive disability                                                                        266
   Ambulatory disability                                                                       295
   Self-care disability                                                                        221
   Independent living disability                                                               287
  Total disabilities tallied for people 65 years and over                                      851
   Hearing disability                                                                          247
   Vision disability                                                                           184
   Cognitive disability                                                                        255
   Ambulatory disability                                                                       572
   Self-care disability                                                                        215
   Independent living disability                                                               373
  Source: ACS 5-year estimates, 2008-2012.
A disability can impact a person’s ability to work, leaving many disabled individuals on
fixed incomes or jobs with wages that are lower than that of the non-disabled population.
Only 22.5 percent of the disabled were employed in 2012, compared to 66.8 percent of the
non-disabled population. The median income of the working disabled was $29,199,
compared to $34,790 for the non-disabled population.
Adopted March 17, 2015                                                                     B-41

CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON                                         2015-2023 HOUSING ELEMENT
Developmental Disabilities
SB 812, which took effect January 2011, amended State housing element law to require an
evaluation of the special housing needs of persons with developmental disabilities. A
"developmental disability" is defined as a disability that originates before an individual
becomes 18 years old, continues or can be expected to continue indefinitely, and constitutes
a substantial disability for that individual. This includes intellectual disabilities, cerebral
palsy, epilepsy, and autism.
According to the California Department of Developmental Services, as of September 2014,
there were 160 residents with developmental disabilities served in American Canyon. This
is less than one percent of the total population. Of the total, 53.1 are under the age of 18.
Most developmentally disabled residents in American Canyon have an intellectual
disability (58.9 percent) and many have autism (39.7 percent). Some consumers have more
than one disability.
Most developmentally disabled residents of American Canyon receiving services lived in
the home of their parent or guardian (134 or 83.8 percent); 17 residents or 10.6 percent lived
in a community care facility. Many developmentally disabled persons are able to live and
work independently. However, more severely disabled individuals require a group living
environment with supervision, or an institutional environment with medical attention and
physical therapy. Because developmental disabilities exist before adulthood, the first
housing issue for the developmentally disabled is the transition from living with a
parent/guardian as a child to an appropriate level of independence as an adult.
Disabled Housing Needs
Some people with mobility and/or self-care limitations are able to live with their families or
others who can assist in meeting housing and daily living needs. A segment of the disabled
population, particularly low-income and retired individuals, may not have the financial
capacity to pay for needed accommodations or modifications to their homes. In addition,
even those able to pay for special housing accommodations may find them unavailable in
the city. Although housing for homeless individuals is discussed in the sections below, there
can be a strong correlation between a person’s ability to work and their housing status.
These disabilities can be both mental and physical and can limit their opportunities for
employment and their ability to find income for housing.
Disabled persons often require special housing features to accommodate physical
limitations. Some disabled persons may have financial difficulty due to the cost of having
their special needs met or because of difficulty in finding appropriate employment.
Although the California Administrative Code (Title 24) requires that all public buildings be
accessible to the public through architectural standards such as ramps, large doors, and
restroom modifications to enable handicap access, not all available housing units have these
features.
B-42                                                                    Adopted March 17, 2015

2015-2023 HOUSING ELEMENT                                                         CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON
Both the Federal Fair Housing Act and the California Fair Employment and Housing Act
impose affirmative duty on local governments to make reasonable accommodations (i.e.,
modifications or exceptions) in their zoning and other land use regulations when such
accommodations may be necessary to afford disabled persons an equal opportunity to use
and enjoy a dwelling. The City adopted a reasonable accommodation ordinance (Chapter
19.52) in 2009. The Reasonable Accommodation Ordinance contains a formal procedure for
an individual with a disability seeking equal access to housing to request reasonable
accommodation.
According to the Napa Housing Authority, American Canyon currently has 56 heads of
households with disabilities receiving rental subsidies, while there are 98 households on the
waiting list for assisted rental housing. The number of persons on this list with disabilities is
not known.
Currently, 10 adult care facilities in the city of American Canyon look after individuals with
special needs. The needs may be a result of a mental of physical disability, which requires
additional support. These facilities are shown in Table 35.
                                                    TABLE 35
                                         ADULT CARE FACILITIES
                                                AMERICAN CANYON
                                                         2014
                                                                               Number of
               Facility                             Address                        Beds          Phone Number
AC Home                                   201 Los Altos Place                6 beds             (707) 534-7725
                                          557 Canyon Meadows
Adondi's Residential Care Home            Dr                                 3 beds             (707) 648-7374
Christopher House                         230 Andrew Rd                      6 beds             (707) 567-6596
Core Arf Gadwall                          3 Gadwall Court                    2 beds             (707) 554-4802
Griffin Family Care Home - Elliot         2330 Elliot Drive                  6 beds             (707) 552-6346
James Road House                          126 James Rd                       10 beds            (707) 552-6012
One Step Beyond Care Home                 154 Entrada Cir                    4 beds             (707) 552-8588
Sacred Heart Care Home #1                 1509 Rio Grande St                 6 beds             (707) 246-4565
Sacred Heart Care Home #2                 1513 Rio Grande St                 6 beds             (707) 246-4565
Sacred Heart Care Home #3                 241 Landana St                     6 beds             (707) 647-2260
Source: Department of Social Services Community Care Licensing Facility Search, September 2014.
On January 1, 2002, SB 520 became effective and required local jurisdictions to analyze local
government constraints on developing, maintaining, and improving housing for persons
with disabilities. In accordance with SB 520 and Government Code 65583(a)(7), the City
recognizes the importance of providing housing for persons with disabilities. The City has
since included a review of all development applications for their adherence to Title 24. This
review is included during the entitlement processing stage as well as during the issuance of
building permits for minor alterations.
Adopted March 17, 2015                                                                                         B-43
CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON                                          2015-2023 HOUSING ELEMENT
Elderly
As is the case in many suburbs, the number of elderly residents has increased in American
Canyon over the years. However, as a proportion of the population, seniors (65 and older)
are decreasing. According to the 2000 Census, 13.4 percent (1,306) of the population was
above the age of 65. In 2010 only 9.6 percent (1,865) of the population was above the age of
65. Current development trends suggest that, while the number of older adults and their
needs will remain significant in the city over the next five years, their proportion of the total
population will continue to decline as more families with children move into new
residential neighborhoods.
In most communities older adults tend to have a lower poverty rate due to retirement
income or government assistance such as Social Security (young families with children,
especially single mothers, usually have the highest poverty rate). According to the 2008-2012
ACS estimates, 5.2 percent of seniors were living in poverty, compared to 7.4 percent of the
general population. Countywide, 6.0 percent of seniors were in poverty compared to 10.0
percent of the general population.
Tenure is also important when analyzing the needs of seniors. Table 18 from the previous
“Household Tenure” section, illustrates the number of seniors living in owner-occupied
housing. Out of 940 senior householders, 91.2 percent were owners. One-third of all elderly
homeowners paid more than 30 percent of their income for housing expenses, compared to
42.7 percent of all householders.
Due to mobility limitations or the need for supportive services (such as medical or meal
assistance), it can become very challenging for the elderly to adequately meet their housing
needs. The City can support the elderly population with rehabilitation programs for existing
units, as well as the creation of affordable senior housing units. The City has collected
specific data on the age and condition of housing units; however, this does not include a
specific breakdown of homes occupied by seniors. In American Canyon the existing mobile
home parks have a large percentage of senior citizens occupying the homes and the City is
committed to retaining this housing type. Because mobile homes tend to deteriorate faster
than site-built homes, and seniors face the added financial burden of space rents, many
seniors find it difficult to maintain their homes and keep up with rising space rents and
utility costs.
B-44                                                                      Adopted March 17, 2015

 2015-2023 HOUSING ELEMENT                                                          CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON
 There are six State Department of Social Services licensed elderly care facilities providing
 services in American Canyon. These facilities are shown in Table 36.
                                                      TABLE 36
                                         ELDERLY CARE FACILITIES
                                                 AMERICAN CANYON
                                                          2014
                                                                                  Number of
                Facility                               Address                        Beds       Phone Number
Greenhills Care Home                          115 Thayer Way                     24 beds        (707) 558-8487
American Canyon Villa                         39 Via Marciana                    6 beds         (707) 648-7983
Bay Manor Luxury Residential Care             10 Ford Dr                         6 beds         (707) 731-1650
EFE Canyon Care 2                             1088 Donaldson Way                 6 beds         (707) 652-9912
Landana Care Home                             122 Landana St                     6 beds         (707) 980-7879
Young at Heart Home Care                      161 Spikerush Circle               5 beds         (707) 557-5606
Source: Department of Social Services Community Care Licensing Facility Search, September 2014.
 According to the Housing Authority of the City of Napa, 26 senior-headed households
 currently receive rental subsidies, while there are 32 seniors on the waiting list for this
 assistance.
 Large Households (Five or More Persons)
 Large households are defined as households of five or more individuals. Large households
 often face special challenges in the housing market because they need housing of sufficient
 size to prevent overcrowding and do not always have sufficient income to purchase or rent
 such housing, even if it is available. Table 11 indicates that in 2010 the percentage of large
 households increased to 25 percent compared to 13 percent countywide.
 Table 37 shows that in 2010 American Canyon had 1,424 households of five or more
 persons. There were 1,068 owner households of five or more persons and 356 renter
 households of five or more persons.
                                                     TABLE 37
                                    HOUSEHOLD BY SIZE AND TENURE
                                                 AMERICAN CANYON
                                                          2010
                                                         Type                                     Number
                             1-4 person household                                                           3,019
  Owner Occupied             5 or more person household                                                     1,424
                             Total                                                                          4,443
                             1-4 person household                                                             858
  Renter Occupied            5 or more person household                                                       356
                             Total                                                                          1,214
  Source: U.S. Census, 2010.
 Adopted March 17, 2015                                                                                       B-45
CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON                                         2015-2023 HOUSING ELEMENT
While the city has a large proportion of large households, homes in American Canyon tend
to be larger. Since much of American Canyon’s housing stock is relatively new, the city has
a higher proportion of larger homes. As shown earlier in Table 17, 81.1 percent of the total
housing stock had three or more bedrooms per house; 19.7 percent had five or more
bedrooms.
However, affordability can sometimes be an issue for larger households since the household
income is split between more people. As shown in Table 38, the median income per person
in American Canyon generally declines with household size.
                                            TABLE 38
                     MEDIAN HOUSEHOLD INCOME BY HOUSEHOLD SIZE
                                          AMERICAN CANYON
                                                2010
          Household Size                  Median Income       Median Income Per Person
 Total                                               $83,609                           varies
 1-person households                                 $50,449                          $50,499
 2-person households                                 $66,582                          $33,291
 3-person households                                $103,125                          $34,375
 4-person households                                $103,431                          $25,858
 5-person households                                 $84,459                          $16,892
 6-person households                                $116,033                          $19,339
 7-or-more-person households                        $126,131                         <$18,019
 Source: ACS 5-year estimates, 2008-2012.
This Housing Element contains policies to facilitate the construction of larger housing units
affordable to extremely low-, very low-, and low-income families. The City of American
Canyon recognizes that finding adequate and convenient child care is critical to maintaining
quality of life for many households in the city. The City continues to implement the large
family day care ordinance, Chapter 19.33 of the Municipal Code.
Farmworkers
In Napa County agriculture is the predominant land use by area. A significant percentage of
farmworkers employed in the county are migrant (seasonal) workers who may require
special accommodations during their temporary stay. Such housing is extremely limited in
Napa County. As a result, many migrant workers live in substandard housing conditions,
such as motel units, illegally converted garages or secondary dwelling units, vehicles, and
older mobile homes and trailers. In Napa County in 2012, 9,857 farmworkers were hired on
916 farms.
Currently, there is no housing in American Canyon specifically designated for farmworkers
or employee housing for farmworkers. Although there are agricultural activities in Napa
County, the city itself does not contain enough land that could suit the demands of
agriculture. Although the Sphere of Influence includes some land designated for
agricultural uses, the city does not have any agriculturally designated properties. Thirty-one
B-46                                                                    Adopted March 17, 2015

2015-2023 HOUSING ELEMENT                                      CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON
people or 0.3 percent of the population in American Canyon were employed in agriculture,
forestry, fishing and hunting, and mining in 2012. This is much less than 6.8 percent in Napa
County. Of those American Canyon residents employed in agriculture, the vast majority are
year-round residents who commute to jobs outside of the city limits.
The California Human Development Corporation (CHDC) manages three farmworker
housing centers in Napa County (Calistoga, Mondavi, and River Ranch) that are designed to
serve the short-term housing needs of unaccompanied male residents during peak
agricultural seasons. Residents tend to be employed by labor contractors and occupy beds
for five days during the week, returning home to their families elsewhere in Northern
California on the weekend. The dormitory-style housing in each of the three centers has 60
beds (30 rooms with 2 beds each), for a total of 180 beds. None of the centers are open year
round; each is closed for portions of the period from November to February, when the
demand for labor goes down. However, the months during which they close are staggered,
such that at least one of the centers is open during any given month of the year. In addition
to the three CHDC centers, there are seven other licensed farmworker housing facilities in
the county that provide an estimated 130 beds.
Due to its location in Napa County, the City will facilitate the provision of housing
opportunities for farmworkers. As a part of the implementation of the Housing Element, the
City will amend the Zoning Code to comply with the Employee Housing Act and allow
employee housing for six or fewer employees in all zones that allow single family dwellings.
Female-Headed Family Households
Most female-headed households are either single elderly women or single mothers.
Traditionally, these two groups have been considered special needs groups because their
incomes tend to be lower, making it difficult to obtain affordable housing, or because they
have supportive service needs related to housing (such as child care or assisted living
support). Single mothers, in particular, tend to experience difficulty in obtaining suitable,
affordable housing because of their low incomes and the need for two or more bedrooms. Of
the 4,613 families in 2010, 751 (16.3 percent) were female householders with no husband. Of
the 751 female-headed households (13.3 percent of all households), 359 (6.3 percent of all
households) had children under the age of 18. Of the 2,452 families in the city in 2000, 404
(about 16.5 percent) were female-headed households.
The city had slightly higher percentages of female-headed households (13.3 percent and 6.3
percent with children) than the county did (10.3 percent and 5.4 percent with children).
According to the 2008-2012 ACS, 878 or 17.4 percent of all female-headed households had
incomes under the poverty level; 811 of the city's female-headed households with children
under the age of 18 (27.4 percent) had incomes below the poverty level, giving this group
the highest poverty rate in the city. It may be assumed that most of these households are
overpaying for housing (i.e., more than 30 percent of their income), or are experiencing
Adopted March 17, 2015                                                                    B-47
CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON                                            2015-2023 HOUSING ELEMENT
other unmet housing needs because of their extremely low incomes and the rising cost of
housing.
The City will continue to support the permitting of Child Care Facilities within the city.
Homeless Population and Persons in Need of Emergency Housing
Government Code Section 65583(a)(7) requires an analysis of housing needs for homeless
individuals and for local governments to address any need for emergency shelters and
transitional housing. Homelessness can result from a number of social and economic factors
that include a breakdown of traditional social relationships, chronic unemployment, a
shortage of affordable housing in relation to income, chronic substance abuse, and a
physical or mental disability that limits the person’s ability to find adequate work. By
definition, a homeless person lacks consistent and adequate shelter and can be considered
residents of a community (those remaining in an area year-round), or transient, depending
on their residence before becoming homeless and the length of time they spend in a
community. The three types of housing that accommodate these needs are emergency
housing, transitional housing, and supportive housing. They are defined as:
     Emergency Shelter/Housing. Housing with minimal supportive services for homeless
      persons that is limited to occupancy of six months or less by a homeless person. No
      individual or household may be denied emergency shelter because of an inability to
      pay (Health and Safety Code 50801). Jurisdictions must allow emergency housing
      (homeless shelters) in at least one zone without discretionary review.
     Transitional Housing. Buildings configured as rental housing developments, but
      operating under program requirements that require the termination of assistance and
      recirculating of the assisted unit to another eligible program recipient at some
      predetermined future point in time that shall be no less than six months from the
      beginning of the assistance (Government Code 65582(h)). Transitional housing units
      must be considered residential uses subject only to those requirements and restrictions
      that apply to other residential uses of the same type in the same zone.
     Supportive Housing. Housing with no limit on length of stay, that is occupied by the
      target population, and that is linked to onsite or offsite service that assists the
      supportive housing resident in retaining the housing, improving his or her health
      status, and maximizing his or her ability to live and, when possible, work in the
      community (Government Code 65582(f)). Supportive housing units must be
      considered residential uses subject only to those requirements and restrictions that
      apply to other residential uses of the same type in the same zone.
Emergency shelters can provide a short-term solution to homelessness by providing limited
supplemental services, while transitional housing is directed toward removing the basis for
homelessness. Transitional housing is provided for an extended period, and is combined
with other social services and counseling to assist in the transition to self-sufficiency.
B-48                                                                       Adopted March 17, 2015

2015-2023 HOUSING ELEMENT                                                   CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON
The nature of the homeless population makes exact counting difficult. According to
Community Action of Napa Valley, in 2014 they served 29 American Canyon residents, up
from 24 in 2013. In addition, they have taken in three families.
The 2013 Napa City and County Continuum of Care is another source for information on
the homeless population. They documented that there were 68 unsheltered and 177
sheltered homeless in Napa County (245 total). Table 39 shows a summary of the
unsheltered and sheltered homeless.
                                                     TABLE 39
                 SUMMARY OF SHELTERED AND UNSHELTERED HOMELESS
                                                    NAPA COUNTY
                                                        2013
           Summary of Sheltered Data                              Summary of Unsheltered Data
  177 sheltered homeless                                   68 people counted in field count
  100 sheltered individuals                                68 unsheltered individuals
  77 sheltered persons in families                         0 unsheltered persons in families
  26 sheltered family households                           0 sheltered family households
  46 sheltered chronically homeless                        35 unsheltered chronically homeless
  9 sheltered veterans                                     10 unsheltered veterans
  Source: Napa City and County Continuum of Care, 2013.
The 2013 survey also illustrated that although the county contained 194 year-round active
beds, including 109 for households with children and 85 for singles, the potential need for
emergency shelter, transitional housing, and permanent supportive housing was 245 beds.
This leaves an approximate county need for 51 beds.
During the 2014 Point in Time (PIT) Count, conducted on January 29, 2014, 13 people
reported American Canyon as their last place of residence before becoming homeless. Of
these a third were 50 years or older, a third were between 25 and 50, and a third were under
25. None were under 18. The majority (38.5 percent) were White, followed by 23 percent
each Black/African American and American Indian/Alaskan Native; 53.8 percent were of
Hispanic or Latino ethnicity. Over half (53.8 percent) were female. Most (53.8 percent) spent
the night before the count outdoors or in the streets, 38.5 percent stayed in emergency
shelters, and 7.7 percent stayed in transitional housing. For 38.5 percent this was their first
time being homeless. Nearly half (46.2 percent) of the homeless population had previously
resided in a home or apartment rented alone or with a partner; 23.1 percent had lived with
friends or relatives. Only 7.7 percent had been homeless for more than a year. A third were
employed, a third were unemployed, and 7.7 percent had seasonal employment. Most (84.6
percent) claimed that they were a victim of domestic violence, stalking, or sexual assault.
The PIT count is typically an undercount of actual homeless persons, as the methodology in
Napa is for the outreach workers to travel around the county on the morning of the count
and identify who is physically present in certain key areas. However, this information
provides a sense of who was out on the morning of the count.
Adopted March 17, 2015                                                                          B-49
CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON                                           2015-2023 HOUSING ELEMENT
The City amended its Zoning Code December 2, 2014 to update the definitions of
transitional and supportive housing in order to comply with State law. The City also
amended the Code to comply with SB2 and provide sufficient housing options for the
homeless population including families in need of emergency housing. This is discussed
within the “Zoning for Variety of Housing” section of this document. Since American
Canyon shares a border with Vallejo, it is not inconceivable that the American Canyon could
see an increase due to a homeless migration from Vallejo to American Canyon. Since Vallejo
is within Solano County and not Napa County, American Canyon would cooperate with the
City of Vallejo, Solano County, and Napa County to address any migration and redirect
those individual to the appropriate facility. Some of the facilities in Vallejo include:
     House of Joy Transitional, 1106 Marin St., Vallejo 707-554-8800
     Homeless Shelter Napa Valley, 2521 Old Sonoma Rd., Napa 707-253-6145
     Baptist Church of Vallejo, 2025 Sonoma Blvd., Vallejo 707-644-4064
     The Salvation Army of Vallejo, 630-632 Tuolumne St., Vallejo 707-643-8621
Agencies Offering Public Assistance
Resources for the homeless in Napa County include the Napa Valley Shelter Program, the
Napa Emergency Women’s Services, the Hope Resource Center, the Sullivan Shelter, the
Samaritan Family Center, and the Winter Emergency Shelter (a leased wing at Napa State
Hospital). Meals are provided at Sally’s Salvation Army Lunchroom, the Table, and the
Seventh-Day Adventist Church. The non-profit Community Health Clinic Ole` sees patients
at the Hope Center twice a week. Other services are provided by Catholic Charities, the
Progress Foundation, the Cope Family Center, and Family Services of Napa County.
Napa Valley Community Housing, a local nonprofit organization, has a new development
(townhomes) that used Supportive Housing Program/funding (SHP) that required the
project to include four of the 17 units for transitional housing. There is also “NEWS” (Napa
Emergency Women's Services) that houses victims of domestic violence.
Catholic Charities offers a program called Rainbow House and a program called Housing
Options. The Rainbow House is a residential program for young single mothers who are 18
to 22 years of age and who are highly motivated to work toward financial and self-
sufficiency. The Housing Option Program helps individuals and families find suitable
housing; helps people interested in a shared housing arrangement; and provides housing
advocacy.
The Napa County Council for Economic Opportunity has a program called the Napa Valley
Shelter Project that provides homeless families and single adults assistance to move into
permanent housing and maintain current housing. Case managers at the shelter work with
clients on an action plan to obtain permanent housing and community support services.
B-50                                                                      Adopted March 17, 2015

2015-2023 HOUSING ELEMENT                                        CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON
The Napa County Council for Economic Opportunity also offers the following programs to
residents of Napa County:
     Samaritan Family Center provides temporary shelter and food for seven families up to
      30 persons.
     Sullivan Shelter provides temporary shelter and food for up to 40 persons a day.
     Winter Shelter operates during the winter months to provide emergency shelter.
     Rental Assistance program helps prevent homelessness among families and
      individuals by providing loan and grant assistance for housing expenses.
     Homeless Employment program works with homeless clients to provide training and
      job placement.
     Family Advocacy program assists homeless families with parenting classes and life-
      skill classes.
     American Canyon Family Resource Center works collaboratively with community
      partners to bring together resources and activities into an integrated service system
      that is accessible and responsive.
The Napa County Council for Economic Opportunity also runs the County Food Bank and
offers the following programs:
     Brown Bag program is a food program providing a bag containing 10 to 14 items twice
      a month to seniors 60 years of age and older who are low income.
     USDA commodities are provided to low-income people once a month. Distribution is
      handled by agencies that have agreements with the food bank.
     Calistoga Cares distributes staples, bread, and produce to low-income families in
      Calistoga.
     Emergency Food Pantry distributes food consisting of staples, bread, and produce to
      low-income individuals in crises. Individuals must have a referral from a church or
      service agency.
Residents of Mobile Home Parks
Residents of mobile home parks are not usually considered a special needs group per se, but
mobile homes represent a significant portion of American Canyon’s housing stock—more
than 14 percent of dwelling units (787 homes as of 2011). The issues and challenges facing
mobile home park residents are substantially different from those of either owners or
renters of site-built housing. The special needs of mobile home park residents result from
the following circumstances:
Adopted March 17, 2015                                                                     B-51

CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON                                          2015-2023 HOUSING ELEMENT
     Most residents have incomes below 80 percent of the countywide median income and
      are elderly, retired, and/or disabled and living on limited pension, social security,
      and/or public assistance income.
     Mobile home residents typically own their homes but rent the spaces on which these
      homes are located. Many residents also pay directly to the park owner for public and
      private utility services. As a result, mobile home residents have less control over their
      housing costs than do other owner-occupants.
     Unlike other forms of housing, mobile homes typically decline in real value with age,
      rather than appreciate. The value of a mobile home is linked to the condition,
      amenities, and cost of the park in which it is located. Even a well-maintained, high-
      value mobile home will suffer a significant decline in value if the park in which it is
      located does not offer superior value and amenities in relation to other parks in the
      community.
A significant percentage of mobile homes in American Canyon are estimated to be more
than 30 years old. Some of these homes are nearly 40 years old and were manufactured prior
to the adoption of minimum State and Federal standards for manufactured housing. Older
mobile homes tend to require more substantive repair and rehabilitation sooner than do site
built homes of comparable age. The feasibility and cost-effectiveness of rehabilitating mobile
homes is often much lower than for site-built homes; however, HCD offers the Mobile
Home Park Resident Ownership Program (MPROP) to assist resident organizations, non-
profit housing providers, or local public agencies to acquire and own mobile home parks.
This program offers short- and long-term 3 percent interest loans for the purchase or
rehabilitation of a mobile home park.
Mobile home owners often face additional challenges in obtaining financing for repairs,
although new private, State, and Federal lending programs adopted over the past 20 years
have reduced the financing gap relative to homes attached to real property.
In theory, mobile homes can be relocated; however, the cost of doing so is often
disproportionate to the value of the home. Additionally older mobile homes can suffer
significant damage during a move. Mobile home owners are, therefore, limited in their
options when faced with financial difficulties; most cannot simply pick up their mobile
homes and move.
The combination of these factors has prompted many communities to establish financial
assistance programs and rent control procedures specifically oriented to mobile home park
residents and owners. Inspection programs are also done by the State. To address the
potential problem of the “permanence” of the location of mobile home parks, the City has
established a mobile home park overlay district (MHP) as well as a Mobile Home
Conversion Ordinance and a Rent Stabilization Ordinance. Purposes of this district include
protecting mobile home parks from speculative pressures to convert to other uses,
designation of appropriate areas of the city for mobile home parks, ensuring adequate park
B-52                                                                     Adopted March 17, 2015

2015-2023 HOUSING ELEMENT                                        CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON
design and residential environment, and achieving design compatibility with surrounding
residential areas. Chapter 19.34, Conversions of Senior Housing to Non-Senior Housing,
establishes necessary and appropriate policies related to conversion of senior housing
projects to non-senior housing projects.
In 2001 the American Canyon City Council approved a mobile home rent control ordinance
(Measure T). Under the ordinance rents were rolled back to 1996 levels and then increased
by adding 3 percent per year, or 75 percent of the annual increase in the Consumer Price
Index (CPI), whichever is lower. The measure restricts annual rent increases to the CPI or a
cap of 3 percent.
E. Opportunities for Energy Conservation
Government Code Section 65583(a)(7) requires that the assessment of current housing needs
and resources includes an analysis of opportunities for energy conservation for residential
development. The Housing Element must inventory and analyze energy-saving features,
materials, systems, and practices that reduce residential costs. These features can help
reduce housing costs for residents by lowering the cost of living associated with extended
commute times, bills associated with energy consumption, and development costs that can
influence the cost of housing. Methods that seek to save energy can not only reduce the cost
of living, but also help mitigate negative environmental effects caused by development.
The City of American Canyon continues to encourage energy conservation in new housing
and existing housing. This energy conservation can be in the form of water, electric, gas, or
any other amenity which helps to power a home. Construction of energy-efficient buildings
does not lower the price of housing; however, housing with energy-conservation features
should result in reduced monthly occupancy costs due to decreased consumption of fuel
and energy. Similarly, retrofitting existing structures with energy-conserving features can
result in a reduction in utility costs. Examples of energy-conservation opportunities include
weatherization programs and home energy audits; installation of insulation; installation or
retrofitting of more efficient appliances and mechanical or solar energy systems; and
building design and orientation that incorporates energy conservation considerations.
In December 2012 the City adopted an Energy Efficiency Climate Action Plan. The plan
includes implementation measures for improving residential energy efficiency. Among the
measures are provisions for a residential energy efficiency checklist, targeted energy
efficiency outreach, and programs to encourage renewable energy systems. The City also
became a Home Energy Renovation Opportunity (HERO) community in November 2014.
HERO is a property assessed clean energy (PACE) program that allows financing for energy
efficiency upgrades and renewable energy to be paid with property taxes.
Land Use and Planning
Planning through effective land use decisions can be another way to achieve conservation of
material including minimizing their impacts on the environment and reducing housing
Adopted March 17, 2015                                                                    B-53
CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON                                         2015-2023 HOUSING ELEMENT
costs. The city has multiple constraints, which have influenced where residential
development could be located, such as Highway 29 which bisects the city; strict
development restrictions from the airport’s flyover zones to the north; Vallejo’s limits
directly to the south; natural constraints to the east and west; and an Urban Limit line
agreement with the County of Napa which restricts the city’s ability to expand outward.
With all of these restrictions, land use planning has been crucial. During the planning stage
of the review, City staff applies mitigation and low impact development measures to the
project design that seek to mitigate excess usage and demand on City services, such as water
(potable and non-potable), sewer, and other utilities. A proposed Highway 29 Priority
Development Area Specific Plan will include multimodal means of transportation to avoid
excessive use of automobiles, reducing carbon emissions from car exhaust. Housing projects
located adjacent to commercial centers will encourage pedestrian access to potential jobs,
services, and amenities. By locating high-density housing close to areas of employment, not
only are commute times and Vehicle Miles Traveled (VMT) reduced, but the use of existing
resources and residential land is maximized as well.
In 2008 the American Canyon City Council approved a “Zero Water Footprint” for the city.
This resolution addressed the growing concern for new development to conserve potable
water supply while minimizing the impact and demand for existing uses. This is addressed
in more detail within the Adequate Infrastructure and Resources section of this document.
Building Materials
Many modern design methods used to reduce residential energy consumption are based on
proven techniques. These techniques can be categorized in three ways:
    1. Building design that keeps natural heat in during the winter and keeps natural heat
        out during the summer. Such design reduces air conditioning and heating demands.
        Proven building techniques in this category include:
           o  Location of windows and openings in relation to the path of the sun to
              minimize solar gain in the summer and maximize solar gain in the winter;
           o  Use of “thermal mass,” earthen materials such as stone, brick, concrete, and
              tiles that absorb heat during the day and release heat at night;
           o  “Burying” part of the home in a hillside or berm to reduce solar exposure or to
              insulate the home against extremes of temperature;
           o  Use of window coverings, insulation, and other materials to reduce heat
              exchange between the interior of a home and the exterior;
           o  Location of openings and the use of ventilating devices that take advantage of
              natural air flow (particularly cool evening breezes); and,
           o  Use of eaves and overhangs that block direct solar gain through window
              openings during the summer but allow solar gain during the winter.
B-54                                                                     Adopted March 17, 2015

2015-2023 HOUSING ELEMENT                                        CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON
    2. Building orientation that uses natural forces to maintain a comfortable interior
       temperature. Examples include:
           o   Orienting the long axis of a building north-south;
           o   Minimizing the southern and western exposure of exterior surfaces; and
           o   Locating dwellings to take advantage of natural air circulation and evening
               breezes.
    3. Use of landscaping features to moderate interior temperatures. Such techniques
       include:
           o   Use of deciduous shade trees and other plants to protect the home;
           o   Use of natural or artificial flowing water; and
           o   Use of trees and hedges as windbreaks.
In addition to natural techniques that have been used for millennia, a number of modern
methods of energy conservation have been developed or advanced during the present
century. These items seek to conserve energy and to reduce environmental impacts and any
potential health risk to individuals. Materials and practices can include:
     Using solar energy to heat water;
     Using solar panels and other devices to generate electricity;
     Using energy efficient home appliances; and
     Using Green Building materials such as bamboo flooring, paint with little or no
      Volatile organic compounds (VOC), and materials that have been recycled such as
      wood for construction or aggregate for driveways
State Building Code Standards
The California Energy Commission was created in 1974 by the Warren-Alquist State Energy
Resources Conservation and Development Act (Public Resources Code 25000 et seq.).
Among the requirements of the new law was a directive for the Commission to adopt
energy conservation standards for new construction. The first residential energy
conservation standards were developed in the late 1970s (Title 24, Part 6 of the California
Code of Regulations) and have been periodically revised and refined since that time.
In 2010 the State of California Building Standards Commission published and mandated
CalGreen, which was most recently updated in 2013. The 2013 California Green Building
Standards Code (“CalGreen”) became effective throughout the state on January 1, 2014.
CalGreen creates uniform regulations for new residential and non-residential California
buildings that are intended to reduce construction waste, make buildings more efficient in
the use of materials and energy, and reduce environmental impacts during and after
construction. Residential buildings subject to CalGreen include multifamily residences and
Adopted March 17, 2015                                                                    B-55

CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON                                          2015-2023 HOUSING ELEMENT
one-and two-family dwellings that have three or fewer stories. The City adopted the 2013
California Green Building Code.
Energy Conservation Incentives
In 2004 the State of California adopted legislation requiring Leadership in Energy and
Environmental Design (LEED) certification for new and renovated public buildings.
There are multiple sources for the funding and assistance of energy conservation for
residential development. Four main sources of funding include:
     Federal grants, loan, and tax credits from the Department of Energy and the
      Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD).
     California agencies that offer the same types of funding include: The Department of
      Housing and Community Development (HCD), California Housing Finance Agency
      (CalHFA), California Energy Commission, and the Public Utilities Commission.
     Local government funding from the City, Housing Authority, and Housing Trusts.
     Other sources such as utility companies, foundations, non-profit organizations, and
      other building organizations.
PG&E Programs
The service provider for American Canyon is Pacific Gas and Electric (PG&E). PG&E has
programs aimed at assisting low-income, disabled, and senior citizen customers through
numerous programs and community outreach projects. These programs include, but are not
limited to:
     California Alternate Rates for Energy (CARE) program which provides a 20 percent
      discount on monthly bills for qualified low- or fixed-income households and housing
      facilities. Qualifications are based on the number of people living in the home and
      total annual household income.
     Energy Partners Program, which provides qualified low-income customers free
      weatherization measures and energy-efficient appliances to reduce gas and electricity
      usage.
     Family Electric Rate Assistance (FERA) which is PG&E’s rate reduction program for
      large households of three or more people with low to middle income.
     Low-Income Home Energy Assistance Program (LIHEAP), which is funded by the
      Federal government and the State Department of Community Services & Development
      (CSD) administers LIHEAP. The Federal Department of Health and Human Services
      distributes funds to states annually to assist with energy bills and offset heating and/or
      cooling energy costs for eligible low-income households. California’s annual share is
B-56                                                                     Adopted March 17, 2015

2015-2023 HOUSING ELEMENT                                        CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON
      approximately $89 million, which CSD distributes to contracted community energy
      service providers.
     Medical Baseline Allowance provides residential customers the ability to receive
      additional quantities of energy at the lowest (baseline) price. To qualify for Medical
      Baseline, a California-licensed physician must certify that a full-time resident in the
      home has a serious medical condition such as being dependent on life-support
      equipment while at home.
     Relief for Energy Assistance through Community Help (REACH) is a one-time energy-
      assistance program sponsored by PG&E and administered through the Salvation
      Army from 170 offices in Northern and Central California. Those who have
      experienced an uncontrollable or unforeseen hardship may receive an energy grant of
      up to $300. Generally, recipients can receive REACH assistance only once within a 12-
      month period, but exceptions can be made for seniors, the physically challenged, and
      the terminally ill.
F. Analysis of At-Risk Units
California Housing Element Law requires jurisdictions to include a study of low-income
assisted housing units that are eligible to convert to market rate during the next 10 years
due to termination of subsidy contracts, mortgage payment, or expiration of restricted use
(Government Code 65583). State law requires housing elements to assess at-risk housing in
order to project any potential loss of affordable housing.
Recent affordable housing projects such as Vineyard Crossing and Vineyard Place, received
subsidies for their affordable units; however, they are at the beginning of their subsidy
contracts and do not risk conversion within this planning period. The Lodge at Napa
Junction provided 22 affordable units, but the affordability restrictions expired in October
2014. Vineyard Crossings, a 144-unit development for households with 55 percent of the
AMI, was funded by LIHTC, but is owned by MidPen, an established non-profit. The only
assisted rental housing in American Canyon that is at risk of converting to market rate is
Canyon Manor. Canyon Manor has an existing Affordable Housing Agreement providing
10 units at low-income rents for 30 years, until 2021. None of the at-risk units are senior
housing units.
Preservation Strategies
There are many options for preserving units, including providing financial incentives to
project owners to extend low-income use restrictions, purchasing affordable housing units
by a non-profit or public agency, or providing local subsidies to offset the difference
between the affordable and market rate rents. Scenarios for preservation will depend on the
type of project at risk.
Adopted March 17, 2015                                                                       B-57

  CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON                                                          2015-2023 HOUSING ELEMENT
  Local Rent Subsidy
  Tenant-based subsidies could be used to preserve the affordability of housing. Similar to
  Housing Choice Vouchers, the City, through a variety of potential funding sources, could
  potentially provide a voucher to lower-income households. The level of subsidy required to
  preserve at-risk affordable housing through rent subsidies is estimated to equal the Fair
  Market Rent for a unit minus the housing cost affordable by a lower-income household.
  Canyon Manor has 10 two-bedroom affordable units. As shown in Table 40, approximately
  $2,510 monthly or $30,120 annually would be required to subsidize rents for the current at-
  risk inventory of 10 units. The subsidy for 10 years would be $301,200, while a subsidy for
  30 years would be $903,600.
                                                     TABLE 40
                                        RENTAL SUBSIDIES REQUIRED
                                                 AMERICAN CANYON
                                                          2014
                                                               Low-Income                                  Total
 Unit       Total      Fair Market        Household                                     Monthly per
                                                                Affordable                               Monthly
 Size       Units          Rent1              Size                                     Unit Subsidy
                                                             Housing Cost                               Subsidy
2-br             10             $1,414                3                      $1,163                $251       $2,510
  1
   Fair Market Rent (FMR) is determined by HUD.
  Source: HUD Fair Market Rents, 2014; HUD Income Limits, 2014; and City of American Canyon, 2014.
  Acquisition
  Another option to maintain the number of affordable units in American Canyon is to
  purchase the 10 units and provide them at an affordable rate. However, because the 10
  affordable units available at Canyon Manor are a part of a larger housing development,
  acquisition is not feasible.
  Replacement
  The cost of preserving existing rental housing is far less than the cost of producing new
  rental housing comparable in size and rent levels. Total development costs of two recent
  Napa Valley Community Housing family apartments in the City of Napa (Magnolia Park in
  2005 and Yountville in 2010) were $317,000 and $320,000 per unit. The larger mixed income
  Alexander Crossings Apartments cost $225,000 per unit, while pro formas for two other
  approved but not yet built affordable projects are $294,000 per unit for Napa Creekside and
  $357,000 per unit for Oak Creek Terrace. Assuming an average cost of $300,000 per unit, the
  estimated cost to replace the 10 at-risk units would be $3 million.
  Cost Comparison
  The most costly option is the construction of new affordable units. With increased
  requirements in local, State, and Federal government requirements, the time and costs
  involved in new construction are far more extensive than purchasing existing units and
  B-58                                                                                      Adopted March 17, 2015
2015-2023 HOUSING ELEMENT                                                      CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON
converting them into affordable housing, or than providing rent subsidies. Providing rental
assistance generally requires the least upfront costs. However, a sustainable funding source
must be identified for this option to be feasible.
The following nonprofit housing developers are active in Napa Valley and could assist the
City in the preservation of at-risk units: Napa Valley Community Housing, Ecumenical
Association for Housing, and Bridge Housing. There are also private developers in the Napa
Valley, including owners of rental apartments with subsidies or other rent restrictions, who
might be interested in participating in their preservation. Such developers may have access
to State and Federal tax credit funding. Potential funding sources to assist in the
preservation of at-risk units include Community Development Block Grants, tax credits, and
HOME funds. HCD also has a multifamily housing program that provides deferred
payment loans for acquisition and rehabilitation of at risk units.
California Government Code Section 65863.10 requires that owners of Federally-assisted
properties provide notices of intent to convert their properties to market rate 12 months
prior and again at 6 months prior to the expiration of their contract, opt-outs, or
prepayment. Owners must provide notices of intent to public agencies, including HCD and
the local public housing authority, as well as to all impacted tenant households. The six-
month notice must include specific information on the owner’s plans, timetables, and
reasons for termination. Under Government Code Section 65863.11, owners of Federally-
assisted projects must provide a Notice of Opportunity to Submit an Offer to Purchase to
Qualified Entities, non-profit or for-profit organizations that agree to preserve the long-term
affordability if they should acquire at-risk projects, at least one year before the sale or
expiration of use restrictions. Qualified entities have first right of refusal for acquiring at-
risk units. HCD keeps a current list of all of the qualified entities across the state. The
qualified entities that HCD lists for Napa County are found in Table 41.
                                                   TABLE 41
                                              QUALIFIED ENTITIES
                                                  NAPA COUNTY
                                                        2013
                        Organization                                    City                 Phone Number
Affordable Housing Foundation                                    San Francisco                       (415) 387-7834
Christian Church Homes of Northern California, Inc.              Oakland                             (510) 632-6714
Housing Corporation of America                                   Laguna Beach                        (323) 726-9672
Nehemiah Progressive Housing Dev. Corp.                          Sacramento                          (916) 231-1999
Petaluma Ecumenical Properties Inc.                              Petaluma                            (707) 762-2336
Rural California Housing Corp                                    West Sacramento                     (916) 447-2854
Sacramento-Yolo Mutual Housing Association                       Sacramento                    (916) 453-8400 x219
Solano Affordable Housing Foundation                             Fairfield                           (707) 422-5919
Vallejo Neighborhood Housing Services, Inc                       Vallejo                             (707) 552-4663
Source: California Department of Housing and Community Development, <www.hcd.ca.gov/hpd/hrc/tech/presrv/hpd00-01.xls>,
December 30, 2013.
Adopted March 17, 2015                                                                                          B-59

      CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON                                            2015-2023 HOUSING ELEMENT
      The City does contain houses that are currently under contract with the City and the Napa
      Housing Authority to allow the sale and transfer to qualified buyers. Any sale or transfer of
      these homes must be released and approved by both the City of American Canyon and the
      Housing Authority. Table 42 shows these homes, by APN, address, associated project
      approval, and their purchase price.
                                                  TABLE 42
                                        AFFORDABLE FOR-SALE HOUSING
                                               AMERICAN CANYON
                                                      2014
       APN          St #     Street Address     Project     Building Final Closing Date Purchase Price
059150051000           8  Bethany Drive       Chesapeake           12/06/01       04/12/02         $217,600
059280041000          14 Bethany Drive        Chesapeake           06/18/02       06/27/02         $217,600
059280038000          20 Bethany Drive        Chesapeake           06/18/02       06/14/02         $217,600
059280034000          26 Bethany Drive        Chesapeake           06/06/02       06/14/02         $217,600
059150034000           9  Karen Drive         Chesapeake           01/30/02       02/18/05         $281,117
059150037000          15 Karen Drive          Chesapeake           01/30/02       02/18/05         $281,140
059280012000          21 Karen Drive          Chesapeake           03/22/02       01/26/07         $285,315
059280017000          29 Karen Drive          Chesapeake           03/22/02       03/22/02         $217,600
059280028000           4  Michael Lane        Chesapeake           06/05/02       06/21/02         $217,600
059280025000          10 Michael Lane         Chesapeake           04/09/02       04/30/02         $217,600
059280022000          16 Michael Lane         Chesapeake           04/03/02       07/30/02         $217,600
059141018000         772 Spring Mountain Ln Heritage Park          12/21/00       12/30/03         $241,680
059141015000         784 Spring Mountain Ln Heritage Park          12/29/00       02/28/01         $190,000
059141009000         808 Spring Mountain Ln Heritage Park          05/08/01       06/17/04         $252,092
059141005000         824 Spring Mountain Ln Heritage Park          05/16/01       06/08/01         $190,000
059142003000         708 Westpark             Heritage Park        12/12/00       01/19/01         $190,000
059142006000         720 Westpark             Heritage Park        12/12/00       03/09/01         $190,000
059142009000         732 Westpark             Heritage Park        12/11/00       12/06/00         $190,000
Source: Napa Housing Authority, October 2014.
      Two properties that were under contract with the Napa Housing Authority were lost to
      foreclosure. Three properties that were under contract with the Napa Housing Authority,
      772 Spring Mountain, 8 Bethany Drive, and 21 Karen Drive, were purchased by the City of
      American Canyon to preserve the affordability covenants. They are still affordable and thus
      still included in the list. The City has them under contract with a property management
      company.
      B-60                                                                       Adopted March 17, 2015
2015-2023 HOUSING ELEMENT                                                    CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON
III. Projected Housing Needs
A. Regional Housing Needs Determination
Each region of the State is assigned a regional housing need by HCD. State law requires
Councils of Governments (COGs) to prepare regional housing needs plans (RHNP) that
assign a share of a region’s housing need to each city and county (Government Code 65584).
The Association of Bay Area Governments (ABAG) prepared the RHNP for Bay Area
jurisdictions in 2014, identifying each jurisdiction's future housing need for an 8.8-year
period beginning January 1, 2014, and ending on October 21, 2022. Each jurisdiction’s
housing need is based on a number of factors that include housing development potential
from vacant land, housing replacement need, and proximity to transit infrastructure. The
exact amount of housing needed is called the Regional Housing Needs Allocation (RHNA).
The City of American Canyon must show that it has enough land to accommodate housing
development to meet the RHNA. The City must also identify policies and implementation
programs to facilitate the construction of new housing. The RHNA is not meant to be a
quota or requirement for the development of housing. Instead, the City must attempt to
facilitate and accommodate the construction of housing to meet the RHNA allocation
through zoning and other policies.
According to the ABAG RHNA, the City of American Canyon has a total housing need of
392 units between 2014 and 2022, or an annual need of about 44 housing units. American
Canyon’s planning period allocation is shown in Table 43 below.
                                                   TABLE 43
                              REGIONAL HOUSING NEED ALLOCATION
                                                AMERICAN CANYON
                                                    2014-2022
                                                    Number of Housing             Percent of Housing
              Income Category                                Units                           Units
   Very Low (0-50% of AMI)                                                  116                    29.6%
   Low (51-80% of AMI)                                                       54                    13.8%
   Moderate (81-120% of AMI)                                                 58                    14.8%
   Above Moderate (over 120% of AMI)                                        164                    41.8%
   Total Units                                                              392                    100%
   AMI = Average Median Income
   Source: Association of Bay Area Governments (ABAG) 2014-2022 Regional Needs Housing Plan, 2014.
The RHNP did not assign an extremely low-income (ELI) housing need for the City of
American Canyon. In accordance with Government Code 65583(a)(1), local agencies shall
calculate the subset of ELI households either using existing data or presume that 50 percent
of the very low-income (VLI) households quantify as ELI households. Since the VLI housing
need is 116 units, this would calculate a demand of 58 units for ELI and 58 for the VLI.
Adopted March 17, 2015                                                                                 B-61

CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON                                       2015-2023 HOUSING ELEMENT
IV. Sites Inventory and Analysis
A. Approved Projects and Units Under Construction
Since the RHNA projection period begins January 1, 2014, American Canyon’s RHNA can
be reduced by the number of new units approved or planned as of January 1, 2014. City staff
compiled an inventory of all residential projects with a housing component that are (as of
January 1, 2014) approved or planned and anticipated to be built by the end of the current
RHNA projection period. For approved and planned projects, deed-restricted affordable
units are inventoried as lower-income. All other units are inventoried as moderate- and
above moderate-income units based on the recent sales prices of surrounding homes.
Approved projects and units under construction are shown in Figure 2 and Table 44. The
Map ID column in Table 44 corresponds with the labels in Figure 2. There are 385 units in
approved and planned projects, including 59 deed-restricted lower-income units.
B-62                                                                  Adopted March 17, 2015

       2015-2023 HOUSING ELEMENT                                       CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON
                                                    TABLE 44
                                       APPROVED AND PLANNED PROJECTS
                                      Moderate-
                                     and Above           Very
Map         Project        Total      Moderate-  Low-    Low-
  ID         Name          Units       Income   Income Income                   Status/Notes
                                                                Approved on August 26, this apartment
         Canyon                                                 complex is located north of Wal-Mart
         Ridge                                                  Supercenter. The project includes eight deed-
A        Apartments           148           140       8         restricted low-income units in perpetuity.
                                                                Infrastructure has been installed; however,
                                                                construction has halted due to the decline in
                                                                the housing market. Developer originally
                                                                received approval in 2005. The City bought
                                                                the land from the original developer in 2009
                                                                and will develop the property as a senior
                                                                affordable housing project. At least 34 of the
                                                                70 units will be rent-restricted to very low-
B        Valley Vista          70            36              34 income households.
                                                                Originally approved in June 2006, the Village
                                                                at Vintage Ranch was formerly known as the
                                                                Canyon Rock Apartments project. The land
                                                                changed ownership in December 2012 and
                                                                plans are moving forward for 164 town
                                                                homes, condos, and apartment units. The
         Village at                                             project includes 17 deed-restricted low-
         Vintage                                                income housing units and 4 deed-restricted
C        Ranch                164           147      17         moderate-income units.
                                                                The Rio Del Mar project is entitled for three
                                                                single family dwelling units with no deed
D        Rio Del Mar             3            3                 restrictions.
Total                         385           326      25      34
Source: City of American Canyon, 2014.
       B. Inventory of Land Suitable for Residential Development
       State Law requires the housing element to include an inventory of land suitable for
       residential development (Government Code Section 65583(a)(3)). An important purpose of
       this inventory is to determine whether a jurisdiction has zoned sufficient land for the
       development of housing to meet the jurisdiction’s share of the regional housing need,
       including housing to accommodate the needs of all household income levels.
       This section provides an analysis of the land available within the city of American Canyon
       for residential development. In addition to assessing the quantity of land available to
       accommodate the City’s total housing needs, this section also considers the availability of
       sites to accommodate a variety of housing types suitable for households with a range of
       income levels and housing needs.
       The City identified all vacant and underutilized sites in zones that allow residential
       development by right. Underutilized (or underdeveloped) parcels are defined as those
       Adopted March 17, 2015                                                                        B-63

CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON                                           2015-2023 HOUSING ELEMENT
where a portion of the site is vacant and there is development potential, or where there are
older or low-value uses with the potential to be redeveloped within the Housing Element
time frame. Parcels that are vacant or underutilized, but are not suitable for residential
development, were not included in the inventory. These parcels have constraints that
restrict any potential housing development from being constructed.
All identified developable land designated for residential use is considered available for
residential development. Additionally, lands within the Community Commercial (CC) and
Neighborhood Commercial (NC) designations are also considered available for residential
development with the application of a use permit.
Realistic Capacity Analysis for Vacant and Underutilized Lands
All non-vacant or underutilized sites were calculated using existing site conditions and
development standards. The sites were reviewed with the use of recent aerial photography
and on-site inspections. The City calculated the total amount of potential housing on each
site taking into consideration a variety of factors, including the zoning development
standards, site constraints, and recent development trends. Due to these standards and
development constraints, many vacant parcels cannot achieve the maximum densities
allowed by their land use designation. This is most common in parcels that are less than an
acre, in which the maximum unit count cannot be calculated due to zoning restrictions for
minimum parcel size. For example, a low-density zone that allows a maximum of 8 units
per acre with a minimum lot size of 5,000 square feet would likely not achieve maximum
density. As a result, many of the low-density sites within the city will not be developed to
the maximum permitted density outlined within the General Plan.
This section includes a detailed inventory of each parcel. In accordance with Government
Code Section 65583.2(a)(3), the inventory lists each non-vacant property (i.e., capable of
being developed at a higher density) as “underutilized.” The inventory describes each
parcel’s capacity to accommodate development, infrastructure, onsite constraints that would
prevent development, and other notes. Since most of the vacant and underutilized sites are
located within developed areas, the feasibility and suitability is high due to the developer’s
ability to expand on existing infrastructure. All of the sites listed on the inventory could be
developed within the planning period.
A majority of the vacant and underutilized sites are contained within the Residential Estates
(RE), Residential Medium (RM), and Commercial districts with residential overlays. All of
the parcels included in the inventory are above the minimum parcel size to allow residential
development. Most of the sites in the lower-density residential lots (RE and RR)
designations are vacant single family residential infill lots capable of accommodating one to
two units. These lots meet the minimum lot size and are already subdivided with
supporting infrastructure.
B-64                                                                      Adopted March 17, 2015

2015-2023 HOUSING ELEMENT                                       CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON
The inventory does not include parcels less than a quarter-acre in size or parcels with
varying width, depth, or overall configuration problems that would make it difficult to
achieve the minimum allowed density. Lot consolidation is an option for these parcels, but
the City cannot force the merger of legal parcels between multiple owners. The City can,
however, provide incentives for lot consolidation to develop affordable housing. Such
incentives could include density bonuses, use of the City’s Housing Fund, expedited permit
processing, waived, reduced, or deferred fees, and negotiation of alternative development
standards through a planned development process.
To identify sites that can accommodate a local government’s share of the RHNA for lower-
income households, housing elements must include an analysis that demonstrates the
appropriate density to encourage and facilitate the development of housing for lower-
income households. The statute (Government Code Section 65583.2(c)(3)) provides two
options for demonstrating appropriate densities:
     Provide a detailed market-based analysis demonstrating how the adopted densities
      accommodate this need. The analysis shall include, but is not limited to, factors such
      as market demand, financial feasibility, or information based on development project
      experience within a zone or zones that provide housing for lower-income households.
     Use the “default density standards” that are “deemed appropriate” in State law to
      accommodate housing for lower-income households given the type of the jurisdiction.
      American Canyon is considered a “suburban jurisdiction” with a default density
      standard of 20 units per acre. HCD is required to accept sites that allow for zoning at
      this density as appropriate for accommodating American Canyon’s share of the
      regional housing need for lower-income households.
American Canyon has opted to rely on the default density standard of 20 units per acre to
demonstrate it has adequate sites to accommodate the lower-income share of the RHNA. All
sites were inventoried based on allowed densities. If the maximum allowed density was
equal to or exceeded the default density standard of 20 units per acre, the site was
inventoried as feasible for lower-income. This would include sites designated High Density
Residential (RH-2), but there are no vacant/underutilized sites with this designation. The
only other sites that meet/exceed the default density standard are the Neighborhood
Commercial and Community Commercial designations, provided they are within the
residential overlay. All sites within zones that do not meet the default density standard
were inventoried as both moderate- and above moderate-income units. Table 45 below
describes the relationship between the zoning of the vacant/underutilized sites and the
inventoried income category.
Adopted March 17, 2015                                                                     B-65

CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON                                                 2015-2023 HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                TABLE 45
                       DENSITY AND INVENTORIED INCOME CATEGORIES
                                   Corresponding             General Plan
                                                                                    Inventoried
    Zoning District                 General Plan            Density Range
                                                                                 Income Category
                                     Designation            (units per acre)
                                                                                 Moderate- and Above
  Rural Estate               Rural Estate                                1-2        Moderate-Income
  Rural Residential-                                                             Moderate- and Above
  20,000                     Residential Low                             2-5        Moderate-Income
  Rural Residential-                                                             Moderate- and Above
  10,000                     Residential Low                             2-5        Moderate-Income
  Suburban                                                                       Moderate- and Above
  Residential-8000           Residential Low                             2-5        Moderate-Income
  Suburban                                                                       Moderate- and Above
  Residential-6500           Residential Low                             2-5        Moderate-Income
                                                                                 Moderate- and Above
  Medium Residential Medium Residential                                 5 - 12      Moderate-Income
  Neighborhood
  Commercial (with           Neighborhood
  Residential                Commercial
  Overlay)                   (with Residential Overlay)             Max of 20           Lower-Income
  Community
  Commercial (with
  Residential                Community Commercial
  Overlay)                   (with Residential Overlay)                Varies1          Lower-Income
  1General Plan Policy 1.14.2 allows for 20 units per acre. The residential portion of a mixed-use
  project is permitted to be a floor area ratio of 1.0, with the remainder for commercial uses. West
  of Highway 29 residential is allowed on 50 percent of site at 20 units per acre. East of Highway
  29 residential is allowed on 60 percent of site at 35 units per acre.
  Source: City of American Canyon, 2014.
Residential development within a commercial zone is allowed “by-right” within the
residential overlays, using the same developmental standards as the High Density
designations and would include such housing types as apartments, condominiums,
townhomes, and senior centers. Sites zoned Community Commercial with the residential
overlay can be developed with residential on 50 percent of the site at 20 dwelling units per
acre for parcels west of Highway 29 and 60 percent of the site at 35 dwelling units per acre
for parcels east of Highway 29. Sites zoned Neighborhood Commercial with the residential
overlay can be developed as stand-alone residential at 20 units per gross acre. For other
commercial sites not within a residential overlay, residential can only be developed on 25
percent of the site at 20 dwelling units per acre. Residential development is allowed by-right
in commercial areas subject to standards set forth in General Plan Policies 1.14.1, 1.14.2
(CN), and 1.15.1 (CC).
General Plan Policy 1.14.1 states that the Neighborhood Commercial designation
“accommodate[s] multifamily dwelling units at a density of 20 units per gross acre on
selected sites subject to the Residential Overlay District, generally in conjunction with
Neighborhood Commercial uses. Mixed-use structures with commercial uses (i.e., retail) on
B-66                                                                             Adopted March 17, 2015

2015-2023 HOUSING ELEMENT                                         CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON
the bottom floor and residential uses on upper floor(s), live-work lofts, and/or commercial
uses along the highway frontage and multifamily residential behind are encouraged.”
General Plan Policy 1.14.2 states that the Neighborhood Commercial designation also
“accommodate[s] the development of commercial uses at a maximum density of a floor area
ratio of 0.35 and height of two (2) stories. On selected parcels, a maximum floor area ratio of
1.5 is permitted for mixed-use projects and height of 3 stories east of Broadway/Highway 29.
The residential portion of a mixed-use project is permitted to be a floor area ratio of 1.0, with
the remainder for commercial uses (I 1.1, 1.4, 1.5, and 1.8).”
General Plan Policy 1.14.2 states that in the Community Commercial designation, “up to 25
percent of a site may be developed with multifamily dwelling units at a density of 16 to 20
units per gross acre, but only in conjunction with permitted commercial uses on the ground
floor or on parcels without Highway 29 frontage. Structures used solely for residential
purposes may not front on the highway. On selected parcels subject to the Residential
Overlay District, up to 50 percent of a site may be developed with multifamily dwelling
units at a density of 20 units per gross acre west of Broadway/Highway 29, and up to 60
percent of a site may be developed with multifamily dwelling units at a density of 35 units
per gross acre east of Broadway/Highway 29. Mixed-use structures with commercial uses
(i.e., retail) on the bottom floor and residential uses on upper floors, live-work lofts, and/or
commercial uses along the highway frontage and multifamily residential behind are
encouraged (I 1.1, 1.4, 1.5, 1.8, and 1.19).”
It is also important to recognize that purely residential projects are allowed in the
Community Commercial District at a density of 16-20 units per acre on properties that front
on Melvin Road to the west. This allows for direct access onto a city street under the
jurisdiction of the City, rather than a State Highway under the jurisdiction of Caltrans. In
addition, the City has committed to approving density bonuses for affordable housing
projects in conjunction with a mixed-use project.
Parcels within the residential overlay were initially chosen because they are mostly
undeveloped, larger lots that could accommodate mixed-use and higher-density housing
without the need for lot mergers or additional land that may be more costly to future
developers. The entire Highway 29 corridor is being studied by the City for its future
development potential to include mixed-use and high-density housing for multiple income
groups. These studies will assist the City in preparing a Specific Plan for the Highway 29
corridor, for which there is already a Stakeholder and Citizens Advisory Committee.
Table 46 shows the American Canyon sites inventory, which includes all vacant and
underutilized parcels that were counted towards meeting the RHNA. For each parcel the
table includes the zoning, general plan designation, acres, units counted towards the
RHNA, infrastructure capacity, and site notes. The Map ID column corresponds with the
labels shown in Figure 2.
Adopted March 17, 2015                                                                       B-67

CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON                2015-2023 HOUSING ELEMENT
This page is intentionally left blank.
B-68                                           Adopted March 17, 2015
      Figure 2:
      Vacant and Underutilized
                                                                                                                                         U
                                                                                                                                         V29
      Residential Sites                                                                                                                                                                      WATSON LN
                                                                                                                    HESS DR
                                                                                                                  Little
                                                                                                                 League
                                                                                                                 Complex
                                                                                                                                                            A
                                                                                                                                                            ¾
                                                                                                                                               NAPA JUNCTION RD
                                                                                                                  13
                                                                                                                  ¾
                                                                                                                  ¾
                                                                                                ¾   11
                                                                                                                            14
                                                                                                                            ¾
                                                 ¾8                                                  10
                                                                                                     ¾                 B
                                                                                                                       ¾
                                                                                                         9
                                                                                                         ¾
                                                                                                         ¾
                                                                                                                                                           MAIN ST
                       Gadwell
                        Park
                                                                                 GIS
                                                                                     E   LA
                                                                                            D                                       17
                                                            1                                   R
                                   RIO GRANDE
                                                           ¾                                                                        ¾
                                                                                                                                    ¾
                                                                                                                                            24
                                                                                                                                   19
                                                                                                                                   ¾
                                                                                                                                   ¾        ¾
                                                                                                                                 28
                                                                                                                                 ¾                                                                         CANTADA WAY
                                                                                                            D
                                                                                                            ¾
                                                                                                            ¾                    29
                                                                                                                                 ¾        25
                                                                                ¾2                                              ¾0
                                                                                                                                3         ¾    22
                                                                                                                                20
                                                                                                                                ¾              ¾
                                                                                                                                               ¾
                                   SPIKERUSH                                                                                                                                                                                  LL DR
                                                                                  DR                                               21
                                                                                                                                   ¾   27
                                                                         JOAN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         NEWE
                                                                                                                                       ¾
                                                                                                                                       ¾
                                                                                                                                                                                                  WAYE
                                      CIR
                                                                                                                                 ¾7   23
                                                                                                                                 ¾    ¾
                                                                                                                                      ¾                                                      AL
                                                                                                                                                                                               ON
                                                                                                                                                                                               DS
                                                                                                    CAROLYN DR
                                                                                                                                ¾5 6 ¾26
                                                                                                                                                                                           DO N
                                                                                                                                    ¾ ¾
                                                                                                                                      18
                                                    Community
                                                      Park
                                                                                                                                                                                                    Shenandoah
                                                                                                                                                                                                       Park
                                                                      NEWBURY
                                            HUMMINGB                                                                ANDREW RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                  12
                                                                                                                                                                                                  ¾
                                                                       WAY                                                                      16
                                                                                                                                                ¾                                                      SILVER OAK TRL
                                                                                                                                  4
                                                                                                                                  ¾
                                                IRD WAY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Flosden
                                                                                                                                  ¾
      North Slou
                                                                                                                                                ¾15
                gh
                                                                                                                                                                                                             Silver
                                                                                Elliott                                                                                    C
                                                                                                                                                                           ¾                                  Oak
                                                                                                                                  3
                                                                                                                                  ¾
                                                                                                                                  ¾                                                                           Park
                                                                                                                                                                                       American Canyon
                                                                                                                   Northampton
                                                                                                                       Park
                                              I WAY
                                         VINC
                                                                                                                                                    ee
                                                                                                                                                       U
                                                                                                                                                       V
                                                                                                                                                       k   29
                                                                Elliott Park                                                                   Cr
                                                                                                                                            on
                                                                                                                                                                     Broadway
                                                                                                                                          y
                                                                                                                                    C   an
                                                               Miles                                               Americ a n
  0            0.125        0.25                             0.5                                                                                                                         ENTRADA CIR
                                                                                                                                 FOLLAND DR
                                          Kimberly Parcels Zoning
              Approved Projects Vacant/Underutilized                                                                                      Suburban Veterans
                                                                                                                                                   Residential - 8000                                  Neighborhood Commercial
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ¯
                                                                      Park
              City Limits                                 Residential Estate                                                                       Memorial - 6500
                                                                                                                                          Suburban Residential                                         Community Commercial
                                                                                                                                                                     Park
              Parks/Open Space                            Rural Residential                                                               Medium Residential                                           Residential Overlay
Note: Labels correspond with ID column in Table 42 and 44                                                                                                                       Source: City of American Canyon (2014); Napa County (2014)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Map Date: 10/27/2014

CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON                2015-2023 HOUSING ELEMENT
This page is intentionally left blank.
B-70                                           Adopted March 17, 2015
    2015-2023 HOUSING ELEMENT                                                                      CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON
                                                          TABLE 46
                                         AVAILABLE LAND INVENTORY SUMMARY
Map                General                                                  Infrastructure
ID        APN        Plan    Zoning     Acres      Units     Existing Use      Capacity             Site Description
                    Low Density Residential: Inventoried as Moderate- and Above Moderate-Income Units
                                                                                           Vacant lot surrounded by existing
   1   058-542-001       RL   RS-8000       0.24         1  Vacant          Yes            homes.
                                                                                           Formerly Rio Vista Pre-Application.
   2   058-162-013       RL   RS-6500       1.09         7  Vacant          Yes            Vacant land surrounded by homes.
                                                                                           Older building using half of large lot,
   3   058-281-013       RL  RR-20,000      1.11         2  Vacant          Yes            surrounded by homes.
   4   058-290-003       RL  RR-10,000      0.31         2  Vacant          Yes            Vacant infill lot surround by homes.
                                                                                           Vacant lot with sheds surrounded by
   5   058-311-002       RL  RR-10,000      0.17         1  Vacant          Yes            homes.
   6   058-311-003       RL  RR-10,000      0.23         1  Vacant          Yes            Vacant lot surround by homes.
   7   058-311-004       RL  RR-10,000      0.26         1  Vacant          Yes            Vacant lot surround by homes.
                                                                                           Large vacant lot between Oat Hill and
   8   058-030-018       RE        RE      20.66        20  Vacant          Yes            homes south of Eucalyptus.
                                                                                           Large vacant lot between Oat Hill and
   9   058-040-020       RE        RE       9.82         9  Vacant          Yes            homes south of Eucalyptus.
                                                                                           On Oat Hill west of Valley Vista
  10   058-270-005       RE        RE      23.22        23  Vacant          Yes            manufactured housing project.
                                                                                           On Oat Hill west of elementary
  11   058-320-001       RE        RE      10.63        10  Vacant          Yes            school.
                                                                                           Previous submitted Branzuela TSM.
                                                                                           Next to PG&E easement. Project has
                                                                                           been withdrawn due to current
  12   059-080-032   SP-1:SF   SP-1:SF      2.81        24  Vacant          Yes            market conditions.
                                           71.61       108
                   Medium Density Residential: Inventoried as Moderate- and Above Moderate-Income Units
                                                                                           Vacant Lot south of elementary
  13   058-082-007       RM        RM          2        10  Vacant          Yes            school. Near West Napa Fault.
                                                                                           Vacant Lot adjacent to school and
  14   058-082-010       RM        RM       0.94         4  Vacant          Yes            homes.
                                            2.94        14
                                       Mixed Use1: Inventoried as Lower-Income Units
    Adopted March 17, 2015                                                                                                       B-71
    CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON                                                                    2015-2023 HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                       TABLE 46
                                        AVAILABLE LAND INVENTORY SUMMARY
Map                General                                             Infrastructure
ID        APN       Plan     Zoning     Acres   Units     Existing Use    Capacity               Site Description
                                                                                      Large vacant lot adjacent to
                                                                                      commercial and residential uses. GP
                                   CN                                                 Policy 1.14.1&2 allow multifamily
                           (residential                                               residential site coverage of 1.0 at 20
  15   058-290-012     CN     overlay)     2.15      43  Vacant        Yes            du/ac.
                                                                                      Large vacant lot adjacent to
                                                                                      commercial and residential uses.
                                                                                      Directly north of Site 18. GP Policy
                                   CN                                                 1.14.1 and 1.14.2 allow multifamily
                           (residential                                               residential site coverage of 1.0 at 20
  16   058-302-001     CN     overlay)     2.17      43  Vacant        Yes            du/ac.
                                                                                      Large vacant lot adjacent to
                                                                                      commercial and residential uses.
                                                                                      Possible merger with #19 and 28 to
                                   CC                                                 maximize housing potential. West
                           (residential                                               side of Hwy 29. GP Policy 1.15.1
  17   058-095-009     CC     overlay)     1.08      10  Vacant        Yes            allows 50% site coverage at 20 du/ac.
                                                                                      Large vacant lot adjacent to
                                                                                      commercial and residential uses.
                                                                                      Possible merger with #26 to maximize
                                   CC                                                 housing potential. West side of Hwy
                           (residential                                               29. GP Policy 1.15.1 allows 50% site
  18   058-311-013     CC     overlay)     2.52      25  Vacant        Yes            coverage at 20 du/ac.
                                                                                      Large vacant lot adjacent to
                                                                                      commercial and residential uses.
                                                                                      Possible merger with #17 and 28 to
                                   CC                                                 maximize housing potential. West
                           (residential                                               side of Hwy 29. GP Policy 1.15.1
  19   058-352-002     CC     overlay)     1.24      12  Vacant        Yes            allows 50% site coverage at 20 du/ac.
                                                                                      Vacant Parcels adjacent to residential
                                   CC                                                 uses. West side of Hwy 29. GP Policy
                           (residential                                               1.15.1 allows 50% site coverage at 20
  20   058-362-001     CC     overlay)     0.68       6  Vacant        Yes            du/ac.
                                                                                      Vacant Parcels adjacent to residential
                                   CC                                                 uses. Near West Napa Fault. West
                           (residential                                               side of Hwy 29. GP Policy 1.15.1
  21   058-362-003     CC     overlay)     1.26      12  Vacant        Yes            allows 50% site coverage at 20 du/ac.
    B-72                                                                                                Adopted March 17, 2015
    2015-2023 HOUSING ELEMENT                                                                    CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON
                                                        TABLE 46
                                         AVAILABLE LAND INVENTORY SUMMARY
Map                General                                              Infrastructure
ID        APN        Plan     Zoning     Acres   Units     Existing Use    Capacity               Site Description
                                                                                       East side of Hwy 29. GP Policy 1.15.1
                                                                                       allows 60% site coverage at 35 du/ac.
                                                                                       Large vacant lot adjacent to High
                                                                                       Density Residential and future town
                                    CC                                                 center site. Inventory conservatively
                            (residential                                               assumes 60% site coverage at 22.5
  22   059-072-005       CC    overlay)     5.18      67  Vacant        Yes            units per acre.
                                                                                       Older commercial structures on very
                                                                                       large parcel adjacent to residential
                                    CC                                                 uses. Near West Napa Fault. West
                            (residential                                               side of Hwy 29. GP Policy 1.15.1
  23   058-362-012       CC    overlay)     2.36      23  Underutilized Yes            allows 50% site coverage at 20 du/ac.
                                                                                       East side of Hwy 29. GP Policy 1.15.1
                                                                                       allows 60% site coverage at 35 du/ac.
                                                                                       Existing Adobe Lumber site along the
                                                                                       east side of Hwy 29. Interest to
                                                                                       relocate facility to Industrial Area and
                                                                                       use site for residential uses adjacent to
                                                                                       Napa Junction mixed-use center.
                                    CC                                                 Inventory conservatively assumes
                            (residential                                               60% site coverage at 22.5 units per
  24  059-020-023        CC    overlay)    14.16     184  Underutilized Yes            acre.
                                                                                       East side of Hwy 29. GP Policy 1.15.1
                                                                                       allows 60% site coverage at 35 du/ac.
                                                                                       Possible merger with #22 to maximize
                                    CC                                                 housing potential. Inventory
                            (residential                                               conservatively assumes 60% site
  25   059-072-002       CC    overlay)     1.98      25  Vacant        Yes            coverage at 22.5 units per acre.
                                                                                       Large commercial site used for
                                                                                       landscaping materials adjacent to
                                                                                       Hwy 29 and the residential uses.
                                                                                       Possible merger with #20 to maximize
                                    CC                                                 housing potential. West side of Hwy
                            (residential                                               29. GP Policy 1.15.1 allows 50% site
  26   058-311-014       CC    overlay)     2.52      25  Underutilized Yes            coverage at 20 du/ac.
    Adopted March 17, 2015                                                                                                    B-73
       CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON                                                                                                                         2015-2023 HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                                         TABLE 46
                                                                AVAILABLE LAND INVENTORY SUMMARY
Map                          General                                                                                  Infrastructure
  ID          APN              Plan            Zoning           Acres         Units            Existing Use              Capacity                         Site Description
                                                       CC                                                                                     Vacant parcel adjacent to Hwy 29.
                                             (residential                                                                                     West side of Hwy 29. GP Policy 1.15.1
    27     058-362-016               CC         overlay)               1              10    Vacant                    Yes                     allows 50% site coverage at 20 du/ac.
                                                                                                                                              Adjacent to Hwy 29. Near West Napa
                                                                                                                                              Fault. West side of Hwy 29. GP Policy
                                                                                                                                              1.15.1 allows 50% site coverage at 20
                                                       CC                                                                                     du/ac. East side of parcel (fronting
                                             (residential                                   Retail in front,                                  Hwy 29) is developed as retail, but
    28     058-352-003               CC         overlay)            2.45              24    vacant in rear            Yes                     back of site is vacant.
                                                                                                                                              Adjacent to Hwy 29. Near West Napa
                                                       CC                                   Underutilized,                                    Fault. West side of Hwy 29. GP Policy
                                             (residential                                   single family                                     1.15.1 allows 50% site coverage at 20
    29     058-353-005               CC         overlay)            1.26              16    dwelling                  Yes                     du/ac.
                                                                                                                                              Vacant parcel adjacent to #30 and
                                                       CC                                                                                     Hwy 29. Near West Napa Fault. West
                                             (residential                                                                                     side of Hwy 29. GP Policy 1.15.1
    30     058-353-006               CC         overlay)            0.63                6   Vacant                    Yes                     allows 50% site coverage at 20 du/ac.
                                                                   42.64            531
                                                         Income Breakdown by Group (Detailed on Table 45)
Lower-Income                                                                         531
Moderate- and Above Moderate-Income                                                  122
1
 All commercial parcels listed within this survey are within the Residential Overlays, which allow multifamily housing “by-right” in accordance with Table 1 section 19.11 of the City's
Zoning Ordinance and General Plan Policies 1.14.1 and 1.15.1 for Community Commercial (CC) and Neighborhood Commercial (CN). Development standards associated with these
residential overlays were accounted for in the unit count projection. Projected unit count is based on minimum densities for multifamily housing allowed under the General Plan Land Use
Element with all projected units calculated towards meeting the Very Low- and Low-Income Groups.
Source: City survey, 2009; updated in 2014.
       B-74                                                                                                                                                        Adopted March 17, 2015

2015-2023 HOUSING ELEMENT                                        CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON
Low Density Residential from Table 46
Parcels #1-12, zoned RS-8000, RS-6500, RR-20,000, RR-10,000, RE, or SP-1: SF, range in size
from 0.25 to 23.22 acres and are located within the older, lower-density residential areas. As
shown in Figure 2, these parcels are located in the older portions of the city, west of
Highway 29. These lots have a minimal risk of flooding from the Napa River to the west of
the city, and earthquake risk from the Alquist-Priolo Earthquake Fault, but no more than
most areas within the city limits. All of the parcels within the low-density residential zones
(#1-15), are infill parcels that are surrounded by existing housing and have sufficient access
to roads and utilities. Many of these non-vacant sites contain smaller homes residing on
larger lots of one to two acres. The City periodically receives interest from home owners in
these areas for small parcel splits and second units. These parcels are either intended to be
sold as a vacant lot with shared access or constructed to house a family member of the
applicant. The development of these infill parcels should not have a significant impact on
the environment because the permitting process to develop a home within the city is not
extensive or prohibitively expensive.
The City anticipates 108 units can be accommodated on low-density residential sites, all of
which were inventoried as moderate- and above moderate-income units.
Medium Density Residential from Table 46
Much like the low-density parcels, sites 13 and 14, which are zoned RM, are infill lots
surrounded by existing homes. They are located near the elementary school, just east of Oat
Hill and have large lots that may have been used for farming/agricultural uses many years
ago. There are many vacant RM lots that were not listed within Table 46 due to their
nonconforming parcels size, but may be developed with a lot merger in the future. As with
sites 1-12, the development of these RM parcels should not have a sufficient impact on the
environment or utilities due to the sites being surrounded by developed properties.
The City anticipates 14 units can be accommodated on medium-density residential sites, all
of which were inventoried as moderate- and above moderate-income units.
High Density Residential and Mixed-Use Development from Table 46
Sites 15-30 are vacant and underutilized areas zoned for commercial uses that the City has
deemed most likely to support housing due to the proximity to surrounding residential
complexes and their poor history sustaining commercial business. The Commercial parcels
are large vacant parcels along Highway 29. Sites 22, 24, and 25 are east of Highway 29 and
would be located near the future Town Center project and Southeast Area Specific Plan. The
remaining parcels are located west of Highway 29 and adjacent to the existing homes.
Proposals for the commercial corridor along Highway 29 include high-density and mixed-
use housing for the area that stretches from American Canyon Road to Napa Junction Road.
Since the improvement of this corridor is a priority for the City, the inclusion of mixed-use
and residential development is also a priority for the City.
Adopted March 17, 2015                                                                    B-75
CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON                                             2015-2023 HOUSING ELEMENT
Commercial Underutilized Parcels
Some of the commercial parcels listed on Table 46 are underutilized and contain existing
structures and businesses, specifically sites 23, 24, 26, 28, and 29. The inclusion of these sites
does not indicate that the City will seek to acquire these parcels. The City is simply
addressing the potential that these parcels have to accommodate future residential growth.
These are not the only underutilized commercial properties with housing potential, but
these parcels have the greatest opportunity for development within the planning period.
Site 23 is located along the west side of the Highway 29 corridor and is zoned Community
Commercial with a Residential Overlay. This parcel has sufficient access to Melvin Road
and Wilson Way and is located adjacent to existing residential uses. There is currently (2014)
an existing tire facility on the eastern side of the 2.36-acre site that fronts Highway 29. Since
the General Plan does not currently allow residential uses to front onto Highway 29, this site
is ideal for a mixed-use project that provides residential access along Melvin Road and
allows potential businesses to be seen from Highway 29 motorists. The City anticipates 23
units can be accommodated on Site 23, all of which are inventoried as lower-income.
                                     Figure 3 Site # 23
Site 24, along the east side of Highway 29, currently (2014) contains the Adobe Lumber
facility. The site is zoned Community Commercial with a Residential Overlay. There has
been some interest to relocate the facility to the Industrial Area of the city, freeing the site
for residential and mixed-use development. Redevelopment to residential mixed-use would
be more consistent with the adjacent Napa Junction Center to the north and the future Town
Center project to the east, which will have a minimum of 20 units per acre for multiple
family housing. This is a very large parcel and could allow residential units up to 35 units
per acre. The City anticipates 184 units can be accommodated on Site 24, all of which are
inventoried as lower income.
B-76                                                                        Adopted March 17, 2015
2015-2023 HOUSING ELEMENT                                      CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON
                                  Figure 4 Site # 24
Site 26 is located along the west side of the Highway 29 corridor. The parcel is located
adjacent to existing residential uses and is zoned Commercial Neighborhood with a
Residential Overlay. There is currently (2014) a landscaping business on the 2.52-acre site
fronting Highway 29. The business primarily uses the site to store materials and there are no
major permanent structures that would need to be demolished to allow residential units.
Site 18 is a 2.52-acre vacant CC site just south of Site 26. Together these parcels have the
potential to develop approximately 5.04 acres of high-density residential development. The
City anticipates 25 units can be accommodated on Site 26, all of which are inventoried as
lower-income.
Adopted March 17, 2015                                                                   B-77
CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON                                          2015-2023 HOUSING ELEMENT
                                   Figure 5 Site # 26
Site 28 is located along the west side of the Highway 29 corridor and is zoned Community
Commercial with a Residential Overlay. This parcel has sufficient access to Melvin Road
and Poco Way and is located adjacent to existing residential uses. There is currently (2014)
retail on the eastern side fronting Highway 29. Since the General Plan does not allow
residential uses to front onto Highway 29, this site is ideal for a mixed-use project that
provides residential access along Melvin Road. The City anticipates 24 units can be
accommodated on Site 28, all of which are inventoried as lower-income.
                                   Figure 6 Site # 28
Site 29 is located along the west side of the Highway 29 corridor and is zoned Community
Commercial with a Residential Overlay. This parcel has sufficient access to Melvin Road
and is located adjacent to existing residential uses. There is currently (2014) a single family
dwelling on the eastern side fronting Highway 29, but much of the site is underutilized.
Since the General Plan does not allow residential uses to front onto Highway 29, this site is
ideal for a mixed-use project that provides residential access along Melvin Road and retail
B-78                                                                     Adopted March 17, 2015
2015-2023 HOUSING ELEMENT                                       CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON
fronting Highway 29. The City anticipates 16 units can be accommodated on Site 29, all of
which are inventoried as lower-income.
                                     Figure 7 Site # 29
Future Development Potential
Plan Bay Area is an integrated long-range transportation and land-use/housing plan for the
San Francisco Bay Area. It includes the Bay Area’s Regional Transportation Plan, which the
Metropolitan Transportation Commission (MTC) updates every four years, and the
Association of Bay Area Governments (ABAG) demographic and economic forecast, which
is updated every two years. MTC and ABAG prepared Plan Bay Area, which was adopted
in July 2013. This Plan includes a Sustainable Communities Strategy (SCS), which
coordinates land use, housing, and transportation for the nine-county Bay Area region. The
primary goal of the SCS is to reduce greenhouse gas emissions in the nine-county region.
To this end Plan Bay Area directs the majority of the regional housing growth to local
priority development areas (PDAs). PDAs are areas that communities identified as possible
areas to grow, nominated by the City Council via resolution. They are generally areas of at
least 100 acres where there is local commitment to developing more housing along with
amenities and services to meet the day-to-day needs of residents in a pedestrian-friendly
environment served by transit. American Canyon’s lone PDA, the American Canyon
Highway 29 Corridor PDA, extends along Highway 29 from Green Island in the north to the
city limits in the south. Roughly 90 percent of units counted towards the RHNA (and 100
percent of the lower-income units) are within this 292-acre PDA.
The City is in the process of developing a specific plan for the Watson Ranch/Town Center
area. American Canyon 1, LLC recently shared a preliminary draft of the Watson Ranch
Specific Plan, which covers approximately 304 acres and is situated east of the Southern
Pacific Rail line, north of the Vintage Ranch neighborhoods, and west of the future extension
of Newell Drive. The draft Specific Plan includes approximately 1,250 units, ranging from
Adopted March 17, 2015                                                                   B-79

CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON                                                       2015-2023 HOUSING ELEMENT
single family homes to townhomes and apartments. City staff is currently (2014)
undertaking an initial review of the Plan, but no formal application has been submitted. Due
to the uncertainty associated with the number and type of units in the final plan, none of the
sites within the Specific Plan area are counted towards the RHNA in this cycle.
C. Housing Needs Met
Table 47 summarizes American Canyon’s ability to meet its housing needs for the 2014-2022
RHNA projection period. Through planned and approved projects and vacant and
underutilized sites, American Canyon has the capacity to meet its housing need for all
income groups. In fact, American Canyon provides sufficient sites to accommodate a 639-
unit surplus for this RHNA projection period.
                                                    TABLE 47
                                SUMMARY OF RESIDENTIAL CAPACITY
                                                                                   Above
                              Very Low-           Low-        Moderate-         Moderate-
                                Income          Income          Income            Income
 RHNA Obligation              (VLI) Units (LI) Units (MI) Units                 (AM) Units               Total
 2014-2022 RHNA                         116             54                58               164                   392
  Capacity
 Planned and
 Approved Projects
 and Units Under                          34            25                                 326                   385
 Construction
 (Table 44)
 Low Density
 Residential                                             0                                 101                   101
 (Table 46 #1-12)
 Medium Density
 Residential                                             0                                   14                   14
 (Table 46 #13-14)
 Neighborhood
 Commercial-CN                                          86                                    0                   86
 (Table 46 #15-16)
 Community
 Commercial-CC                                        445                                     0                  445
 (Table 46 #17-30)
 Total                                                590                                  441                1,031
  Surplus Capacity
 Housing Surplus                                      420                                  219                   639
 Source: The Association of Bay Area Governments (ABAG), 2014-2022 Regional Needs Housing Plan; City of American
 Canyon, 2014.
B-80                                                                                   Adopted March 17, 2015

2015-2023 HOUSING ELEMENT                                         CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON
D. Adequate Infrastructure and Environmental Constraints
Another factor adding to the cost of new construction is the cost of providing adequate
infrastructure. Major and local streets; curbs, gutters, and sidewalks; water and sewer lines;
and street lighting are required to be built or installed in new developments. The City has
been willing to reduce road cut standards under the General Plan requirements to some
developers to help accommodate more units.
Adequate Infrastructure and Resources
The City’s Planning Area contains a number of important natural resources which are key
elements in the quality of life for its residents, but may also act as constraints to residential
development. These include air and water quality, agriculturally suited soils, wildlife
habitats, hillsides, and mineral resources. Due to the city’s location within the Bay Area fault
lines, certain areas of the city are potentially impacted by various natural and man-made
hazards including earthquakes, landslides, liquefaction, flooding, and noise. These
resources and hazards are taken into consideration when making location and design
decisions related to housing. None of these environmental constraints will impede the City’s
ability to accommodate its regional housing needs under the ABAG housing allocation plan.
Water
Water availability has become a major issue for the region and the City within the last few
years. The Water Distribution Division maintains 102 miles of water mains that run from the
Water Treatment Plant to residents and businesses in the water service area, which extends
from the Napa/Solano County line to Soscol Creek just north of the Napa Airport. They take
the lead on water conservation efforts, and they respond to water leaks, main breaks, water
pressure problems, and other service issues. They also maintain the new recycled water
distribution system, which was put into service in March 2010. In 2008 the American
Canyon City Council approved a “Zero Water Footprint” for the city. This resolution
addressed the growing concern for new development to conserve potable water supply
while minimizing the impact and demand for existing uses.
American Canyon recently (2010) prepared an update to its Urban Water Management Plan
(UWMP) evaluating the relationship between water supplies and demands through 2035.
The UWMP considers current and planned land uses within American Canyon’s historic
water service area and projects that demands will increase on average by 4.1 percent
annually through 2020 before settling at about 2.0 percent annually through 2035. The
UWMP concludes that under single-dry water year conditions or multiple-dry water year
conditions, the supply is sufficient at least through 2030. The UWMP includes a contingency
plan outlining specific actions to help meet demands during water storages. These actions
include American Canyon exercising all of its options to purchase additional baseline water
from Vallejo, expanding its reclaimed water system, and, if needed, developing municipal
groundwater wells.
Adopted March 17, 2015                                                                      B-81

CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON                                           2015-2023 HOUSING ELEMENT
All of the residential projects, as well as the land available for residential development, are
located in areas that have existing infrastructure or have already been addressed in their
approval, with development fees paid during the permit processing phase. New
development within these areas is subject to review by the Community Development
Department, water connection fees, and utility improvements requested before a Certificate
of Occupancy (CO) can be certified to allow the use of the home or structure. During the
planning stage of the review, City staff applies mitigation and low-impact development
measures to the project design that seek to mitigate excess usage and demand on City
services, such as water (potable and non-potable), sewer, and other utilities. These measures
can also be found within the Energy Conservation portion of this update.
One issue that has remained is water availability for new development. Since American
Canyon does not currently have any applications for subdivisions for housing, the only
major water issue related to housing could come from the annexation and development of
the Town Center project which would include approximately 600 new units. Although this
project has been integrated and addressed in the Zoning Ordinance and General Plan, it is
unlikely that the project will be completed within this time frame. Environmental issues,
including water availability, and a finalized design have yet to be submitted and approved.
Sewer
The City of American Canyon owns and operates the American Canyon Wastewater
Treatment Plant (WWTP) commissioned in 2001, which treats domestic and industrial
wastewater flows. The WWTP is a secondary/tertiary treatment plant and was one of the
first WWTPs in the country with Membrane Bio Reactor (MBR) and ultraviolet light (UV)
disinfection. The Sewer Collection crew maintains 34 miles of sanitary sewer mains that
connect residents and businesses to the WWTP. They respond to reports of sewer spills and
back-ups and monitor compliance with environmental compliance and water quality
regulations. The plant was designed to treat an average flow of 2.5 million gallons per day
(MGD) and a peak flow of 3.75 MGD. The average flow in dry water conditions was 1.9
MGD in 2011, with an excess capacity of 0.6 MGD. Capacity is sufficient to accommodate
future growth.
Priority for Water and Sewer
Per Chapter 727, Statutes of 2004 (SB 1087), upon completion of an amended or adopted
housing element, a local government is responsible for immediately distributing a copy of
the Element to area water and sewer providers. In addition, water and sewer providers
must grant priority for service allocations to proposed developments that include housing
units affordable to lower-income households. Chapter 727 was enacted to improve the
effectiveness of the law in facilitating housing development for lower-income families and
workers.
B-82                                                                      Adopted March 17, 2015
2015-2023 HOUSING ELEMENT                                         CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON
Local public and/or private water and sewer providers must adopt written policies and
procedures that grant a priority for service hook-ups to developments that help meet the
community’s share of the regional need for lower-income housing. In addition, the law
prohibits water and sewer providers from denying, conditioning the approval, or reducing
the amount of service for an application for development that includes housing affordable
to lower-income households, unless specific written findings are made.
Urban water management plans must include projected water use for single family and
multifamily housing needed for lower-income households. This law is useful in areas with
limited available sewer or water hook-ups. As the responsible agency, the City will supply a
copy of the adopted housing element to the American Canyon Public Works Department, as
well as to all other private water and sewer providers; however, since the City provides
these services to its residences, City staff will work closely to provide input from the other
divisions in Public Works, which control water distribution throughout American Canyon.
Environmental Hazards and Constraints
Housing element law requires a general description of any environmental constraint to the
development of housing within the jurisdiction. The city is located to the east of the Napa
River and adjacent estuary site. This river has been prone to flooding in the past, which has
affected some of the adjacent cities and county developments. Although flooding has been
an issue for American Canyon for these areas adjacent to the Napa River and estuary,
recently built neighborhoods have been constructed outside of the flood hazard areas, and
none of the vacant or underutilized sites in the Housing Element Sites Inventory are within
a flood hazard area.
The city is bisected by the Alquist-Priolo Earthquake Fault line, which runs north to south,
along the west side of the city. Like many communities in the Bay Area, the potential of
significant seismic activity caused by earthquake can influence development patterns
including the location of where residential housing can be placed within American Canyon.
On August 24, 2014, a 6.0 magnitude earthquake occurred just a few miles northwest of
American Canyon. While the earthquake caused significant damage in the region, most of
the newer homes in American Canyon were not affected. The City conducted inspections of
homes and waived building permit fees for repairing residential earthquake damage.
Virtually all home inspections showed nonstructural cracks to interior walls, exterior stucco,
concrete floors, and patios. Other damages included chimney damage/failure or displaced
water heaters. CDBG grants are available for lower-income households from the City for up
to $5,000 towards chimney or other repairs. On October 27, 2014, FEMA declared Napa
County eligible for individual assistance.
Adopted March 17, 2015                                                                    B-83

CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON                                         2015-2023 HOUSING ELEMENT
E. Zoning for a Variety of Housing Types
State Law (Government Code Section 65583(c)(a)) requires that local land use regulations
accommodate a range of housing types, as well as facilities for people in need of emergency
shelter and transitional housing. The following is a brief analysis of the availability of land
for other types of housing.
Multifamily Rental Housing
There are three apartment complexes, five mobile home parks, and one townhouse facility
within the city. The commercially-zoned properties allow 25 percent of the site to be
developed as residential use, while commercial sites with residential overlay allow 50
percent for areas west of Highway 29 and 60 percent for areas east of Highway 29. These
residential uses allow for mixed-uses with densities ranging from 20 to 35 units an acre.
These commercial areas, accompanied with the proposed development within the Town
Center project, will incorporate development similar to the Lodge at Napa Junction and the
Vineyard Crossing Apartments. Although there is residentially-zoned property outside of
the commercial areas, it is unlikely that it will be able to accommodate a large residential
facility for multifamily housing.
 Figure 8 Typical Multifamily Development within American Canyon
                                   (Vineyard Crossing)
Housing for Agricultural Employees Both Permanent and Seasonal
As stated previously in the Special Housing Needs section of this report, the city does not
have land that is specifically zoned for or designated agriculture within the city limits. For
farming purposes that require permanent housing for agricultural workers, the city contains
affordable housing projects such as Vineyard Crossing, Vineyard Place, and the Lodge at
Napa Junction Apartment complex adjacent to the Napa Junction Commercial Center. The
City conditionally permits “Farm Employee Housing” within the CC zone, but the Zoning
B-84                                                                    Adopted March 17, 2015

2015-2023 HOUSING ELEMENT                                         CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON
Ordinance must be amended to fully comply with the Employee Housing Act, which
requires employee housing for six or fewer employees to be allowed wherever single family
homes are allowed.
The United States Department of Agriculture (USDA) Section 515 rental housing program is
not specifically targeted to farmworkers, but it does provide low-cost housing in rural areas
including many farmworker households. According to the National Low Income Housing
Coalition (NLIHC) under the Section 515 program, the USDA’s Rural Development arm
(RD) makes direct loans to developers of affordable multifamily rental housing. Since its
inception in 1962, this program has provided more than a half-million decent rental homes
affordable for the lowest-income rural residents.
Section 514/516 of the USDA’s Farm Labor Housing provides loans and grants to
farmworkers, family farm organizations, state and local public agencies, private broad-
based organizations, and nonprofit organizations of farmworkers. The objective is to
provide sufficient housing that is safe and affordable for domestic and migrant farm
laborers where the need exists.
Although farmworker housing has not been an issue in American Canyon, these programs
will be recognized by City staff if the needs arise within this planning period.
Emergency Shelters and Transitional and Supportive Shelters
Emergency Shelter
Government Code Section 65583(a)(4) requires the identification of a zone or zones where
emergency shelters are allowed as a permitted use without a conditional use or other
discretionary permit. The identified zone or zones shall include sufficient capacity to
accommodate the City’s need for emergency shelters.
The City currently (as of December 2, 2014) allows emergency shelters by-right within the
Light Industrial (LI) and Community Commercial (CC) zones subject to objective
development standards as allowed by State law. After taking into account existing
development, access, and availability of infrastructure, there are 38 parcels totaling over 89
acres of vacant land in the CC and LI zone districts. There is sufficient land available to
accommodate at least one emergency shelter, which would accommodate the city’s
homeless needs. Figure 9 shows the vacant parcels and Table 48 lists a listing of the parcels
by zone and assessor parcel numbers (APNs).
Adopted March 17, 2015                                                                    B-85

CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON                                2015-2023 HOUSING ELEMENT
                                             TABLE 48
                              VACANT CC AND LI PARCELS
                      APN                      Zoning Acres
                057-130-032             Ll                    2.33
                057-180-001             Ll                    1.36
                057-180-002             Ll                    0.44
                057-180-003             Ll                    1.02
                058-030-010             Ll                    0.86
                058-030-011             Ll                    2.56
                058-030-023             Ll                    4.16
                058-030-044             Ll                    0.43
                058-081-003             CC                    0.47
                058-081-004             CC                    0.06
                058-081-005             CC                    0.47
                058-081-006             CC                    0.58
                058-083-018             CC                    1.24
                058-312-005             CC                    0.16
                058-320-013             CC                    0.84
                058-362-005             CC                    0.63
                058-362-021             CC                    1.85
                058-380-007             Ll                   10.24
                058-380-008             Ll                   10.05
                058-380-012             Ll                    9.57
                058-530-001             Ll                    2.67
                058-530-002             Ll                    1.87
                058-530-003             Ll                    2.00
                058-530-004             Ll                    2.02
                058-530-005             Ll                    1.65
                058-530-006             Ll                    1.69
                058-530-007             Ll                    0.85
                058-530-008             Ll                    6.91
                058-530-009             Ll                    2.09
                058-530-010             Ll                    0.49
                059-020-002             Ll                    0.21
                059-020-004             CC                    1.02
                059-020-037             CC                   13.98
                059-040-003             CC                    0.71
                059-075-001             CC                    0.09
                059-075-012             CC                    0.69
                059-080-004             CC                    0.50
                059-080-038             CC                    0.79
                Total                                        89.57
                Source: Mintier Harnish, 2014.
B-86                                                           Adopted March 17, 2015
    Figure 9: Parcels
    Potential Sites
    for Emergency Shelters
                                                                                                                                                             WATSON LN
                                                                                                                  HESS DR
                                                                                                               Little
                                                                                                              League
                                                                                                              Complex
                                                                                                                                NAPA JUNCTION RD
                          Gadwell                                                                                                    MAIN ST
                           Park
                                                                                 GI S
                                                                                      E   LA
                                                                                               DR
                                    RIO GRAN
                                     DE
                                                                                                                                                                              CANTADA WAY
                                                                                                                                                                                            N E WE
                                      SPIKE RUSH
                                                                               N   DR
                                                                           JOA                                                                                                               LL DR
                                                                                                                                                                   WA
                                        CI R                                                                                                                         YE
                                                                                                                                                                  ON
                                                                                                                                                                LD S
                                                                                                                                                              NA
                                                                                                                                                             DO
                                                                                                    CAROLYN
                                                                                                     DR
                                                           Community
                                                             Park                                                                                                      Shenandoah
                                                                                                                                                                          Park
                                                                       NEWBURY
                                                                                                                   ANDREW
                                                   HUMM IN GB
                                                                        WAY
                                                                                                                    RD                                                    SILVER OAK TRL
                                                     IRD WAY
                                                                                                                                                                                Silver               Flosden
                                                                                                                                                                                 Oak
                                                                                 Elliott                                                                                         Park
                                                       Miles
                                                                                                                                                         American Canyon
0     0.175        0.35                              0.7                                                          Northampton
                                                                                                                      Park                                                                    Am erica n Cany
                                                                                                                                                                                                                on
                                                   VINC
     Parcels potentially appropriate for emergency shelters                                                                               29
                                                                                                                                                                                                     ¯
                                                   I WAY
                                                                                                                                       U
                                                                                                                                       V
     City Limits
     Parks/Open Space
                                                                                                                                        Source: City of American Canyon (2014); Napa County (2014)
                                                                                                                                                                             Map Date: 12/18/2014

CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON                2015-2023 HOUSING ELEMENT
This page is intentionally left blank.
B-88                                           Adopted March 17, 2015
2015-2023 HOUSING ELEMENT                                               CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON
The City will also continue to support the development of housing options and special
services for the homeless and continue to work with other departments to identify any
homeless housing needs should they occur. The City shall participate in the countywide
Homeless Coordination Project that provides services to the homeless in Napa County.
Transitional and Supportive Housing
Transitional housing is a type of housing used to facilitate the movement of homeless
individuals and families to permanent housing. Residents of transitional housing are
usually connected to supportive services designed to assist the homeless in achieving
greater economic independence and a permanent, stable living situation. Transitional
housing can take several forms, including group quarters with beds, single family homes,
and multifamily apartments; and typically offers case management and support services to
help return people to independent living (often six months to two years).
Supportive housing links the provision of housing and social services for the homeless,
people with disabilities, and a variety of other special needs populations. Similar to
transitional housing, supportive housing can take several forms, including group quarters
with beds, single family homes, and multifamily apartments.
With the enactment of Senate Bill 2 in 2008, State law now requires cities and counties to
treat transitional housing and supportive housing as a residential use subject only to those
restrictions that apply to other residential uses of the same type in the same zone.
The City adopted an amendment to the Zoning Ordinance on December 16, 2014 to allow
transitional and supportive housing as permitted uses in zones allowing residential use, in
accordance with State law, including adoption of the following definitions:
         “Transitional housing” refers to a type of housing that provides services that enable homeless
         individuals and families transition into permanent housing. A homeless person may live in a
         transitional dwelling for no less than six (6) months while receiving supportive services that
         enable independent living. Transitional housing units are residential uses subject only to
         those requirements and restrictions that apply to other residential uses of the same type in the
         same zoning district.
         “Supportive housing” refers to rental housing that provides a range of support services
         designed to enable residents to maintain stable housing, improve his or her health status, lead
         fuller lives, and when possible, work in the community. Supportive housing units are
         residential uses subject only to those requirements and restrictions that apply to other
         residential uses of the same type in the same zoning district.
Adopted March 17, 2015                                                                               B-89

CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON                                          2015-2023 HOUSING ELEMENT
Single-Room Occupancy
Single-room occupancy (SRO) units can provide affordable private housing for lower-
income individuals, seniors, and persons with disabilities. An SRO unit is usually small,
between 200 to 350 square feet. These units can serve as an entry point into the housing
market for formerly homeless people.
This Housing Element contains a program to amend the City’s Municipal Code to allow
SROs in the RH zone district.
Mobile Homes/Factory-Built Housing
Manufactured homes are reviewed in accordance with Municipal Code Section 19.10.130.
This section of the City’s Zoning Code is meant to provide placement opportunities and
general development standards for manufactured homes in single family residential
districts. Section 19.10.130 is consistent with State law Section 65852.3 by allowing
manufactured homes on permanent foundations wherever single family homes are allowed
and ensures all manufactured homes are designed and located to be harmonious within the
context of the surrounding houses. They are to be reviewed by the Community
Development Director prior to the issuance of building permits. Mobile homes not on
permanent foundations are conditionally permitted in RE, RR, and RS Zones. Mobile home
parks are allowed in the MHP Overlay District through approval of a Design Review
Permit.
Second Units
In compliance with Government Code Section 65852.2, American Canyon’s Second-Unit
Ordinance (Section 19.10.120) includes guidelines for residents who wish to construct a
second unit on their property. In accordance with State law, applications for administrative
approval shall be submitted to the Community Development Department. The application
shall include a statement of the use proposed and a site plan prepared in accordance with
Section 19.10.120. The Ordinance sets forth criteria for the application of second units
including the definition of a second unit, the maximum allowable square footage, and the
development standards. Criteria for a second unit include:
     A detached second unit shall not contain a gross floor area in excess of 800 square feet
      except in the RR zone where up to 1,200 square feet in any area may be permitted.
     A second unit created by the internal conversion of an existing single family dwelling
      shall not occupy more than 30 percent of the total floor area of the building, including
      any proposed addition, but excluding the garage area.
     A second unit shall be provided with one off-street parking space in addition to the
      off-street parking spaces required by the on-site single family dwelling.
B-90                                                                     Adopted March 17, 2015

2015-2023 HOUSING ELEMENT                                          CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON
     A lot with a second unit shall be the primary residence of its owner. The owner may
      occupy either the primary or second unit.
     Second units must comply with design standards, so as to blend with and complement
      the existing single family unit to which it is attached in terms of height, roofing and
      siding materials, and color.
     A second unit shall be single story.
The purpose of the Second Unit Ordinance is to increase the supply of smaller units and
rental housing units by allowing second residential units on lots containing a single family
dwelling in areas zoned for single family residential uses, and to establish design and
development standards for second residential units to ensure that they are compatible with
existing neighborhoods.
The City has approved two use permits for second units since 2009. The City encourages
property owners to construct second units and provides staff assistance in planning and
designing to the homeowner. The City Council may waive sewer and water connection fees
and the Traffic Mitigation and Parks and Civic Facilities Impact Fees. In addition,
development standards such as parking and lot coverage may be waived by the Planning
Commission based upon site characteristics.
Adopted March 17, 2015                                                                       B-91

CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON                                                      2015-2023 HOUSING ELEMENT
V.            Constraints
A. Governmental Constraints
Government Code Section 65583(a) requires that jurisdictions must analyze potential and
actual governmental and non-governmental constraints that may impact the maintenance,
improvement, and construction of new housing for all income levels.
Land Use Controls
By definition local land use controls constrain housing development by restricting housing
to certain areas of the city and by limiting the number of housing units that can be built on a
given parcel of land. In the last decade most of the housing within American Canyon has
occurred within the Southeast Specific Plan and the residential zones west of Highway 29.
The commercial zones include only multifamily residential. General Plan Policies 1.14.1 and
1.15.1 allow multifamily residential in the Neighborhood Commercial (CN) and Community
Commercial (CC) zones. The General Plan includes designations that permit a range of
residential development types (see Table 49), from low-density development (1 to 2 units
per gross acre) up to high-density residential (20 units per gross acre).
                                                    TABLE 49
                 CITY GENERAL PLAN RESIDENTIAL LAND USE DESIGNATION
  General Plan Designation                                           Description
 Residential Estate (RE)                 Single family detached dwellings with a density of 1 to 2 units
                                         per gross acre
 Residential Low (RL)                    Single family detached dwellings with a density of 2 to 5 units
                                         per gross acre
 Residential Low-1 (RL-1)                Single family detached dwellings with a density of 2 to 5 units
                                         per gross acre. Multifamily dwelling units for a maximum of 15%
                                         of the total allowed by the prescribed density, if clustered to
                                         preserve open space.
 Residential Low- 2 Multifamily          Single family detached dwellings with a density of 2 to 5 units
 (RL-2)                                  per gross acre. Multifamily dwelling units on 10 acres.
 Residential Medium (RM)                 Single family detached dwellings or multifamily dwellings with
                                         a density of 5 to 12 units per gross acre.
 Residential High (RH-1)                 Single family detached dwellings or multifamily dwellings with
                                         a density of 12 to 16 units per gross acre.
 Residential High (RH-2)                 Single family detached dwellings or multifamily dwellings with
                                         a density of 20 units per gross acre.
 Source: City of American Canyon Zoning Ordinance, 2010.
The Zoning Ordinance provides for a full range of residential types and densities dispersed
throughout the community. There are five types of residential districts in the city:
Residential Estate (RE), Rural Residential (RR), Suburban Residential (RS), Rural Medium
Residential (RM), and Residential High (RH). Mixed-use development is allowed within the
Community Commercial (CC) District and Neighborhood Commercial (CN) District. The
CC district accommodates a broad range of commercial uses that will serve local residents
and the greater community, reduce the need for external trips to adjacent jurisdictions for
B-92                                                                                 Adopted March 17, 2015
2015-2023 HOUSING ELEMENT                                                               CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON
goods and services, and provide shopping and service opportunities for commuters,
visitors, and tourists. The CC district also accommodates multifamily residential uses,
especially in conjunction with a commercial use.
The CN district encourages a limited range of retail and service commercial uses that are
oriented to the day-to-day needs of the local residents, at a scale compatible with adjacent
neighborhoods. This district also accommodates multifamily residential uses, especially in
conjunction with a commercial use.
Housing Element law specifies that jurisdictions must identify adequate sites to be made
available through appropriate zoning and development standards to encourage the
development of various types of housing for all economic segments of the population. Table
50 summarizes the housing types permitted for each of the American Canyon zoning
districts.
                                                              TABLE 50
                                HOUSING TYPES PERMITTED BY ZONING DISTRICT
                                                          AMERICAN CANYON
                                                                   2014
                                                                                         Zone
              Residential Use                         RE       RR         RS         RM         RH          CN         CC         LI
Single Family Detached                                 P        P          P           P          P           -          -        -
Single Family Semi-Attached                             -       P          P           P          P           -          -        -
2-4 Multifamily                                         -       P          P           P          P        P***       P***        -
5+ Multifamily                                          -        -         -           P          P        P***       P***        -
Residential Care Home ( <6 people)                      -       P          P           -          -           -          -        -
Congregate Living Facility (i.e.,
Residential Care >6 people)                             -        -         -           P          P           -          -        -
Long Term Care Facility                                 -        -         -           -          -           P         P         -
Single-Room Occupancy                                   -        -         -           -          -           -          -        -
Manufactured Homes (**)                                P        P          P           P          P           -          -        -
Mobile Homes                                         CUP       CUP       CUP           -          -           -          -        -
Mobile Home Park                                        -        -         -         CUP       CUP            -          -        -
Transitional Housing                                   P*       P*        P*         - P*        P*         - P*        P*        -
Supportive Housing                                     P*       P*        P*          P*         P*          P*         P*        -
Homeless Shelter (i.e., Emergency
Shelter)                                                -        -         -         CUP       CUP            -         P         P
Second Unit                                            P        P          P           P          -           -          -        -
Farm Employee Housing                                   -        -         -           -          -           -      CUP          -
Notes:
P=Permitted CUP=Conditional Use
(*) Transitional and Supportive Housing is permitted wherever other residential uses are allowed.
(**) Manufactured housing is processed under the City Municipal Code Section 19.10.130 as a conventionally built residence, as long
as it has a permanent foundation.
(***) Multifamily is permitted by right in the CN and CC zones when located within the Residential Overlay. Outside of the Residential
Overlay, a CUP is required.
Source: City of American Canyon Zoning Ordinance, 2014.
Adopted March 17, 2015                                                                                                     B-93
      CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON                                                                2015-2023 HOUSING ELEMENT
      Table 51 summarizes the Zoning Ordinance development standards in the residential
      districts. Although these requirements apply to new development, their practical impact in
      affecting the construction of housing for low-income households is minor in comparison to
      non-governmental constraints. Nevertheless, this table describes the key development
      regulations and policies that potentially affect the City’s ability to accommodate housing.
                                                                TABLE 51
                          DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS FOR RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
                                                            AMERICAN CANYON
                                                                    2014
                                                                    Zoning
     Development                   Zoning          Zoning             RR-         Zoning         Zoning         Zoning        Zoning
        Standard                       RE        RR-20,000          10,000       RS-8,000 RS-6,500                 RM            RH
                                                                                                                        Per          Per
                                   1 unit/acre
Maximum density                                         2 (U/A)        4 (U/A)       6 (U/A)          7(U/A)      General General
                                          (U/A)
                                                                                                                       Plan         Plan
                                                                    10,000 sq.                                  20,000 sq. 20,000 sq.
Minimum area per lot 43,560 sq. ft. 20,000 sq. ft.                               8,000 sq. ft.   6,500 sq. ft.
                                                                             ft.                                         ft.1         ft.1
Minimum width per
                                       120 feet          75 feet        70 feet       65 feet          60 feet   100 feet1     100 feet1
lot
Minimum depth per
                                       200 feet        120 feet       110 feet       100 feet          90 feet   100 feet1     100 feet1
lot
Minimum front yard                  10% of lot           20 feet        20 feet       15 feet          15 feet      15 feet      20 feet
   Garage                                 depth                --             --      20 feet          20 feet      20 feet             --
Minimum side yard
                                    10% of lot
   First story                                           10 feet        10 feet         5 feet          5 feet       5 feet        5 feet
                                         width
   Second story                               --         10 feet        10 feet         8 feet          8 feet      10 feet      10 feet
Street side of corner
                                              --         10 feet        10 feet       10 feet          10 feet      10 feet      10 feet
lot
                                    25% of lot
Minimum rear yard                                        20 feet        20 feet       20 feet          15 feet      10 feet      10 feet
                                          depth
Maximum building
                                           30%              30%           30%            40%              40%          50%          50%
coverage
Maximum number of
                                             2.5             2.5            2.5            2.5              2.5            3             3
stories
Maximum building height
Main structure                           35 feet         35 feet        35 feet       35 feet          35 feet      42 feet      42 feet
Detached accessory
                                         20 feet         15 feet        15 feet       15 feet          15 feet      15 feet      15 feet
bldg.
(1) Applies only to the subdivision of master parcels for future development. The minimum lot size, width, and depth standards for
individual residential lots shall be in accordance with an approved development plan.
Source: City of American Canyon Zoning Ordinance, 2014.
      B-94                                                                                             Adopted March 17, 2015

2015-2023 HOUSING ELEMENT                                       CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON
The table shows that the development standards remain fairly constant across all residential
zoning districts. One exception to note is that the minimum lot area per unit decreases as
allowable intensity increases from the RE, single family residential zone to the RM,
multifamily residential. Likewise the front setback requirement becomes less restrictive as
permitted density increases.
The maximum building height for all residential zones is 35 to 42 feet. This allows for
development to exceed two stories in all zones for all residential housing types. Section
19.10.090 of the Zoning Ordinance allows architectural projections such as mechanical
equipment and other appurtenant roof-top structures or penetrations such as skylights,
stairwells, and ventilation atria; spires, cupolas, chimneys, and other design elements
integral to the overall design character of a building intended to distinguish its design may
be permitted above the height limits where it does not conflict with the intent of the Zoning
Ordinance, but may not exceed 20 percent of the horizontal area of the floor area below or
10 feet in height above the main roof.
Parking standards are based on the number of units for both single family and multifamily
developments. All single family residences are required to provide a minimum of two
parking spaces per unit. Parking for multifamily residential dwellings are based on the
number of bedrooms ranging from studio (one parking space) to units with two or more
bedrooms (one covered space plus one uncovered space). Senior housing is required to
provide one parking space per 1.5 units. In the case of mixed uses, the number of required
parking spaces may be reduced for projects comprised of uses that generate parking needs
primarily at different times, and that cooperatively establish and operate shared parking
facilities.
While all of the base residential development standards are listed above, Section 19.10.050 of
the City’s Zoning Ordinance contains provisions that provide flexibility for many base
standards, which allows property owners and developers to maximize development on
their lots without requiring discretionary action. For instance, certain architectural features
may project into required yards such as eaves, cantilevered roofs, fireplace structures,
buttresses, wing walls, bay and greenhouse windows, uncovered porches, platforms, and
landings may extend up to two and one-half feet into a required yard.
Adopted March 17, 2015                                                                     B-95

   CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON                                                         2015-2023 HOUSING ELEMENT
   Table 52 summarizes the Zoning Ordinance development standards in the commercial
   districts. The City adopted the Residential Overlay (RO) district in 2006 to provide for
   higher-density multifamily residential uses on selected sites in the CC and NC districts. The
   RO district allows a density of 20 units per acre west of Broadway/Highway 29 and a
   density of 35 units per acre east of Broadway/Highway 29. Other development standards in
   the RO district are the same as the underlying district.
                                                       TABLE 52
                    DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS FOR COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS
                                                   AMERICAN CANYON
                                                          2014
           Zoning District                                   CN                                     CC
Minimum area per lot                                         10,000 square feet                                   1 acre
Minimum width per lot                                                    200 feet                               200 feet
Minimum depth per lot                                                    100 feet                               100 feet
Minimum front yard                                                        10 feet                                20 feet
Minimum side yard                                                          10 feet                               10 feet
Street side of corner lot                                                  10 feet                               15 feet
Minimum rear yard                                                          20 feet                               10 feet
Minimum setback from Hwy. 29                            40 feet, 50 feet average              40 feet, 50 feet average
Maximum floor area ratio (FAR)
 Nonresidential                                                        0.35 FAR                               0.50 FAR
 Mixed-use structure                                                     1.5 FAR                               1.5 FAR
  Residential portion                                                    1.0 FAR                               1.0 FAR
  Commercial portion                                                     0.5 FAR                               0.5 FAR
Maximum no. of stories                                                           2                                     3
Maximum building height,                                                                42 feet west of Broadway, 54
                                                                           30 feet
residential or mixed use                                                                        feet east of Broadway
Maximum building coverage for standalone residential uses
Outside Residential Overlay                                   Up to 25 percent                        Up to 25 percent
                                                50 percent west of Broadway             50 percent west of Broadway
Within Residential Overlay
                                                  60 percent east of Broadway            60 percent east of Broadway
Source: City of American Canyon Zoning Ordinance, 2014.
   Inclusionary Housing Requirement
   Inclusionary units are those units that are required to be provided at affordable rents or
   sales prices to specified households of residential projects containing 10 or more dwelling
   units when initial sales prices or rents will be affordable only to above moderate-income
   households. Currently, the City requires inclusionary units for both ownership and rental
   projects.
   However, in 2009 the case of Palmer/Sixth Street Properties, L.P. vs. City of Los Angeles
   held that the City of Los Angeles Inclusionary Housing Ordinance and its in-lieu fee
   provision was invalid for rental properties under the Costa Hawkins Act. Since that time
   there have been no contrary court decisions to Palmer, and there have been no legislative
   changes to alter the holding of Palmer. In response to this court case, the City is in the
   B-96                                                                                    Adopted March 17, 2015
2015-2023 HOUSING ELEMENT                                            CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON
process of amending the inclusionary housing ordinance to remove the inclusionary
requirement for rental housing. In place of the inclusionary requirement, the City is
conducting a nexus study to consider adopting an affordable housing impact fee for rental
units and a commercial linkage fee to generate funds to support the development of
affordable housing.
The following list states the current required number and type of inclusionary units:
     Ownership projects shall provide a number of inclusionary units equal to at least 10
      percent of applicable project units at prices or rents affordable to low-income
      households. Such inclusionary units may be either ownership units or rental units.
     Currently, rental projects shall provide a number of inclusionary units equal to at least
      5 percent of applicable project units at prices or rents affordable to low-income
      households, and 5 percent affordable to very low-income households. The
      inclusionary units shall be rental units. However, the City will remove the
      inclusionary requirement for rental units, and is in the process of conducting a nexus
      study to consider adopting an affordable housing impact fee for rental housing
      developments. In determining the number of inclusionary units to be provided, any
      decimal fraction of 0.3 or more shall be rounded up to the nearest whole number, and
      any decimal fraction of less than 0.3 shall be rounded down to the nearest whole
      number.
     Where an odd number of inclusionary units are required of a rental housing project, a
      larger number of units affordable to very low-income households shall be provided
      (e.g., if the inclusionary requirement equals three units, two shall be affordable to very
      low-income households and one shall be affordable to a low-income household). If
      only one inclusionary unit is required, such unit must be affordable to a very low-
      income household.
Alternative methods for meeting the inclusionary housing requirement are discussed below.
     By permitting the developer to provide a site for the construction of affordable
      housing in lieu of constructing inclusionary housing units.
     By providing a fee payment as an alternative when the construction of such units is
      infeasible, the City will use the fee to acquire a site for the construction of an
      affordable housing project. The fee is $10,250 per each required inclusionary housing
      unit.
Inclusionary units should be constructed concurrently with market rate units unless both
the City and the developer/applicant agree within the housing agreement to an alternative
schedule for development. Inclusionary units shall be evenly distributed throughout the
project, except that the decision-making body may waive this requirement if it finds that
such distribution is infeasible for one or more of the following reasons:
Adopted March 17, 2015                                                                       B-97

CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON                                          2015-2023 HOUSING ELEMENT
     Significant topographic or other constraints exist rendering such distribution
      infeasible.
     Substantially improved site design will result from such waiver.
     Substantially improved building design and an improved unit amenity level will
      result from such waiver.
     Significant economic hardships will result from such distribution that does not apply
      to other projects in the city.
     Significant economic hardships will result from such distribution for the developer of
      the inclusionary units receiving financial assistance from the Federal, State, or local
      governmental agencies if such waiver is not granted.
The City of American Canyon’s inclusionary requirements are similar to those of other
jurisdictions within Napa County. As is also typical, American Canyon’s Inclusionary
Ordinance contains a variety of concessions or incentives for construction of affordable
units, including but not limited to, density bonuses or incentives of equal financial value;
waiver or modification of City standards; provision of direct financial assistance; and
deferral of payment of City fees. Since adoption of this ordinance in 2006, all multifamily
residential apartments have constructed inclusionary units on site in accordance with the
ordinance while low-density single family has typically provided in-lieu fees. Based on this
assessment, it is concluded that the City’s inclusionary requirements do not pose a
constraint to residential development, and are one of the key programs to assist in
providing housing affordable to low- and moderate-income households.
Mobile Home Park Conversion Ordinance
Chapter 19.32 ensures that any proposed conversion of an existing mobile home park to any
other use is preceded by adequate notice, that the social and fiscal impacts of the proposed
conversion are adequately defined prior to consideration of a proposed conversion, and that
relocation and other assistance is provided to park residents, consistent with the provisions
of the Ordinance Sections 65863.7 and 66427.4 of the California Government Code.
In addition to any other necessary discretionary land use permit applications, such as a
subdivision or a design permit, the conversion of any existing mobile home park to any
other use shall require the review of a use permit application by the Planning Commission,
which shall forward a recommendation on the discretionary permits and use permit to the
City Council for final action. In approving a use permit for a mobile home park conversion,
the City Council shall find that the proposed conversion meets the following requirements,
in addition to the other requirements of the Ordinance:
     The proposed use of the property is consistent with the General Plan and any and all
      of its elements, any applicable specific plan, or planned unit development plan or
      similar mechanism provided for in State law or City ordinance, and this chapter.
B-98                                                                     Adopted March 17, 2015

2015-2023 HOUSING ELEMENT                                        CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON
     The residents of the mobile home park have been adequately notified of the proposed
      conversion including information pertaining to the anticipated timing of the proposed
      conversion.
     Any mobile home residents displaced as a result of the conversion shall be
      compensated by the applicant for all reasonable costs incurred as a result of their
      relocation.
     The relocation plan mitigates the impacts of the displacement of individuals or
      households for a reasonable transition period and mitigates the impacts of any long-
      term displacement.
     The conversion will not result in the displacement of very low-, low-, or moderate-
      income mobile home residents or senior citizens over the age of 62 who cannot afford
      rents charged in other mobile home parks within the city or Napa County, unless
      otherwise approved by the City Council.
     Land exists zoned for new or replacement comparable mobile home parks or adequate
      space is available in other comparable mobile home parks within the city or Napa
      County for the residents who will be displaced.
     The age, type, size, and style of mobile homes to be displaced as a result of the
      conversion will be able to be relocated into other comparable mobile home parks
      within the city or Napa County, or that the applicant has agreed to purchase any
      mobile home that cannot be relocated at its in-place value as provided for in this
      chapter.
Senior Housing Conversion Ordinance
The City has established policies related to conversion of senior housing projects to non-
senior housing projects. According to the ordinance, no senior housing shall convert to a
non-senior housing project unless the project first obtains a conversion permit, consistent
with the procedures outlined in Section 19.34.040. The Planning Commission shall conduct a
public hearing on all complete applications for conversion permits. The Planning
Commission shall issue a conversion permit if it makes a finding consistent with the
following:
     The proposed use is consistent with the Zoning Ordinance and General Plan.
     The project must comply with parking requirements.
     The applicant has paid all applicable fees including school district fees.
     All required notices were given relating to six-month notice of changes of regulations
      of mobile home parks.
     The applicant has complied with CEQA requirements.
Adopted March 17, 2015                                                                    B-99

CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON                                           2015-2023 HOUSING ELEMENT
Rental Housing Conversion
Chapter 18.32 of the Subdivision Ordinance deals with condominium conversions. The
purpose of this section is to:
     Alleviate the adverse impact that condominium conversions will have on the City’s
      ability to meet its affordable housing requirement;
     Promote greater individual choice in type, quality, price, and location of housing;
     Provide for the housing needs of all segments of the population;
     Provide increased homeownership opportunities for all segments of the population;
     Mitigate the hardship caused by displacement of tenants, particularly those in low to
      moderate cost housing and those who are elderly, families with minor dependent
      children, and the disabled;
     Promote the safety of conversion projects and correction of building code violations in
      such projects;
     Provide adequate off-street parking;
     Encourage construction of new rental units to replace units lost due to conversions;
     Protect the existing rental housing stock by reducing conversions;
     Provide increased opportunities for the ownership of commercial or industrial real
      property in the form of condominiums or stock cooperatives;
     Assure that the continued use of buildings for commercial or industrial purposes is
      substantially consistent with the City’s General Plan; and
     Generally regulate projects in accordance with the General Plan and with the public
      health, safety, and welfare.
As a condition of tentative map or preliminary parcel map approval, the advisory agency
shall require that the applicant or successor in interest pay to the City a fee of $5,000 for each
unit in a residential conversion project, based on the number of units in the project prior to
conversion. This fee must be paid prior to approval of the final map by the City Engineer.
All fees collected pursuant to this section are deposited and held in the rental housing
production account of the City’s Community Development Department, which is to be
administered by the City’s Planning Division separately from all other money. Money in
this account shall be used exclusively for the development of low- and moderate-income
rental housing in the city, pursuant to guidelines approved by resolution of the City
Council.
The following requirements apply to condominium conversions:
B-100                                                                     Adopted March 17, 2015

2015-2023 HOUSING ELEMENT                                          CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON
     Each residential conversion project must comply with any and all affordable income
      housing provisions in the Municipal Code, including but not limited to, Chapter 19.28.
     Parking for residential conversion projects.
           o   The minimum number of resident parking spaces per dwelling unit shall be
               1.25 parking spaces per dwelling unit having three or fewer habitable rooms
               and 1.5 parking spaces per dwelling unit having more than three habitable
               rooms. The advisory agency may increase or decrease the required number of
               parking spaces up to and including 0.75 spaces per dwelling unit, where it
               finds that such modification is consistent with the purposes of this chapter.
           o   The minimum number of guest parking spaces shall be 0.25 spaces per
               dwelling unit for projects containing fifty or fewer units and 0.5 per dwelling
               unit for projects containing more than fifty units. The advisory agency may
               modify the guest parking requirement up to and including 0.5 per unit where
               it finds such modification consistent with the purposes of this section.
           o   The advisory agency may require up to one of the required resident parking
               spaces per dwelling unit be provided in a private garage or carport where it
               finds that it is reasonable and feasible and consistent with the purposes of this
               chapter.
           o   Where the number of parking spaces required by other provisions of this code
               in existence on the date of map application exceeds the minimum numbers
               established by this section, the number of parking spaces shall not be
               diminished.
           o   The design and improvement of parking facilities and areas shall substantially
               conform to the provisions of Chapter 10.32 of Title 10 of the City Municipal
               Code.
Density Bonus
Chapter 19.27 of the City Zoning Ordinance pertains to housing incentives and encourages
the development of housing that meets the needs identified in the Housing Element of the
General Plan by allowing the granting of density bonuses and other incentives.
State Density Bonus Law (Government Code Section 65915-65918) requires the City to
provide certain incentives to developers that provide affordable or senior housing. Cities
and counties are required to grant a density bonus and other incentives or concessions to
housing projects that contain one of the following:
     At least 5 percent of the units are restricted to very low-income residents;
     At least 10 percent of the units are restricted to lower-income residents;
     At least 10 percent of the units in a for-sale common interest development are
      restricted to moderate-income residents;
Adopted March 17, 2015                                                                     B-101

CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON                                          2015-2023 HOUSING ELEMENT
      The project is a senior citizen housing development (no affordable units required); or
      The project is a mobile home park age-restricted to senior citizens (no affordable units
       required).
The amount of the density bonus is set on a sliding scale, based upon the percentage of
affordable units at each income level, with a maximum density bonus of 35 percent for
projects that include either 10 percent very low-income units, 20 percent lower-income
units, or 40 percent moderate-income units.
In addition to the density bonus, the City is also required to provide up to three incentives
or concessions to a project that qualifies for the density bonus. An incentive or concession is
defined as:
      A reduction in site development standards or a modification of zoning code or
       architectural design requirements, such as a reduction in setback or minimum square
       footage requirements;
      Approval of mixed-use zoning; or
      Other regulatory incentives or concessions which actually result in identifiable and
       financially sufficient cost reductions.
The number of required incentives or concessions is based on the percentage of affordable
units in the project, as follows:
      For projects with at least 5 percent very low-income, 10 percent lower-income, or 10
       percent moderate-income units, one incentive or concession is required.
      For projects with at least 10 percent very low-income, 20 percent lower-income, or 20
       percent moderate-income units, two incentives or concessions are required.
      For projects with at least 15 percent very low-income, 30 percent lower-income, or 30
       percent moderate-income units, three incentives or concessions are required.
The City amended its Zoning Code on December 2, 2014 to comply with State law. These
changes state the City shall provide a density bonus of at least 35 percent, and up to three
additional incentives, or equivalent financial incentives for qualified housing developments.
Building, Safety, and Code Enforcement
Building and fire codes can have a significant effect on housing affordability. They can also
act as barriers to achieving designated densities or have unintentional impacts on
community housing design and character. Inflexible standards may also inhibit innovative
housing types and design. Building and safety codes establish minimum standards and
specifications for structural soundness, safety, and occupancy. State housing law requires
local jurisdictions to adopt minimum housing standards based on model industry codes.
B-102                                                                    Adopted March 17, 2015

2015-2023 HOUSING ELEMENT                                        CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON
New construction in American Canyon, including additions, must comply with the 2013
California Building Codes (CBC). The City implemented the 2013 CBC and other State
regulations as required by law, including the energy conservation requirements for new
residential structures and the accessibility regulations for the disabled in multifamily
structures. American Canyon Fire District (ACFD) has adopted the periodic updated
Uniform Fire Code (UFC). Pursuant to the UFC and local ordinance, the District now
requires sprinklers in all residential structures. The Fire District inspects all apartment
buildings annually to ensure that the units comply with safety requirements, such as
appropriate smoke detectors and emergency exits.
Other than the inspections of apartments, City inspectors will only inspect existing
residences in response to complaints of substandard housing or unsafe conditions received
from the public. In these cases the City takes enforcement action only in cases where the
dwelling in question does not comply with the Uniform Housing Code, which specifies
minimum standards for the health, safety, and welfare of residents. These standards are less
stringent than the current CBC for new construction. Existing residences may be remodeled
or expanded provided that the existing structure has no obvious sanitary or safety hazards,
all building code requirements have been met, and the necessary permits have been issued.
Additions must comply with the current building codes.
The Community Development Department contains Code Enforcement staff that work
regularly with Building and Planning to ensure building and zoning standards are being
enforced and followed within the city. Table 53 shows a list of enforcement actions
documented from 2009 to 2014. There were 1,509 code infractions from 2009 to 2014. The
majority of the enforcement interactions were in neighborhood preservation, as described in
Chapter 9.04.040, which includes a variety of nuisances that detract from the appearance,
safety, economic value, and livability of the neighborhoods.
                                           TABLE 53
                        SUMMARY OF CODE ENFORCEMENT INFRACTIONS
                                        AMERICAN CANYON
                                              2014
                    Case Type               2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 Total
 Building                                      128    46      45      49    57    36     361
 Fire Code                                       0     0      79       0     0     0      79
 High Weeds                                      0     0       0      56    67    88     211
 Neighborhood Preservation                     179   166     150    111    123    65     794
 Substandard Housing                             4    14      13      13     8    12      64
 Total                                         311   226     287    229    255   201   1,509
 Source: City of American Canyon, 2014.
Adopted March 17, 2015                                                                 B-103
CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON                                                 2015-2023 HOUSING ELEMENT
On- and Off-Site Improvements
In most areas of the city, all of the utilities, such as sewer lines, water lines, natural gas, and
electrical service exist along at least one side of each street. Very few parcels would require
any measurable extension of utilities to serve a development site. In areas where curbs,
gutters, sidewalks, improved streets, and utilities exist, it is likely that off-site improvements
would not be required. In unimproved areas the City would typically require the
installation of curbs, gutters, and sidewalks, and upgrading the facing street to the
centerline to City standards.
Fees and Exactions
The City requires a number of permits and development fees to cover the cost of processing
development requests, providing public facilities and services to new development, and
mitigating the environmental impacts of new development. Although these fees are
necessary to meet City service and environmental standards, they can have a substantial
impact on the cost of housing, particularly affordable housing. The City has policies and
programs in the Housing Element to help alleviate the impact of fees on the provision of
affordable housing, by providing fee deferrals or fee reductions, or using the Affordable
Housing Fund to subsidize fees, as appropriate.
Table 54 summarizes the City’s building permit fees for single family and multifamily
development. Normally, permit fees would have a minimal impact on housing costs
because most the fees are flat rate charges, not per unit charges, and can be spread over the
entire development. For a modest-sized development proposal, permit fees would typically
amount to a few thousand dollars per dwelling unit. Permit fees could have a more
substantial impact on small, infill projects that would be typical of most remaining vacant
land.
                                             TABLE 54
                                     BUILDING PERMIT FEES
                                         AMERICAN CANYON
                                                 2014
              Service                                                Fee
                              Single Family Building Permit Fees
1-1,500 square feet                                                                              $1,246
1,501-3,000                                                                                      $1,539
3,001-4,500                                                                                      $1,832
4,501-6,000                                                                                      $2,418
6,001 + square feet- additional time                                                                $72
per 200 square feet
Electrical Permit                     $37 Plus $0.15 per sq. ft. (Note: fee for construction work on
                                      one- and two-family dwellings)
                                      Minimum fee $77
B-104                                                                            Adopted March 17, 2015

2015-2023 HOUSING ELEMENT                                                    CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON
                                                TABLE 54
                                      BUILDING PERMIT FEES
                                            AMERICAN CANYON
                                                    2014
               Service                                                   Fee
Mechanical Permit                        $37 Plus $0.12 per sq. ft. (Note: fee for construction work on
                                         one- and two-family dwellings)
                                         Minimum fee $55
Plumbing                                 $37 Plus $0.12 per sq. ft. (Note: fee for construction work on
                                         one- and two-family dwellings)
                                         Minimum fee $55
                                 Multifamily Building Permit Fees
1-5,000 square feet                                                                                  $1,939
5,001-10,000                                                                                         $2,624
10,001-15,000                                                                                        $3,895
15,001-30,000                                                                                        $5,239
30,001-50,000                                                                                        $7,095
50,001 + square feet- Additional                                                                      $579
time per 5,000 square feet
Electrical Permit                        $37 Plus $0.10 per sq. ft. (Note: fee for multifamily building
                                         such as apartments and condominiums having three or more
                                         dwellings units constructed at the same time)
                                         Minimum fee $77
Mechanical Permit                        $37 Plus $0.08 per sq. ft. (Note: fee for multifamily building
                                         such as apartments and condominiums having three or more
                                         dwellings units constructed at the same time)
                                         Minimum fee $55
Plumbing                                 $34 Plus $0.08 per sq. ft. (Note fee for multifamily building
                                         such as apartments and condominiums having three or more
                                         dwellings units constructed at the same time)
                                         Minimum fee $55
      Other Inspections and Fees (including inspection of fire sprinkler systems)
Code compliance inspection               $275 plus $50 per unit
condominium conversion
Inspections outside of normal            $260 minimum, plus the hourly rate of the Building Inspector
business hours                           I and II for each additional hour over 2 hours
Re-inspection fees                       $130 minimum, plus the hourly rate of the Building Inspector
                                         I and II for each additional hour over 1 hour
Inspection for which no fees are         $117 minimum plus the hourly rate of the Building Inspector I
specifically indicated                   and II for each additional hour over 1 hour
Source: American Canyon Community Development Department, User Fee Schedule, 2014.
In addition to the building permit fees, there are planning fees that cover the cost of
reviewing and approving the plans and providing inspection services. Fees are charged to
cover the costs of City staff review and processing of applications and permits related to
housing development. A project’s application fees are estimated upon submittal, and the
Adopted March 17, 2015                                                                                 B-105

CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON                                        2015-2023 HOUSING ELEMENT
developer pays a deposit covering the estimate. Actual staff time spent on the project is then
deducted from the deposit amount, and any unspent remainder is refunded.
B-106                                                                  Adopted March 17, 2015
2015-2023 HOUSING ELEMENT                                                  CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON
                                                  TABLE 55
                                              PLANNING FEES
                                               AMERICAN CANYON
                                                      2014
                     Fee Category                                              Fee Amount
                                     Planning and Application Fees
Pre-Application                                                           $680    Deposit of $280 is required
                                                Design Permit
Director review                                                         $2,969   Deposit of $1,200 is required
Planning Commission review                                              $6,525   Deposit of $3,000 is required
Major Conditional Use Permit                                            $6,525   Deposit of $3,000 is required
Minor Conditional Use Permit                                            $1,652                         Flat fee
Variance                                                                $1,528   Deposit of $1,000 is required
Minor variation                                                         $1,073    Deposit of $800 is required
Minor modification                                                        $809    Deposit of $500 is required
Major modification                                                      $1,618   Deposit of $1,200 is required
Pre-zoning/ rezoning                                                    $2,994   Deposit of $2,000 is required
Zoning ordinance amendment                                              $6,700   Deposit of $4,000 is required
General Plan amendment                                                  $6,700   Deposit of $4,000 is required
Specific plan                                                                                     Actual cost
Specific plan amendment                                                 $6,006   Deposit of $3,000 is required
Home occupation permit                                                     $55                         Flat fee
Zoning Clearance                                                           $55                         Flat fee
                                                 Subdivision
Parcel map                                                              $2,875   Deposit of $1,225 is required
Tentative subdivision map                                               $6,552   Deposit of $3,000 is required
Lot line adjustment                                                     $1,467    Deposit of $600 is required
Lot merger                                                              $2,866    Deposit of $1,25 is required
Reversion to acreage map                                                $1,467    Deposit of $600 is required
Map extensions                                                            $826                         Flat fee
Final map review                                                          $305    Deposit of $280 is required
                                          Environmental Review
The Community Development Director will evaluate all permit applications for compliance with the
California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA). The initial determination may be revised during review
of the application. Prior to final action by the City, the applicant shall pay any additional applicable fees
required for conformance with CEQA.
Environmental Review - Categorical Exemption                              $110       County Clerk Fee of $50
Initial Study (if performed in house)                                  $11,623 Deposit of $2,500 is required
                                                                                  Or 20% of contract amount,
CEQA Document Administration and Review                                 $6,456
                                                                                         whichever is greater
Mitigation Monitoring                                                   $1,220 Deposit of $1,000 is required
                                                Miscellaneous
Appeal                                                                    $606                         Flat fee
Non-conforming use certificate                                            $275                         Flat fee
Planning plan check (General)                                             $145    Deposit of $100 is required
Special Commission meetings                                               $551                         Flat fee
Time extensions                                                           $385                         Flat fee
Adopted March 17, 2015                                                                                B-107
CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON                                                2015-2023 HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                   TABLE 55
                                               PLANNING FEES
                                                AMERICAN CANYON
                                                      2014
                     Fee Category                                             Fee Amount
Classifications of use                                                 $132                           Flat fee
Planned Community District Conceptual Master Plan                   $22,572     Deposit of $5,000 is required
Planned Community District Development Permit                        $6,525     Deposit of $2,500 is required
Development Agreement                                               $13,445     Deposit of $6,000 is required
Processing Second Unit Planning Application                            $116                           Flat fee
                                                                   $195 for
                                                                 previously
Residential Building Permit for Public Works                  approved and                            Flat fee
                                                            submitted, $373
                                                             for new (infill)
Source: American Canyon Master Fee Schedule, 2015.
Development impact fees have a much larger effect than permit fees on the final cost of a
home. Such fees include water and sewer impact and hook-up costs, park fees (in lieu of
land dedication), traffic impact fees, and similar charges. Residential development is
assessed fees by the City, County, and school district to cover the costs of infrastructure
improvements and maintenance, and the provision of services. The largest fees are related
to sewer and water service, and reflect the cost of providing, improving, and expanding
these utilities.
Other types of exactions include land dedication, which may be required of residential
development for right-of-ways, or as an alternative to the park development fee, in addition
to on-site improvements that are necessary for the public health, safety, and welfare. Such
improvements may include: water, sewer, and other utility line extensions; street
construction; and traffic control device installations that are reasonably related to a project.
Table 56 shows estimated impact fees for new single family and multifamily development.
Development impact fees for a 2,000-square foot single family unit would cost an estimated
$30,579, plus school fees, for a total of $39,139. Fees for an 800-square foot multifamily unit
would cost an estimated $21,852, plus school fees, for a total of $25,276. Planning and
permitting fees would add an estimated $2,000 to the cost of a single family home and
roughly $500 for a multifamily unit, for a total estimated cost of $41,139 for a single family
home and $25,776 for a multifamily unit. There is a significant cost benefit to multifamily
development.
B-108                                                                            Adopted March 17, 2015
2015-2023 HOUSING ELEMENT                                                  CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON
                                                       TABLE 56
                                        DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEES
                                                     AMERICAN CANYON
                                                           2014
                             Impact                               Single Family Unit  Multifamily Unit
  Water Connection                                                            $12,462            $8,100
  Wastewater Connection                                                        $8,106            $5,210
  Traffic Mitigation Impact                                                    $3,954            $2,600
  Parks                                                                        $4,394            $4,394
  Public Facilities                                                            $1,343            $1,343
  Fire District Mitigation Fees
  $0.2050 per sq ft for single family                                            $410             $200
  $0.2501 per sq ft for multifamily
  School district fees ($4.28 per sq ft as of January 2014)                    $5,260            $2,104
  Total                                                                       $35,929          $23,951
  1
    Assumes 2,000 square feet per single family unit
  2
    Assumes 800 square feet per multifamily unit
  Source: American Canyon, 2014.
Based on the cost analysis in the Non-Governmental Constraints Section, development
impact fees can account for approximately 10 percent of the total estimated per unit cost for
single family units and about 11 percent for multifamily units. The cost impact of these fees
is not significant for typical single family homes. The City’s development impact fees could,
however, be significant for an affordable single family or multifamily housing project
oriented to low- or moderate-income households.
Possible Reduction of Fees
Sewer and water connection fees are adopted by ordinance by the City Council and are
directly related to the cost of providing clean and potable domestic water and the treatment
of domestic waste at the wastewater treatment plant. Any reduction in the sewer and or
water connection fees will either have to be offset by increases paid by the residents or a
reduction in the water and sewer funds.
Impact fees are directly related to the cost of mitigating impacts of new development on
existing City services. The City has adopted a Traffic Impact Mitigation Fee and Parks
Impact Fee. The Traffic Impact Mitigation Fee generates revenues to improve certain
roadway segments and intersection improvements to accommodate the additional traffic
from new development. Where a developer proposes to install one or more roadway and or
intersection improvements set forth in the Impact Fee ordinance, credits are granted.
The Parks Impact Fee generates revenues to provide park land, park improvements, and the
pro-rata contributions from new development to such facilities as the police station and
library. Developers can provide the parks and park improvements on-site and have this
portion of the fees waived or credited. Any reduction in fees without providing the on-site
park amenities will impact existing facilities in the vicinity of the project area, or the
improvements would have to be funded through the General Fund.
Adopted March 17, 2015                                                                             B-109

CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON                                         2015-2023 HOUSING ELEMENT
The City Council will consider reducing or waiving building permit fees, impact fees, and
sewer and water connection fees for affordable housing projects when the developer can
show that the waivers or reductions in adopted fees are necessary for the financial feasibility
of the project and the targeted rents.
Processing and Permit Procedures
The evaluation and review process required by City procedures contributes to the cost of
housing in that holding costs incurred by developers are ultimately manifested in the selling
price of the home. The City Council and Planning Commission govern the review process in
American Canyon, or depending on the project, it might be reviewed by the Community
Development Director.
Community Development Department
City staff seeks in all cases to streamline approval processes wherever possible. Conditional
use permits, rezones, tentative maps, and plan checks are all processed within
approximately three to four months, if an environmental impact report is not necessary, and
assuming that there are no significant issues affecting the project. If environmental
processing is required, or if it is necessary to resolve special issues, processing times are
streamlined to the extent possible within statutory limits governing review periods.
There are two basic development permits in the City of American Canyon, and any new
development is subject to one or the other, but never both for the same project. Planning
Commission approval of a Design Permit (Chapter 19.41 of the Zoning Code) is required for
any multifamily dwellings of five or more units in the Residential Medium and Residential
High Districts. In the Community Commercial and Neighborhood Commercial Districts, a
Conditional Use Permit is required for any multifamily development, except within the
Residential Overlay. The time frames, procedures, and application fees for processing both
Design Permits and Conditional Use Permits are identical. As noted below, the major
differences are in the required findings and the fact that the Planning Commission may
waive or modify development standards as a part of the Use Permit process, but a Design
Permit must adhere to the development standards of the underlying Zoning District unless
a Density Bonus is a part of the applicant’s request.
Table 57 shows the basic processing times. For a residential housing project, plan check is
two weeks for processing and one to two weeks for corrections, resulting in building
permits generally taking a month to get processed and issued. A multifamily project must
go through the Planning Commission for approval that typically takes one month followed
by two weeks for a plan check, and one to two weeks for corrections. The Commission
primarily looks at compliance with development standards such as parking, height,
setbacks, and basic design. A rezoning application takes four to 12 months for processing
and may require a concurrent General Plan Amendment.
B-110                                                                   Adopted March 17, 2015

2015-2023 HOUSING ELEMENT                                                   CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON
                                                TABLE 57
                            TIMELINES FOR PERMIT PROCEDURES
                                            AMERICAN CANYON
                                                    2014
              Type of Approval or Permit                                 Typical Processing Time
Ministerial Review                                                                            1-6 weeks
Conditional Use Permit                                                                      12-16 weeks
Zone Change                                                                                 4-12 months
General Plan Amendment                                                                      4-12 months
Site Plan Review                                                                              4-8 weeks
Design Permit                                                                                8-12 weeks
Tract Maps                                                                                   4-12 weeks
Parcel Maps                                                                                  8-12 weeks
Initial Study                                                                                3-8 months
Environmental Impact Report                                                                 6-12 months
Building Plan Check                                                                           2-4 weeks
Source: American Canyon Community Development Department Projections, 2014.
Design Permit Process
Design permits are required for multifamily residential projects and single family
developments of five or more units. The Community Development Director may approve
design permits for two-family structures and appurtenant accessory structures, and
multifamily projects containing fewer than five units. These administrative permits can be
approved concurrently with other permits and do not add significant time to the
development permit process. No public hearing is required unless the design permit is
being processed concurrently with other applications for which a hearing is required. In this
case the design permit is considered at the same time. Small multifamily projects in the RM
Zone are most likely to be within the threshold for approval of administrative design
permits.
All other residential projects require design permits from the Planning Commission. The
Design Permit process takes approximately 8 to 12 weeks from the date of submittal of a
complete application, which, by itself, does not add significant time to the permit approval
process.
The scope of a Design Permit covers site planning issues such as compliance with zoning
standards, preservation of natural site amenities, and the use of landscaping, outdoor
lighting, and usability of open spaces. The Design Permit also considers structural design
issues such as the scale and configuration of structures, compatibility of design features and
building materials with surrounding land uses, screening of utility and mechanical facilities,
and the relationship of primary structures and accessory elements.
Adopted March 17, 2015                                                                            B-111
CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON                                          2015-2023 HOUSING ELEMENT
The City and approving authority must make the following findings to approve a Design
Permit:
     That the project complies with all General Plan policies and zoning standards (e.g.,
      standards for size, massing, color, placement, setbacks)
     That the quality and character of the project is compatible with its surroundings.
     That the design avoids excessive variety and monotonous repetition.
     That the design promotes harmonious transition between different land uses.
     That the design provides for adequate and safe circulation.
An applicant can achieve these findings for approval by adhering to the design guidelines
and principles outlined within the General Plan Land Use Element. These guidelines
include a specific design criterion that includes examples, such as building orientation,
massing, color scheme, vegetation, ground cover, building materials, architectural features,
and characteristics. These guidelines are intended to assist an applicant in creating a viable
housing proposal.
The City does not believe that the application of the Design Permit process adds significant
time or cost to a project. Most of the design criteria and findings relate to aspects of a project
that the City must review for compliance with zoning standards and CEQA. The Design
Permit by itself rarely results in the imposition of significant, additional development
requirements. The City has not used the design permit process to impose costly architectural
or material requirements, to reduce project densities below the level that could otherwise be
achieved in the applicable zone, or to impose excessive landscaping, parking, or other
requirements that could significantly increase project costs.
Conditional Use Permits
As noted above, Conditional Use Permits (CUPs) typically require about 12 to 16 weeks for
approval. The City believes this time frame helps facilitate the provision of housing in
American Canyon and keeps added costs associated with delays in permit approvals to a
minimum. A review of other nearby cities reveals that the processing time for similar type
projects can take as long as 4 to 6 months in Napa, 7 to 10 weeks in Benicia, or two months
in Vallejo.
Chapter 19.42.020 in the Zoning Ordinance prescribes the procedures for obtaining a CUP.
Briefly, these procedures include submittal of a complete application followed by approval
by the Community Development Director (for minor use permits) or the Planning
Commission (for CUPs). Upon receipt of a complete application, action is generally taken on
CUPs in four to six weeks.
B-112                                                                     Adopted March 17, 2015

2015-2023 HOUSING ELEMENT                                          CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON
The Commission must make a few broad findings in approving a CUP application:
     The proposed use is consistent with the General Plan and any applicable master or
      specific plan.
     The proposed use is consistent with the purposes and standards of the district in
      which the site is located.
     The proposed use complies with applicable policies of the Napa County Airport land
      use compatibility plan.
     The project site is physically suitable for the type and intensity of land use being
      proposed.
     The proposed use will not be a nuisance or materially detrimental to the general
      health, safety, and welfare of the public or to property and residents in the vicinity.
     The site for the proposed use has adequate access and meets parking and circulation
      standards and criteria.
     There are adequate provisions for water and sanitary services and other public utilities
      to ensure that the proposed use would not be detrimental to public health and safety.
Neither the CUP process nor the required findings create additional standards or thresholds
of compliance that are not already addressed by development standards for the Community
Commercial zone or through the environmental mitigation process required under CEQA.
As noted above, the advantage of a CUP is that the Planning Commission can waive
development standards by a CUP, where with a Design Permit the Planning Commission
must find that the project meets all required design and development standards of the
Zoning Code and General Plan. The City believes that the impact of the Conditional Use
Permit process on housing availability and affordability will be minimal.
Housing Constraints for Persons with Disabilities
Persons with disabilities normally have a number of housing needs that are related to the
following: accessibility of dwelling units, access to transportation, employment, commercial
services, and alternative living arrangements that include on-site or nearby supportive
services. American Canyon ensures that new housing developments comply with California
building standards (Title 24 of the California Code of Regulations) and Federal
requirements for accessibility.
Definition of Family
The American Canyon Municipal Code defines “family” as “one or more individuals
occupying a dwelling unit and living as a single household unit.” This definition is not
considered restrictive.
Adopted March 17, 2015                                                                      B-113

CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON                                          2015-2023 HOUSING ELEMENT
Procedures for Ensuring Reasonable Accommodations
The City adopted a reasonable accommodation ordinance (Chapter 19.52) in 2009. The
Reasonable Accommodation Ordinance contains a formal procedure for an individual with
a disability seeking equal access to housing to request reasonable accommodation. A request
for reasonable accommodation may be made by any person with a disability, his or her
representative, or an entity, developer, or provider of housing for individuals with
disabilities, when the application of a land use or zoning regulation, policy, practice or
procedure acts as a barrier to housing opportunities. Those requesting reasonable
accommodation must complete the Request for Reasonable Accommodation Form and
submit it to the Community Development Department. Requests for reasonable
accommodations are reviewed by the Community Development Director.
Efforts to Remove Regulatory Constraints for Persons with Disabilities
The Lanterman Development Disabilities Act (Lanterman Act) is a part of California law
that sets out rights and responsibilities of persons with developmental disabilities. The
Lanterman Act impacts local zoning ordinances by requiring the use of property for the care
of six or fewer disabled persons to be classified as a residential use under zoning. The City
of American Canyon Municipal Code Section 19.05.040 defines a “Residential Care Home”
as a provision of 24-hour non-medical care of six or fewer persons in need of personnel
services, supervision, protection, or assistance essential for sustaining the activities of daily
living, or a 24-hour care for six or fewer foster children. This classification includes only
those services and facilities licensed by the State for such purposes. The City currently
allows “Residential Care Homes” in the R-R, and R-S zones as a permitted use without
further discretionary entitlements. The City does not impose additional zoning, building
code, or permitting procedures other than those allowed by State law.
The City also allows residential retrofitting to increase the suitability of homes for persons
with disabilities in compliance with accessibility requirements. Such retrofitting is permitted
under Title 16, of the 2013 version of the California Building Code.
Zoning and Other Land Use Regulations
As part of American Canyon’s previous housing element update, the City conducted a
comprehensive review of its zoning laws, policies, and practices for compliance with fair
housing laws. The City has not identified any zoning or other land-use regulatory practices
that could discriminate against persons with disabilities and impede the availability of such
housing for these individuals.
Examples of the ways in which the City facilitates housing for persons with disabilities
through its regulatory and permitting processes are:
B-114                                                                    Adopted March 17, 2015

2015-2023 HOUSING ELEMENT                                           CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON
     Section 19.21.030 (Vehicle Parking Requirements) of the City’s Zoning Ordinance
      requires that access and parking for the handicapped must conform to the latest
      standards established by the State of California.
     The City permits housing for special needs groups, including individuals with
      disabilities, without regard to distances between such uses or the number of uses in
      any part of the city. The Land Use Element of the General Plan does not restrict the
      siting of special needs housing.
Permits and Processing
The City does not impose special permit procedures or requirements that could impede the
retrofitting of homes for accessibility. The City’s requirements for building permits and
inspections are the same as for other residential projects and are straightforward and not
burdensome. City officials are not aware of any instances in which an applicant experienced
delays or rejection of a retrofitting proposal for accessibility to persons with disabilities.
The City allows group homes of six or fewer persons (Residential Care Home) by right in
the RR and RS zones. However, the Zoning Ordinance needs to be amended to allow group
homes in all zones that permit single family homes. The City allows larger group homes
(Congregate Living Facility) in the RM and RH zones.
Building Codes
American Canyon provides reasonable accommodation for persons with disabilities in the
enforcement of land use, zoning, and building regulations, policies, practices, and
procedures of the City. For new construction the City’s building department requires new
housing to comply with the 1998 amendment to the Fair Housing Act, with multifamily
development also subject to the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADFA) standards. These
standards assure that all new apartment buildings are subject to requirements for unit
“adaptability” on ground floor units. Adaptable units are built for easy conversion to
disabled access, such as doorway and hallway widths, and added structural support in the
bathroom to allow the addition of handrails.
The City adopted the 2013 version of the California Building Code (CBC) which includes
Title 24 regulations that address accessibility for disabled persons. (Government Code
Section 65583 (c)(3)).
Local Efforts to Remove Barriers
Consistent with State law, the City of American Canyon has developed several programs to
help remove barriers to creating affordable housing. In 2004 the City amended its Municipal
Code, to include Chapter 19.27, which encourages the development of housing which meets
the needs identified in the Housing Element of the General Plan by allowing the granting of
density bonuses and other incentives. The City updated Chapter 19.27.10 on December 2,
Adopted March 17, 2015                                                                         B-115

CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON                                            2015-2023 HOUSING ELEMENT
2014 to fully comply with State law. Chapter 19.28 provides Inclusionary Housing
requirements, intended to increase the amount of affordable housing within the city. The
ordinance also provides developers options to meet this requirement by offering in-lieu fees
for those who cannot meet the minimum 10 percent. The City also implemented two
ordinances to establish policies and procedures for the conversion of special housing
including the Mobile home Conversion Ordinance and the Senior Housing Conversion
Ordinance.
B. Non-Governmental Constraints
Availability of Financing
The primary factor related to home finance affecting housing affordability and availability is
the cost of borrowing money (interest rates). Historically, substantial changes in interest
rates have correlated with swings in home sales. When interest rates decline, sales increase.
The reverse has been true when interest rates increase. Mortgage rates have steadily
declined since 2007, and hit a historic low in 2013 at 3.41 percent for a 30-year fixed-rate
mortgage. In 2013 interest rates started to increase, but still remain low as of 2014.
While mortgage rates are currently at historic lows, mortgage credit is difficult to obtain for
most first-time buyers and the recent tightening of underwriting standards also hinders the
ability of households at the low and middle tiers to move up. Besides lowering monthly
interest payments for buyers, low interest rates allow existing homeowners to refinance
their homes, thereby lowering monthly housing costs and perhaps preserving their
ownership status.
The City has not found any local constraints to the availability or cost of financing for home
purchases or rehabilitation that differ significantly from the availability and cost of
financing throughout California. Even in older neighborhoods of the city, there are no
barriers to obtaining financing for home purchase, improvement, or construction (other than
customary underwriting considerations by lenders).
Land Costs
Land costs are affected by such factors as zoning density, the availability of infrastructure,
the existence of environmental constraints, and the relative amount of similar land available
for development. The cost of residential land in the American Canyon area has been
relatively low in comparison to the Bay Area market. However, land values have started to
rise to levels similar to Vallejo and Vacaville, especially as the city’s proportion of newer
homes increases and amenities are added as the city improves.
There is limited land currently (2014) for sale in the city. One residentially-zoned vacant
property was for sale in October 2014 on loopnet.com: a 0.66-acre lot located within the
Rancho Del Mar subdivision was priced at $300,000 (or $454,545 per acre). Zillow.com also
showed this property and included another property: a 56.87-acre vacant property listed for
B-116                                                                      Adopted March 17, 2015

2015-2023 HOUSING ELEMENT                                           CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON
$799,000 (or $14,049 per acre). The vast difference in price per acre is due to the location,
infrastructure, and development potential for these properties. The 0.66-acre property is
centrally located with existing infrastructure. It is also currently zoned for residential use.
The 56.87 acre is hilly, located outside of city limits, and is not development-ready.
Land in nearby Vallejo varied between $515,000 and $742,000 per acre, with an average cost
of $640,000 per acre. Fairfield, which is a neighboring jurisdiction, currently contains land
that is selling for slightly less than land in Vallejo. In Fairfield vacant land ranges from
$415,000 to $739,000 per acre, an average cost of $490,000 per acre. Recent listings for
unimproved parcels in all areas of Benicia ranged from $384,600 to $2.3 million per acre.
Construction Costs
Housing prices are influenced partly by the types of construction materials used. Homes in
American Canyon are generally of wood frame construction, finished with stucco, wood
siding, or shingles. This type of construction is the least expensive conventional method–
brick, stone, and concrete block are more costly. Composition shingle and built-up roofs,
which are found on a large share of the community’s homes, are also the least expensive,
followed by wood shingle, wood shake, concrete tile, metal tile, and clay tile
Building-Cost.net is an online resource that provides construction cost estimates based on
the calculations used in the National Construction Cost Manual. According to Building-
Cost.net, the approximate cost of constructing a 1,700-square foot single family home is
$242,911. This is about $143 per square foot. The estimate assumes standard quality building
materials and includes a contractor’s markup as well as indirect costs. The total indirect cost
and contractor markup for the construction of the home is $35,855 and the total direct cost is
$207,056. Direct costs include estimates for material costs ($90,775), labor costs ($113,112),
and equipment costs ($3,159).
According to the California Homebuilding Foundation, formerly the Construction Industry
Research Board, construction costs on lots with steep slopes or other environmental
constraints can run as high as $425,000 for a 1,700-square foot home ($250 or more per
square foot).
For a recent affordable multifamily housing project in Napa County, for which the County
provided funding assistance, the total hard construction costs were approximately $140 per
square foot, with soft costs (e.g., design, permits), and land costs, and other project costs
further contributing to the total development cost. The total development cost was
approximately $275 per square foot.
Total Costs
The major components of housing costs are land costs, construction costs, impact fees, and
permitting costs. Table 58 illustrates an approximation of cost for single family and
multifamily units based on both permit (soft cost) and construction material and land (hard
Adopted March 17, 2015                                                                    B-117

CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON                                                                  2015-2023 HOUSING ELEMENT
cost). Land that is development-ready could cost $454,545 per acre, or $52,175 for a 5,000
square foot single family lot. Construction costs were $140 per square foot. Development
impact fees, as previously stated, cost an estimated $35,929 for single family and $23,951 for
multifamily units. The current permitting cost is an estimated $1,539 for a single family unit
and $262 per multifamily unit. Based on these assumptions, the cost to build a single family
home in American Canyon is an estimated $369,643. A multifamily unit would cost an
estimated $209,440.
                                                       TABLE 58
                       ESTIMATED NEW CONSTRUCTION COST PER UNIT
                                                  AMERICAN CANYON
                                                          2014
                     Cost/Fee Type                               Single Family1               Multifamily2 Cost
                                                                  Cost Per Unit                     Per Unit
Land Acquisition                                                                $52,175                         $27,727
Construction3                                                                 $280,000                         $157,500
Development Impact Fee                                                          $35,929                         $23,951
Permitting Cost4                                                                  $1,539                            $262
Total Estimated Per Unit Cost                                                 $369,643                         $209,440
1
  Assumes a 2,000-square foot single family home built on a 5,000 square foot lot (i.e., roughly 8 units per acre).
2
  Assumes a 20-unit multifamily building with average unit size of 800 square feet with a total building size of 22,500
square feet on a one-acre lot.
3
  Assumes $140 per square foot construction costs.
4
  Permitting cost from Table 55. Single family permitting cost is $1,539 per building. Multifamily permitting cost per
unit is the cost for the building ($5,239) divided by 20.
Source: The City of American Canyon Community Development Department, loopnet.com, building-cost.net, Mintier
Harnish, 2014.
Costs could be reduced for an affordable housing project by reducing the dwelling unit sizes
(for example, to 350 square feet for a studio, 500 square feet for a one-bedroom unit, 700
square feet for a two-bedroom unit, and 900 square feet for a three-bedroom unit). These
reduced sizes are often found in rental housing designed for low-income seniors and
families. Such size reductions could reduce costs enough to make some studios affordable to
the upper end of the very low-income range and some of the one- to three-bedroom units
affordable to the lower and middle ranges of low-income (between 50 percent and 70
percent of median income).
Higher densities and/or reduced unit sizes by themselves would not have much effect on
affordability for very low-income households. Only subsidies or density bonuses could
make housing affordable to this income group.
Design Characteristics
Housing costs are affected by the size of a residence, its design, and the number and type of
amenities. Single family design preferences in the past, as reflected in American Canyon,
include enclosed garages, fireplaces, and private yards. However, given the city’s large
number of mobile homes, manufactured homes, and single family homes on small lots, it
B-118                                                                                               Adopted March 17, 2015

2015-2023 HOUSING ELEMENT                                         CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON
appears that residents are also willing to accept non-traditional designs. Residential types
that have not yet been constructed in the city include townhomes and luxury homes.
Discrimination
Theoretically and legally, the sole criterion used in qualifying for home mortgage is whether
the borrower can repay the loan. A recent study by the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston,
however, concluded that, all other factors being equal, Black and Hispanic mortgage
applicants are roughly 60 percent more likely to be denied a loan than White applicants. In
the rental housing market, prospective tenants may be denied a unit because of
discrimination related to children, race, ethnicity, disability, AIDS, public assistance, age,
marital status, and sex.
According to the Napa Fair Housing, there have been a total of 146 allegations of
discrimination since 2009 in American Canyon. The Napa County Rental Information and
Mediation Services organization considers American Canyon a very low threat for housing
discrimination issues.
Adopted March 17, 2015                                                                   B-119
CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON                                         2015-2023 HOUSING ELEMENT
VI. Administrative and Financial
            Resources
The goals and policies contained in the Housing Element address the City of American
Canyon housing needs, and are implemented through a series of housing programs offered
through the County of Napa and the City’s Community Development Department.
State Housing Programs
HCD Loans and Grants
The mission of the Department of Housing and Community Development (HCD) is to
provide leadership, policies, and programs to preserve and expand safe and affordable
housing opportunities and promote strong communities for all Californians. To accomplish
this, HCD awards loans and grants to hundreds of public and private housing developers
and service providers every year. This money supports the construction, acquisition,
rehabilitation, and preservation of affordable rental and ownership housing, shelters and
transitional housing for the homeless, public infrastructure and facilities, and jobs for lower-
income workers. HCD’s loan and grant programs typically announce the availability of
program funds by issuing a formal Notice of Funding Availability (NOFA) or a Request for
Proposals (RFP) that is posted on the HCD website and noticed or sent by mail to cities,
counties, developers, and other interested parties. The NOFA describes the program that is
offering the money, the amount available, the eligible uses of the money, other rules and
relevant information, tells who can apply and how, and may give an application deadline
date if the process is competitive. HCD’s NOFAs and RFPs make funds available in either of
two ways: (1) over-the-counter (OTC), or (2) on a competitive basis.
CalHome Program
The CalHome Program enables low- and very low-income households to become or remain
homeowners. Grants are made available to local public agencies and nonprofit developers
to assist individual households with deferred-payment loans. Direct, forgivable loans are
also available to assist development projects involving multiple ownership units, including
single family subdivisions. CalHome does not loan directly to individuals.
Grants are given to local public agencies or nonprofit corporations for first-time homebuyer
downpayment assistance, home rehabilitation, including manufactured homes not on
permanent foundations, acquisition and rehabilitation, homebuyer counseling, self-help
mortgage assistance programs, or technical assistance for self-help homeownership.
Loans are given for real property acquisition, site development, predevelopment,
construction period expenses of homeownership development projects, or permanent
financing for mutual housing and cooperative developments. Project loans to developers
may be forgiven as developers make deferred-payment loans to individual homeowners.
B-120                                                                    Adopted March 17, 2015

2015-2023 HOUSING ELEMENT                                       CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON
Assistance to individual households will be in the form of deferred payment loans, payable
on sale or transfer of the homes, or when they cease to be owner-occupied, or at maturity.
County Housing Programs
Housing Authority of the City of Napa Programs
The Housing Authority of the City of Napa offers programs countywide. These programs
include the Tenant Based Section 8 Housing Assistance Program, the Family Self-Sufficiency
Program, the Mortgage Credit Certificate program, two programs for the homeless, and the
Mainstream Voucher Program.
Tenant Based Section 8 Housing Assistance Program.
The first program is the Tenant Based Section 8 Housing Assistance Program. There are a
total of 1,375 units currently (October 2014) receiving vouchers. The current budget can
feasibly provide 1,170 Section 8 Vouchers. The waiting list is currently 8,777 people, 311 of
which are residents of American Canyon. The waitlist is currently closed with a waiting
period of five to six years for those on the list.
The Family Self-Sufficiency Program
The Housing Authority’s Family Self Sufficiency program currently has 70
families/individuals enrolled in the program. It has received funding totaling $135,678 for
2014.
Mortgage Credit Certificate Program
The third program is a Mortgage Credit Certificate Program. Eligibility for this program is
limited to first-time homebuyers and there are restrictions on income limits and the
purchase price. The Mortgage Credit Certificate (MCC) reduces the amount of Federal
income tax the borrower must pay, which in turn, frees up income to qualify for a mortgage.
The Federal government allows every homebuyer to claim an itemized Federal income tax
deduction for all of the mortgage interest paid each year on a mortgage loan. The MCC will
allow the borrower to take a tax credit equal to 25 percent of the annual interest paid on the
mortgage loan for a single family conventional residence and 40 percent on a manufactured
single family home.
Napa County Continuum of Care Strategy for the Homeless
The U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) sponsored Continuum of
Care for the Homeless garners funding each year to assist with providing housing and
needed services to the homeless population. A competitive process, the Housing Authority
generally acts as the lead agency, applying to HUD on behalf of the various project
sponsors. The Continuum of Care is a countywide collaboration between homeless housing
and service providers. The annual budget varies, as do the number of persons assisted with
the various projects.
Adopted March 17, 2015                                                                   B-121

CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON                                        2015-2023 HOUSING ELEMENT
Shelter Plus Care Program
The Shelter Plus Care Program is a rental assistance program available to homeless, disabled
individuals. Shelter Plus Care requires supportive services be provided to the clients by a
referring supportive service agency. The Program is a component of the Napa County
Continuum of Care Strategy for the Homeless. The Housing Authority assists
approximately 10 individuals.
Mainstream Voucher Program
The Mainstream Voucher Program provides rental assistance to persons with disabilities.
This program is operated in partnership with North Bay Housing Coalition. North Bay
Housing Coalition acts as the lead agency, in conjunction with agencies throughout Napa
County that provide supportive services for persons with physical, mental, and
developmental disabilities. Participants in this program receive both a rental subsidy and
supportive services during this five-year grant. The Housing Authority was awarded
$899,635 over a five-year period. This program assists 30 individuals.
City Housing Programs
Residential Rehabilitation Program
The Residential Rehabilitation Program targets homeowners whose income is below 80
percent of the area median income level, based on family size. Funding comes from three
different sources: CDBG, CalHome (which can only be used for manufactured homes), and
HOME. Loans may be used to finance the cost of repairs and improvements to owner-
occupied units. Any home within the city limits is eligible, including single family homes,
mobile homes, and apartments. Payments are based on ability to pay. Deferred payment
loans are available for very low-income households. Eligible items for repair or replacement
include, but are not limited to, structural, mechanical, plumbing, electrical, roofing, water
damage, energy conservation, correction of health and safety deficiencies, and
accessibility/mobility modifications. In 2014 the CDBG funds were transferred to cover
earthquake repair. The maximum grant amount is $5,000 and the maximum loan amount is
$20,000.
B-122                                                                  Adopted March 17, 2015
2015-2023 HOUSING ELEMENT                                      CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON
VII. Evaluation of Previous (2009)
           Housing Element
The Evaluation of the previous Housing Element illustrates accomplishments that were
achieved from the City’s adopted 2009 Housing Element. Policies within this Element
addressed the following:
     Maintaining a supply of developable land adequate to accommodate the amount and
      type of projected household and job growth.
     Promoting residential development in the various Residential Districts and
      Commercial Districts.
     Promoting a diversity of housing types.
     Creating neighborhoods that have a high degree of livability, and protecting existing
      neighborhoods from the adverse effects of development.
     Promoting affordable housing in suitable locations.
     Preserving the City’s existing affordable housing stock.
     Providing and maintaining housing for special needs groups.
For this update the City reviewed and evaluated the progress in implementing the 2009
Housing Element. This report reviews the results and effectiveness of programs from the
previous Housing Element’s planning period. Most importantly, it reveals which programs
were successful and should be retained for the 2015-2023 Housing Element update.
Adopted March 17, 2015                                                                   B-123

   CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON                                                                                       2015-2023 HOUSING ELEMENT
                                  TABLE 59 EVALUATION OF AMERICAN CANYON 2009 HOUSING ELEMENT
                           2009 Housing Program                                 Evaluation/Achievements (2009-2014)           Recommendation
GOAL 2: HOUSING SUPPLY
PROGRAM 2.1.1
Continue to implement the General Plan Land Use Plan that:                   In September 2011, the City annexed 300 acres to
                                                                             provide developable land for a new residential
    1.  Provides for a sufficient amount of land designated at appropriate   community of up to 1,600 homes (The Watson
        densities to accommodate projected household and job growth          Ranch project).                                  Maintain as a policy.
        through 2014.                                                        The City adopted a Mobile Home Rent
                                                                             Stabilization Ordinance in 2011 to minimize
    2.  Applies an appropriate residential land use designation to existing  rental increases in mobile home parks.
        mobile home parks to prohibit their conversion to other uses.
PROGRAM 2.1.2
Sustain residential land use designations that:
    1.  Include a minimum density for each designation’s range of permitted
        densities.                                                           In November 2011 the City approved a 17-acre
                                                                             General Plan and Zoning Code amendment
    2.  Allow flexibility in the types of units that may be constructed in   from Industrial, which does not allow housing,   Maintain as a policy.
        master-planned communities and other planned developments.           to Community Commercial which allows high-
                                                                             density housing.
    3.  Include a density category that, when combined with an affordable
        housing density bonus, is sufficiently high enough to facilitate the
        development of lower-income housing.
   B-124                                                                                                                 Adopted March 17, 2015

    2015-2023 HOUSING ELEMENT                                                                                       CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON
                                  TABLE 59 EVALUATION OF AMERICAN CANYON 2009 HOUSING ELEMENT
                           2009 Housing Program                                  Evaluation/Achievements (2009-2014)           Recommendation
PROGRAM 2.2.1 (A)
When changes are made to the Land Use Plan affecting the location and/or
amount of residential development, amend, if necessary, appropriate portions  No changes were made to the Land Use plan.       Maintain as a policy.
of the General Plan to ensure that required services and infrastructure would
be provided.
PROGRAM 2.2.1 (B)
                                                                              No new residential projects have been approved
Continue to assess development fees, establish assessment districts, and      that require a Housing (Development)             Maintain as a policy.
utilize development agreements to provide for adequate infrastructure.        Agreement during the reporting period.
                                                                              The City did not rezone land from residential to
                                                                              non-residential use. The City increased the
                                                                              amount of residential zoning. In November 2011
PROGRAM 2.2.1(C)
                                                                              the City approved a 17-acre General Plan and
The City shall provide flexibility on the identification of sites for         Zoning Code amendment from Industrial to
accommodating its Regional Housing Needs Plan (RHNP) Allocation. A            Community Commercial, which allows high-
rezone request of a site counted towards meeting the City’s RHNP Allocation   density housing.
                                                                                                                               Maintain as a policy.
shall include findings that justify the rezone and identify an adequate
                                                                              In April 2013 the City accepted an application
replacement site(s) that will provide the minimum number of units by income   for a General Plan Amendment and Prezoning
level for accommodating the City’s RHNP Allocation and is developable         to allow up to 38 large lot single family homes
during the term of the Housing Element planning period.                       on 35 acres within the City's Urban Limit Line.
                                                                              In November 2013 the city approved a zone
                                                                              change that provided 17 acres of higher-density
                                                                              housing.
    Adopted March 17, 2015                                                                                                                 B-125

    CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON                                                                                          2015-2023 HOUSING ELEMENT
                                   TABLE 59 EVALUATION OF AMERICAN CANYON 2009 HOUSING ELEMENT
                           2009 Housing Program                                   Evaluation/Achievements (2009-2014)             Recommendation
PROGRAM 2.3.1
Follow through on the actions and programs prescribed in the Housing
Element in a timely manner and monitor progress annually. To ensure
adequate sites are available throughout the planning period to meet the City's
RHNA, the City will continue to annually update an inventory that details the
amount, type, and size of vacant and underutilized parcels to assist
developers in identifying land suitable for residential development and that
also details the number of extremely-low, very low-, low and moderate-
income units constructed annually. The primary source for accommodating
these units shall be within infill commercially zoned properties with
residential overlay identified within the background report of this update.
These commercial parcels were used to accommodate the City share of             Sufficient land has been designated with
housing needs, however, should a shortfall exist due to a shortfall in new      appropriate densities to allow for housing        Maintain program.
affordable housing construction or the construction of uses other than          development for all economic segments of the      Modify wording to
                                                                                community in accordance with the City's
residential on commercially zoned sites identified in Table 46, the City shall                                                    be more succinct.
                                                                                RHNA.
identify parcels within this supplemental area which meet the requirements
of Government Code 65583.2 and are appropriate and available within the
planning period to accommodate mixed-use, multifamily development and
affordable housing that is consistent with all applicable City standards. These
shall be identified on a project-by project manner and outlined within the
City’s annual housing report.
To ensure sufficient residential capacity is maintained to accommodate the
RHNA need, the City maintain a formal ongoing project-by-project
evaluation for housing projects pursuant to Government Code Section 65863
(No-Net Loss) for its impact on housing supply for multiple income levels.
Should an approval of commercial development result in a reduction of
capacity within mixed-use zones below the residential capacity needed to
    B-126                                                                                                                    Adopted March 17, 2015

    2015-2023 HOUSING ELEMENT                                                                                            CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON
                                   TABLE 59 EVALUATION OF AMERICAN CANYON 2009 HOUSING ELEMENT
                            2009 Housing Program                                      Evaluation/Achievements (2009-2014)           Recommendation
accommodate the remaining need for lower-income households, the City will
identify and, if needed, zone sufficient sites to accommodate the shortfall. In
particular, if one of the 4 commercially zoned sites identified as allowing for
exclusively residential uses (i.e., sites 20, 22, 23 or 25) is developed with uses
other than residential or only a portion of the site is developed with
residential units so as the projected units are below the capacity assumed in
Table 46, the City will identify additional sites within the City which will
allow for exclusively residential uses. The outcomes of this evaluation and
monitoring shall be contained within the City annual housing reports
submitted to HCD as required pursuant to GC Section 65400.
PROGRAM 2.3.2
                                                                                   Staffing was adequate to expedite the approval
Maintain City staffing or contracted services at levels that are adequate to       of a site plan and density bonus to construct 70 Maintain program.
ensure the continued prompt consideration of residential development               affordable senior housing units on 3.75 acres of
applications.                                                                      City-owned land.
    Adopted March 17, 2015                                                                                                                     B-127
    CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON                                                                                            2015-2023 HOUSING ELEMENT
                                  TABLE 59 EVALUATION OF AMERICAN CANYON 2009 HOUSING ELEMENT
                           2009 Housing Program                                    Evaluation/Achievements (2009-2014)               Recommendation
GOAL 2A: BALANCE OF HOUSING TYPES
PROGRAM 2.4.2
Facilitate the development of market rate rental housing through the
following:
     1.  Use of housing set-aside funds for mixed income housing projects
         that include units affordable to extremely low-, very low-, and low-
         income households;
     2.  Regulatory incentives, such as expediting permit processing, deferred  In 2013 the City expedited approval of a site
                                                                                plan and density bonus to construct 70
         fees, and/or reduced parking requirements based on the bedroom         affordable senior housing units on 3.75 acres of     Update to reflect
         mix of the project; and                                                City-owned land and provided a density bonus         current density
                                                                                of 35% in return for the developer ensuring that     bonus requirements.
     3.  Provide a 25 percent density bonus when at least 20 percent of the     at least 20% of the units will be affordable to
         units are affordable to low-income households or 10 percent of the     low-income residents.
         units are affordable to extremely low- and very low-income
         households.
The City will publicize the above incentives for market rate housing to
developers and/or other interested parties by providing informational fliers at
the Community Development Department’s counter and in the general
development application packet.
    B-128                                                                                                                       Adopted March 17, 2015

    2015-2023 HOUSING ELEMENT                                                                                    CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON
                                   TABLE 59 EVALUATION OF AMERICAN CANYON 2009 HOUSING ELEMENT
                            2009 Housing Program                               Evaluation/Achievements (2009-2014)           Recommendation
GOAL 2B: LIVEABLE NEIGHBORHOODS
PROGRAM 2.5.1
Review the design of new residential development to ensure consistency with
any adopted design guidelines. These design guidelines are within the
                                                                             Staff continues to review development
General Plan Policies for each land use and are intended to provide design   applications to ensure consistency with adopted Maintain program.
principles for new and existing development that implement the goals and     design guidelines.
vision of the community. These guidelines include objective standards such
as size, color, façade articulation, front porches, and massing, and will be
approved by the appropriate approving authority.
    Adopted March 17, 2015                                                                                                              B-129

   CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON                                                                                             2015-2023 HOUSING ELEMENT
                                   TABLE 59 EVALUATION OF AMERICAN CANYON 2009 HOUSING ELEMENT
                           2009 Housing Program                                    Evaluation/Achievements (2009-2014)               Recommendation
PROGRAM 2.7.3
Neighborhood Preservation Program
    1.  The City will continue to enforce Neighborhood Preservation
        (Chapter 9.04 of the Municipal Code) through the following actions
        designed to ensure that individual properties within neighborhoods
        are maintained at levels that protect property rights of both           During 2013 staff reviewed and required
                                                                                changes to two apartment development
        individual property owners and general neighborhoods and                applications, a large-lot single family detached
        minimize potential nuisances and impacts to the public health, safety,  neighborhood, a 3-lot infill subdivision, and a
        and welfare.                                                            70-unit affordable senior housing development.       Maintain program.
                                                                                Modifications recommended by staff for these
    2.  In choosing among financing and design alternatives for public          projects addressed improvements to functional
        improvements in existing neighborhoods, select those that minimize,     pedestrian-oriented spaces, aesthetics, sensitive
        to the extent practical, financial costs on existing affordable housing arrangement of buildings, and improved
                                                                                pedestrian, bicycle, and vehicular circulation.
        and low-income households.
    3.  The City will continue street, sidewalk, and other infrastructure
        maintenance, and expand its neighborhood cleanup program. The
        City will establish an incentive program, such as awards for well-
        maintained residential properties.
GOAL 2C: AFFORDABLE HOUSING DEVELOPMENT
PROGRAM 2.10.1                                                                  In 2013 the City expedited approval of a site
To promote the development of affordable housing units, the City will           plan and density bonus to construct 70               Review and modify
promote housing opportunities and assist developers and property owners         affordable senior housing units on 3.75 acres of     program to be more
                                                                                City-owned land and provided a density bonus         succinct. Remove
with the consolidation of lots and the construction of affordable housing
                                                                                of 35% in return for the developer ensuring that
through the following actions:                                                  at least 20% of the units will be affordable to      redundancy.
                                                                                low-income residents.
    1.  Selling City owned land at a reduced cost to developers to build
   B-130                                                                                                                        Adopted March 17, 2015
2015-2023 HOUSING ELEMENT                                                                             CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON
                             TABLE 59 EVALUATION OF AMERICAN CANYON 2009 HOUSING ELEMENT
                       2009 Housing Program                                Evaluation/Achievements (2009-2014)   Recommendation
    affordable housing through a Request for Proposals process. The City
    will notify developers of opportunity sites and incentives through the
    City’s web site, informational brochures available at City Hall, and
    the distribution of Requests For Proposals as sites become available.
 2. Providing financial assistance from the Housing Fund for the
    construction of affordable housing.
 3. Offering density bonuses for developments that include at least 20%
    low-income units, 11% very-low-income units, or 50% for senior units
    that are low-income and a flat 10% density bonus for condominiums
    with 20% moderate incomes.
 4. Offering to reduce or defer fees in accordance with Program 2.10.3.
 5. Making every reasonable effort to expedite processing of permit
    approvals and conduct concurrent review of multiple permits
    whenever possible.
 6. Negotiating alternative development standards through its planned
    development process, such as alternative parking standards, street
    improvement standards, maximum density, and lot coverage and
    height limits.
 7. Offering assistance in accessing local, state, and federal funding for
    affordable housing by applying for such funding when feasible on
    behalf of the affordable-housing developer or by providing technical
    assistance or documentation necessary to support an application for
    funding.
 8. Offering the incentives described above to owners of small and
    under-utilized properties for the consolidation and/or re-use of small
Adopted March 17, 2015                                                                                                    B-131

    CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON                                                                                               2015-2023 HOUSING ELEMENT
                                   TABLE 59 EVALUATION OF AMERICAN CANYON 2009 HOUSING ELEMENT
                            2009 Housing Program                                      Evaluation/Achievements (2009-2014)               Recommendation
         lots to create larger parcels with greater residential development
         potential. The City will post information on its website and distribute
         information to owners of small lots informing them of available
         incentives for lot consolidation.
PROGRAM 2.10.2
Discourage proposals for residential down-zonings or reclassifications of
                                                                                                                                        Maintain as a policy.
residentially designated property to nonresidential uses that would impact
                                                                                                                                        Combine with other
the City’s potential to meet its Quantified Objectives for affordable housing.     No down-zonings were approved.                       policies addressing
Any proposal must demonstrate adequate alternatives and methods that
                                                                                                                                        downzoning.
would help minimize and mitigate any loss in potential housing for multiple
income groups.
PROGRAM 2.10.3
The City will reduce or waive building permit fees, impact fees, and sewer
and water connection fees for affordable housing projects when the
developers can show that the waivers or reductions in adopted fees are             No fees were reduced during the planning             Maintain program.
                                                                                   period.
necessary for the financial feasibility of the project and the targeted housing.
The City Council may also use funds in the Affordable Housing Fund for this
purpose.
                                                                                   In 2013 the City expedited approval of a site
PROGRAM 2.10.5 (A)                                                                 plan and density bonus to construct 70
                                                                                   affordable senior housing units on 3.75 acres of     Combine with other
Priority shall be given to projects that propose to make at least half their units
                                                                                   City-owned land and provided a density bonus         programs for
affordable to lower-income households (any combination of extremely low-,
                                                                                   of 35% in return for the developer ensuring that     expedited review.
very low-, and low-income households).                                             at least 20% of the units will be affordable to
                                                                                   low-income residents.
    B-132                                                                                                                          Adopted March 17, 2015

    2015-2023 HOUSING ELEMENT                                                                                              CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON
                                 TABLE 59 EVALUATION OF AMERICAN CANYON 2009 HOUSING ELEMENT
                           2009 Housing Program                                       Evaluation/Achievements (2009-2014)             Recommendation
PROGRAM 2.10.5 (B)
Use the following criteria for projects involving the development of
affordable housing, giving the highest priority to sites or projects that have or
will have:
     1.  Adequate vehicular and pedestrian access.
     2.  Convenient access to transit (or provision of transit by the project to
         meet the needs of its prospective residents).
     3.  Convenient access to neighborhood services and facilities, as needed                                                         Combine with other
                                                                                    The City continues to give priority to affordable
         by the prospective residents.                                              housing and ensures projects are consistent with  programs for
                                                                                    adopted guidelines.                               expedited review.
     4.  Convenient access to neighborhood recreation facilities, or onsite
         provision of adequate facilities.
     5.  Minimal environmental constraints or cost-effective mitigation of
         constraints.
     6.  Cost-effective provision of services and utilities to the site and onsite.
     7.  Adequate site area to provide sufficient parking, open space,
         setbacks, and building separations.
PROGRAM 2.10.6
                                                                                    The City amended the Municipal Code on
Amend the American Canyon Municipal Code Section 19.27 to reflect                   December 2, 2014 to reflect the latest State law  Delete program.
changes to Government Code 65915-65918 regarding Density Bonuses.                   requirements for density bonuses.
PROGRAM 2.11.1                                                                      The City contracts with the City of Napa
Continue to partner with the City of Napa Housing Authority or similar              Housing Authority to conduct annual affordable    Maintain program.
entity to take advantage of administrative resources and receive a reasonable       housing monitoring inspections and
    Adopted March 17, 2015                                                                                                                        B-133
    CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON                                                                                           2015-2023 HOUSING ELEMENT
                                  TABLE 59 EVALUATION OF AMERICAN CANYON 2009 HOUSING ELEMENT
                           2009 Housing Program                                  Evaluation/Achievements (2009-2014)               Recommendation
share of federal, state and private funding for housing. Housing Authority     verifications. In addition the City of Napa
administered programs that City residents will continue to benefit from        Housing Authority oversees Section 8 apartment
                                                                               rental units for the City. The City successfully
include the Rental Assistance and Section 8 Programs; programs in the          applied for and received a CDBG and Home
foreseeable future may include CDBG funds.                                     Grant to fund a low-income home renovation
                                                                               loan program and a first-time homebuyer
                                                                               program.
PROGRAM 2.11.3
Monitor apartments for Section 8 status, and prepare a plan for the
                                                                               The City of Napa Housing Authority oversees         Maintain program.
preservation of these units as affordable rental housing. The plan will state  Section 8 apartment rental units for the City.      Identify the Housing
the City’s proposed actions for assisting the current property owner in
                                                                                                                                   Authority as a
preserving these affordable units, or assisting in the acquisition by a non-   There were no at-risk units during the planning
                                                                               period.                                             partner.
profit entity dedicated to permanently preserving the affordability of these
rental units.
                                                                               The City continues to implement the
PROGRAM 2.13.1
                                                                               inclusionary housing ordinance. The City
Require all residential projects of ten or more above moderate-income units to currently has a contract with DRA for a nexus       Maintain program.
include affordable units.                                                      study to develop an affordable housing impact
                                                                               fee. The fee will include non-residential projects.
GOAL 2D: PRESERVATION OF AFFORDABILITY
PROGRAM 2.14.2
Require the replacement of housing units occupied by, and affordable to, very
low- or low-income households that are removed or converted to market-rate     No applications for conversion or removal           Maintain program.
housing units as a condition of development approval. The applicant for        during the planning period.
development approval will be responsible for providing replacement
housing. The City will consider regulatory and other incentives to increase
    B-134                                                                                                                     Adopted March 17, 2015

    2015-2023 HOUSING ELEMENT                                                                                          CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON
                                   TABLE 59 EVALUATION OF AMERICAN CANYON 2009 HOUSING ELEMENT
                           2009 Housing Program                                    Evaluation/Achievements (2009-2014)            Recommendation
the feasibility of providing replacement housing (see Density Bonus Program
in the Programs Section relating to density bonuses and other incentives).
PROGRAM 2.14.3                                                                  In November 2013 the City expedited approval
                                                                                of a site plan and density bonus to construct 70
Continue to impose resale or rent controls for not less than 30 years on all    affordable senior housing units on 3.75 acres of  Maintain as policy.
units that receive City financial assistance or affordable housing density      City-owned land. The Term of affordability is 55
bonuses.                                                                        years.
PROGRAM 2.14.4
The City will continue to protect the interests of residents living in existing
mobile home parks by enforcing the Mobile home Park Rent Stabilization
Program (Chapter 15.04 of the Municipal Code, adopted 1995). Measures           The City adopted Mobile home Rent
include rent stabilization, strict conversion standards, and relocation         Stabilization Ordinance in 2011 to minimize       Maintain program.
assistance and compensation to residents if parks are converted to another      rental increases in mobile home parks.
use. Work with residents of mobile home parks to attain greater stability in
housing costs and permanence of residency by pursuing cooperative or
condominium forms of ownership if the opportunity arises.
                                                                                The City contracts with the City of Napa
PROGRAM 2.15.1                                                                  Housing Authority to conduct annual affordable
The City will continue support for the Rental Assistance Program at the state   housing monitoring inspections and                Maintain program.
                                                                                verifications. In addition the City of Napa
and local level by maintaining membership in the Napa Housing Authority.        Housing Authority oversees Section 8 apartment
                                                                                rental units for the City.
    Adopted March 17, 2015                                                                                                                    B-135
   CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON                                                                                             2015-2023 HOUSING ELEMENT
                                  TABLE 59 EVALUATION OF AMERICAN CANYON 2009 HOUSING ELEMENT
                           2009 Housing Program                                      Evaluation/Achievements (2009-2014)             Recommendation
GOAL 2E: HOUSING FOR SPECIAL NEEDS
PROGRAM 2.16.2
Facilitate the construction of affordable rental housing for extremely low-,
very low-, and low-income persons. The City currently manages an
Affordable Home Renovation Program that assists low-income households to          In April 2013 the City successfully applied for
perform necessary maintenance and repairs to residences within the city           and received a CDBG and Home Grant to fund a       Modify program to
                                                                                  low-income home renovation loan program and
limits. The City will help qualified homeowners with low-interest loans as                                                           focus on housing
                                                                                  a first-time homebuyer program.
well as construction assistance. Applicants must be very low-income or low-       The City's Code Enforcement program ensures        maintenance not
income households and meet home ownership requirements.                           that unsafe housing conditions are identified      new construction.
                                                                                  and corrected. On average, the City processes
Funding is available to repair or replace deficiencies to residential structural, 370 Code Enforcement cases per year.
mechanical, plumbing, and electrical systems, roofing, water damage, energy
conservation, correction of health and safety issues and accessibility/mobility
modifications.
   B-136                                                                                                                        Adopted March 17, 2015
   2015-2023 HOUSING ELEMENT                                                                                         CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON
                                  TABLE 59 EVALUATION OF AMERICAN CANYON 2009 HOUSING ELEMENT
                           2009 Housing Program                                   Evaluation/Achievements (2009-2014)           Recommendation
PROGRAM 2.16.3B
The City will provide assistance through the following financial and
regulatory incentives:
    1.   Use of housing set-aside funds for mixed income housing projects
         that include units affordable to very low- and low-income
         households;
                                                                               In April 2013 the City approved the Valley View  Modify program to
    2.   Regulatory incentives, such as expediting permit processing, deferred Affordable Senior Housing project with a         remove repetition
                                                                               density bonus of 35% in return for the developer with other density
         fees, and/or parking requirements based on the bedroom mix of the
                                                                               ensuring that at least 20% of the units will be
         project;                                                              affordable to low-income residents.              bonus programs.
    3.   A 35 percent density bonus when at least 20 percent of the units are
         affordable to low-income households or 11 percent of the units are
         affordable to very low-income households; and
    4.   Assistance in accessing state and/or federal subsidies or tax credit
         programs for new construction.
                                                                               In April 2013 the City successfully applied for
                                                                               and received a CDBG and HOME grant to fund
                                                                               low-income home renovation loan program.
PROGRAM 2.16.3C                                                                                                                 Maintain program
                                                                               This program can be used for improvements
Assist elderly homeowners in rehabilitating their homes to address health      that provide energy efficiency.                  but modify to reflect
and safety repairs, accessibility needs, and energy efficiency improvements.   In April 2014 the City approved participation in new PACE program.
                                                                               a PACE programs to enable homeowners to
                                                                               obtain loans funded by their property taxes for
                                                                               energy conservation improvements.
PROGRAM 2.16.4                                                                 The City ensures required handicap accessibility
                                                                               features are provided in development projects    Maintain program.
Facilitate the construction of subsidized rental housing affordable to         through plan check and inspection.
   Adopted March 17, 2015                                                                                                                   B-137
    CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON                                                                                         2015-2023 HOUSING ELEMENT
                                 TABLE 59 EVALUATION OF AMERICAN CANYON 2009 HOUSING ELEMENT
                           2009 Housing Program                                 Evaluation/Achievements (2009-2014)               Recommendation
extremely low-, very low- and low-income persons that meet the physical and
supportive service needs of persons with disabilities such as:
    1.  Handicapped accessibility; and
    2.  On-site supportive services and/or daily living assistance; and
    3.  Transportation.
The City publicizes financial and regulatory incentive opportunities to
developers and/or other parties interested in the construction of subsidized
rental housing that meets the needs of persons with disabilities by providing
informational fliers at the Community Development Department and in all
general development application packets.
                                                                              The City adopted a Reasonable Accommodation
                                                                              ordinance to allow people with special needs to
                                                                              obtain relief from zoning requirements through
                                                                              a ministerial process.
PROGRAM 2.16.4 (A)
                                                                              The City successfully received a CDBG and
Assist disabled homeowners in making modifications for improved               HOME grant that will fund necessary home            Maintain program.
accessibility.                                                                maintenance and repairs for lower-income
                                                                              residents.
                                                                              The City ensures required handicap accessibility
                                                                              features are provided in development projects
                                                                              through plan check and inspection.
PROGRAM 2.16.4 (B)
Amend Chapter 19 of the American Canyon Municipal Code to allow a             The City amended the Zoning Ordinance on
                                                                              December 2, 2014 to allow transitional and          Delete program.
variety of housing types including group homes and boardinghouses as a        supportive housing in all zones allowing
permitted use in the City’s Residential High (RH) Zoning District. Group      residential uses, consistent with State law (SB 2).
homes and boarding houses will not be subject to additional requirements or
    B-138                                                                                                                    Adopted March 17, 2015

    2015-2023 HOUSING ELEMENT                                                                                         CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON
                                  TABLE 59 EVALUATION OF AMERICAN CANYON 2009 HOUSING ELEMENT
                           2009 Housing Program                                    Evaluation/Achievements (2009-2014)           Recommendation
conditions beyond what is set forth in the American Canyon Municipal Code
as required by Senate Bill 2, which took effect in 2008.
PROGRAM 2.16.4 (C)
                                                                                                                                 Modify program to
Continue to allow group homes/residential facilities of 6 or fewer persons as a
                                                                                                                                 address specific
permitted use by right in all districts in which single-family homes are        In reviewing the Zoning Ordinance as part of
                                                                                the 2015 Housing Element, the City identified    amendments the
allowed, including housing within the City’s Residential High (RH) Zoning
                                                                                additional Zoning Ordinance amendments           City must make to
District for multiple group quarters. Subject to the provision of the American  needed to comply with State law.                 fully comply with
Canyon Municipal Code, group home/residential facilities will be held to the
                                                                                                                                 State law.
same standards and permit processing as single-family homes.
PROGRAM 2.16.4 (D)
The City will conduct an analysis of governmental constraints affecting access
to housing and supportive services and affordability of housing for persons
                                                                                The City reviews its procedures and regulatory   Delete program.
with disabilities based on guidelines prepared by the California Department
                                                                                standards as part of the Housing Element
of Housing and Community Development (SB 520 [2001] Analysis Tool). The         Update. The City adopted a Reasonable            This is conducted as
analysis will address the City’s permit process, zoning and other regulatory    Accommodation ordinance to allow people with     part of the Housing
standards, code enforcement, access to public participatory processes, and      special needs to obtain relief from zoning       Element Update.
other relevant topics relating to access for persons with disabilities. Should  requirements through a ministerial process.
any constraints be identified, the City will adopt appropriate programs that
will mitigate the impediments to housing for persons with disabilities.
PROGRAM 2.16.4 (E)
The City shall amend Chapter 19 of the Municipal Code to allow single room                                                       Maintain program.
                                                                                Not completed
occupancy (SRO) in the Residential High (RH) zone district. Development
standards will be established that will allow and encourage the construction
    Adopted March 17, 2015                                                                                                                    B-139

    CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON                                                                                             2015-2023 HOUSING ELEMENT
                                   TABLE 59 EVALUATION OF AMERICAN CANYON 2009 HOUSING ELEMENT
                            2009 Housing Program                                    Evaluation/Achievements (2009-2014)              Recommendation
of new SROs.
PROGRAM 2.16.4 (F)
Amend City Municipal Code Title 19 to develop formal procedures for
reasonable accommodation for housing for persons with disabilities in
accordance with fair housing and disability laws. Include provisions for clear
rules, policies, and procedures, for reasonable accommodation in order to         The City adopted a Reasonable Accommodation
                                                                                  ordinance to allow people with special needs to    Completed. Delete
promote equal access to housing. Policies and procedures should be
                                                                                  obtain relief from zoning requirements through     program.
ministerial and include but not be limited to identifying who may request a       a ministerial process.
reasonable accommodation (i.e., persons with disabilities, family-members,
landlords, etc.), time frames for decision-making, and provision for relief
from the various land-uses, zoning, or building regulations that may
constrain the housing for persons of disabilities.
PROGRAM 2.16.4 (G)
Amend City Municipal Code Title 19 to adopt a new ordinance relating to
Universal Design Element pursuant to Health and Safety Code Section 17959.
The ordinance shall address the full cycle of use of housing without regard to    Not completed; however, new statewide
                                                                                  building regulations have increased housing        Delete program.
the physical abilities or disabilities of a home’s occupants or guest in order to
                                                                                  accessibility.
accommodate a wide range of individual preferences or physical abilities.
Include provisions for clear rules, policies, and procedures, for Universal
Design in order to promote equal access to housing.
PROGRAM 2.16.5                                                                    The only affordable units approved during the
                                                                                  planning period were senior units, which are       Maintain program.
Facilitate the construction of housing that includes 3- and 4-bedroom units       smaller. However, the City continues to promote
affordable to extremely low-, very low-, and low-income families. The City        the inclusion of large units in affordable
    B-140                                                                                                                       Adopted March 17, 2015

   2015-2023 HOUSING ELEMENT                                                                                           CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON
                                 TABLE 59 EVALUATION OF AMERICAN CANYON 2009 HOUSING ELEMENT
                           2009 Housing Program                                   Evaluation/Achievements (2009-2014)              Recommendation
will publicize financial and regulatory incentive opportunities to developers   developments.
and/or other parties interested in the construction of housing that includes 3-
and 4- bedroom affordable units by providing informational fliers at the
Community Development Department and in all general development
application packets.
                                                                                The Housing Rehabilitation Program has three
                                                                                funding sources: CDBG, CalHome (specifically
                                                                                for manufactured homes), and HOME (which
                                                                                can be used for any home). CDBG funds have
                                                                                recently been earmarked for earthquake repairs.    Combine with other
PROGRAM 2.16.5 (A)
                                                                                                                                   program addressing
Continue to allow bedroom and bathroom additions under the City’s               The program is intended to help lower-income       housing
Housing Rehabilitation Program.                                                 homeowners bring their homes up to safety
                                                                                codes. In some situations, overcrowded             rehabilitation.
                                                                                conditions can require the addition of a
                                                                                bedroom or bathroom. However, there were no
                                                                                requests for bedroom and bathroom additions
                                                                                during the planning period.
PROGRAM 2.16.6                                                                  The City continues to allow day care facilities in
Continue to support female-headed households in the City with the               the CC district by right; in the CN, LI, GI, RE,
                                                                                RR, RS, RM, RH districts with a minor use          Maintain as a policy.
permitting of child day care facilities as outlined in Chapter 19 of the
                                                                                permit; and in the P district with a conditional
Municipal Code.                                                                 use permit.
   Adopted March 17, 2015                                                                                                                       B-141

    CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON                                                                                       2015-2023 HOUSING ELEMENT
                                  TABLE 59 EVALUATION OF AMERICAN CANYON 2009 HOUSING ELEMENT
                           2009 Housing Program                                 Evaluation/Achievements (2009-2014)             Recommendation
PROGRAM 2.16.7
Continue to implement the City’s First-Time Homebuyer Assistance Program.
This program is designed to provide second mortgages that act as “gap”
financing, meaning the second mortgage is making up the cost difference
between what the buyer can afford for a first mortgage and the price of a
home. The second mortgage is a “silent” second (i.e., payments are deferred
with a low interest rate until an agreed upon time period ends or the home is
sold).
Eligible participants must have an annual gross income at or below 80 percent
of the Napa County median income, adjusted for family size, as defined by
the Department of Housing and Urban Development. This program is
available citywide and properties eligible include newly constructed or       The City successfully applied for and received a
                                                                              CDBG and Home Grant to fund a low-income
existing single-family detached housing, condominiums, and mobile homes       home renovation loan program and a first-time     Maintain program.
placed on permanent foundations.                                              homebuyer program. The advertising was
                                                                              completed.
The City will establish the following three main sources for advertising the
First-Time Homebuyer Program under an affirmative fair housing marketing
plan:
     1.  Publish ads in the home or real estate sections of the American
         Canyon Eagle newspaper offering free homebuyer seminars.
     2.  Distribute Spanish and English language flyers to local community
         resource agencies and community groups working with minority and
         low-income households.
     3.  Educate local real estate agents and lenders about the program and
         provide first-time homebuyer seminars for those who qualify.
    B-142                                                                                                                  Adopted March 17, 2015

    2015-2023 HOUSING ELEMENT                                                                                     CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON
                                 TABLE 59 EVALUATION OF AMERICAN CANYON 2009 HOUSING ELEMENT
                          2009 Housing Program                                  Evaluation/Achievements (2009-2014)             Recommendation
PROGRAM 2.16.8
The City shall contact non-profit builders and agricultural stakeholders to
identify suitable and available sites for the development of migrant and
seasonal farm worker housing in the Residential Medium (RM); Residential
High (RH), Commercial Neighborhood (CN), and Community Commercial
(CC) zones. In addition, the City shall amend zoning consistent with Health
and Safety Code Section 17021.5 and 17021.6 to further facilitate housing for
                                                                              Zoning amendment not complete.
farm workers. Other programs to facilitate the development of affordable
housing may include fee waivers and reduced development standards.            The Napa County Farm Worker Oversight
Financial and technical assistance will be sought from HCD’s Office of        Committee was dissolved in 2001. The Napa
Migrant Services, the Joe Serna Jr. Farm Worker Housing Grant Program, the    County Housing Commission is a new                Modify program.
California Tax Credit-Allocation Committee’s Farm Worker Housing              commission formed to replace the Oversight
                                                                              Committee. The Napa County Housing
Assistance Program, and the USDA Rural Development Program.                   Commission is a county effort in which the cities
Background: Seasonal or migrant farm worker housing is provided in the        are not involved.
unincorporated areas of Napa County while the City of American Canyon
will provide housing opportunities for permanent farm workers and other
lower-income households. The City actively participates in the Napa County
Farm Worker Oversight Committee and the Napa Valley Housing Authority
to assist in providing housing opportunities for seasonal and permanent farm
workers.
    Adopted March 17, 2015                                                                                                                 B-143

    CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON                                                                                          2015-2023 HOUSING ELEMENT
                                 TABLE 59 EVALUATION OF AMERICAN CANYON 2009 HOUSING ELEMENT
                          2009 Housing Program                                     Evaluation/Achievements (2009-2014)             Recommendation
PROGRAM 2.17.1(A)
Review, on an annual basis, the conditions of approval of those residential
                                                                                During 2013 the City's Code Enforcement
care homes (group care facilities) operating under a previously approved
                                                                                program ensures that unsafe housing conditions
conditional use permit for compliance, and actively enforce applicable          are identified and corrected. On average the City  Delete program.
conditions of the use permit. Report unlicensed residential care homes and      processes 370 Code Enforcement cases per year.
unacceptable living conditions identified in such facilities to the responsible However, Code Enforcement is handled on a
county or state agencies for abatement or fulfillment of licensing              complaint basis, not as an annual review.
requirements.
PROGRAM 2.17.1 (B)                                                              The current Zoning Ordinance permits               Delete. Add
                                                                                Residential Care Homes with more than 6
The City shall consider options to allow Residential Care Homes with more       residents, defined as Congregate Living            program to permit
than six mentally disordered or otherwise handicapped persons or dependent      Facilities, in the RM and RH zones. In order to    Residential Care
and neglected children as a permanent use in the Residential High (RH) zone     comply with State law, group homes for 6 or        Homes in RE, RM,
district.                                                                       fewer must be permitted in RE, RM, and RH          and RH.
                                                                                zones.
PROGRAM 2.17.1 (C)
                                                                                The City updated its Zoning Ordinance
The City shall amend Chapter 19 of the Municipal code to permit transitional    December 2, 2014 to add definitions for
and supportive housing as a residential use and only subject to those           transitional and supportive housing and allow      Completed. Delete.
requirements that apply to other residential uses or the same type in the same  them in residential zones, in compliance with
zone as required by Senate Bill 2, which took effect in 2008.                   State law.
    B-144                                                                                                                     Adopted March 17, 2015
   2015-2023 HOUSING ELEMENT                                                                                          CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON
                                   TABLE 59 EVALUATION OF AMERICAN CANYON 2009 HOUSING ELEMENT
                           2009 Housing Program                                    Evaluation/Achievements (2009-2014)             Recommendation
PROGRAM 2.18.2 (A)
The City shall amend Chapter 19 of the Municipal Code to allow emergency
shelters as a permitted use in the Community Commercial (CC) and Light
Industrial (LI) zone districts. With approximately 72 acres of land in the CC
and LI zone districts there is sufficient land available for at least one
emergency shelter. Taking into account existing development, surround land       The City updated its Zoning Ordinance
uses, access, and availability of infrastructure, the City still has 22 acres of December 2, 2014 to allow emergency shelters as
                                                                                 a permitted use in the CC and LI districts and to Completed. Delete.
land available to accommodate an emergency shelter. Emergency shelters will
                                                                                 adopt objective standards to regulate the
not be subject to additional development standards or conditions beyond          shelters.
those set forth in Chapter 19 for the CC and LI zone districts as provided for
by Senate Bill 2, which took effect January 1, 2008. In addition to amending
Chapter 19 to identify specific zone districts, the City shall also adopt
objective standards to regulate emergency shelters as provided for under
Senate Bill 2.
                                                                                                                                   Modify program.
                                                                                                                                   Change Napa Valley
PROGRAM 2.18.2 (B)
                                                                                 According to Community Action of Napa             Shelter System to
Provide information regarding the Napa Valley Shelter System to City             Valley, in 2014 they served 29 residents of       Napa County Health
personnel and others (newspapers, churches, etc.) likely to be in contact with   American Canyon, up from 24 in 2013. In
                                                                                                                                   and Human
those needing shelter. Direct personnel to refer such persons as appropriate.    addition, they have taken in three families.
                                                                                                                                   Services– Homeless
                                                                                                                                   Services
   Adopted March 17, 2015                                                                                                                      B-145

    CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON                                                                                       2015-2023 HOUSING ELEMENT
                                 TABLE 59 EVALUATION OF AMERICAN CANYON 2009 HOUSING ELEMENT
                          2009 Housing Program                                Evaluation/Achievements (2009-2014)              Recommendation
PROGRAM 2.18.3
Continue to implement the large family day care ordinance, Chapter 19.33
and evaluate other areas of the Zoning code where incentives for the        City staff continued to implement. The City
                                                                            updated its density bonus ordinance to comply      Modify.
provision of childcare can be established, possibly including the use of
                                                                            with State law on December 2, 2014.
expedited entitlements. Provide additional density bonuses in conjunction
with affordable housing projects as provided under State law.
PROGRAM 2.19.1
Provide information about the Napa County Rental Information and
Mediation Service (NCRIMS) and similar entities to City personnel likely to
                                                                                                                               Maintain program.
receive fair housing complaints. Direct employees to refer such persons as  A total of 183 residents were assisted during the  Change NCRIMS to
appropriate. Distribute fair housing information to public agencies and     2013-2014 contract period with Fair Housing        Fair Housing Napa
establishments in American Canyon with information on the Napa County       Napa Valley (FHNV).
                                                                                                                               Valley.
Rental Information and Mediation Service (NCRIMS) or any similar entity.
Include fair housing information at least annually in City mailings to
residents and on the City’s web site.
PROGRAM 2.19.2 (A)
Annually sponsor a fair housing event in collaboration with the Napa County
Rental Information and Mediation Service (NCRIMS) or any similar entity     Fair Housing of Napa Valley replaced NCRIMS.       Modify program.
targeted to community organizations serving residents who may experience    April is Fair Housing Month.
housing discrimination, rental property owners, real estate industry
representatives, and lenders.
    B-146                                                                                                                 Adopted March 17, 2015

    2015-2023 HOUSING ELEMENT                                                                              CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON
                               TABLE 59 EVALUATION OF AMERICAN CANYON 2009 HOUSING ELEMENT
                          2009 Housing Program                                  Evaluation/Achievements (2009-2014)   Recommendation
PROGRAM 2.19.2 (B)
Post information regarding local, state, and federal fair housing programs on
                                                                              Completed                               Maintain program.
community signs, churches, and in such public places as the city hall, fire
station, and post office.
    Adopted March 17, 2015                                                                                                       B-147
    CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON                                                                                           2015-2023 HOUSING ELEMENT
                                 TABLE 59 EVALUATION OF AMERICAN CANYON 2009 HOUSING ELEMENT
                           2009 Housing Program                                     Evaluation/Achievements (2009-2014)             Recommendation
GOAL 2F: EXISTING HOUSING NEEDS
PROGRAM 2.20.3
Housing Rehabilitation and Improvement. The City will complete the
following action from the Housing and Rehabilitation Program:
     1. The City will annually evaluate the need for HOME funds for the
        First-time Homebuyer Program and CDBG funds for rehabilitation
        and apply for the next funding cycle. CDBG funds can assist lower-
        income elderly and disabled households in the maintenance of their
        homes by performing minor exterior repairs and rehabilitation, yard
                                                                                 In April 2013 the City successfully applied for
        cleanup and maintenance, and minor household repairs. The City           and received a CDBG and Home Grant to fund a
        provides no interest loans, assists the client with the selection of a   low-income home renovation loan program and        Combine with other
        contractor, and provides standard contract documents.                    a first-time homebuyer program.                    programs
     2. Subsidize permit fees for units rehabilitated through the CDBG                                                              addressing housing
                                                                                 During 2013 the City's Code Enforcement
        Housing Rehabilitation Program.                                          program ensures that unsafe housing conditions     rehabilitation.
                                                                                 are identified and corrected. On average the City
     3. Identify units in need of hazards correction and interior rehabilitation processes 370 Code Enforcement cases per year.
        during other improvement activities and provide rehabilitation loan
        information to qualifying owners. Provide loan information to
        owners of units cited for substandard conditions.
     4. Continue weatherizing units rehabilitated through the CDBG
        Rehabilitation Program.
     5. City code enforcement efforts and the results of those efforts shall be
        incorporated into the City’s Housing Rehabilitation Program.
    B-148                                                                                                                      Adopted March 17, 2015

    2015-2023 HOUSING ELEMENT                                                                                         CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON
                                 TABLE 59 EVALUATION OF AMERICAN CANYON 2009 HOUSING ELEMENT
                           2009 Housing Program                                   Evaluation/Achievements (2009-2014)            Recommendation
PROGRAM 2.20.5
The City will contact property owners of units at-risk of converting to market
rate housing within one year of affordability expiration to discuss the City’s
desire to preserve complexes as affordable housing. Participation from         No at-risk units during the planning period. The
agencies interested in purchasing and/or managing units at-risk will be        affordable units at the Lodge expired in 2014.    Maintain program.
                                                                               City staff reached out and the apartment owner
sought. Property owners are required to give a nine-month notice of their      chose to let the affordability provision expire.
intent to opt out of low-income use restrictions. The City will work with
tenants to provide education regarding tenant rights and conversion
procedures pursuant to California law.
PROGRAM 2.20.5 (A)
Continue the City’s building code enforcement program for residential
housing units. The City’s full-time Code Enforcement Officer manages code      During 2013 the City's Code Enforcement
enforcement activities on a case-by-case complaint basis. The owners of        program ensures that unsafe housing conditions    Maintain program.
                                                                               are identified and corrected. On average the City
residential housing units identified as needing code enforcement actions shall processes 370 Code Enforcement cases per year.
also be provided with information on the City’s various housing programs
including funding sources from CDBG.
    Adopted March 17, 2015                                                                                                                  B-149

    CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON                                                                                         2015-2023 HOUSING ELEMENT
                                 TABLE 59 EVALUATION OF AMERICAN CANYON 2009 HOUSING ELEMENT
                            2009 Housing Program                                  Evaluation/Achievements (2009-2014)             Recommendation
GOAL 2G; ENERGY CONSERVATION
PROGRAM 2.22.4 (A)
                                                                               In 2011 ABAG approved a Highway 29 PDA and
The City will continue to encourage new residential development and
                                                                               the City obtained two grants to prepare a
rehabilitation projects to incorporate sustainable building design and siting, specific plan (2011 and 2013). Compact urban
construction, and operation. The City promotes the reduction of energy         development will use less energy per capita than
consumption through the use of recycled water for new large residential,       traditional suburban development. In February
commercial, and industrial landscaping projects; requires adherence to the     2013 the City prepared and adopted an Energy       Maintain program.
                                                                               Efficiency Climate Action Plan that includes
City’s zero water footprint policy that requires new development to reduce     measures to conserve natural gas and electricity
water consumption to a level sustainable with the city’s long term water       in new development.
supplies, or provide off-site water conservation measures to reduce overall
citywide water consumption; and participates in the regional trash recycling   During 2013 the City expedited approval of solar
                                                                               energy panel permits with a ministerial process.
programs.
PROGRAM 2.22.4 (B)
                                                                               The City adopted a Bicycle Master Plan in
The City will consider new standards for proposed residential and mixed-use
                                                                               August 2012, a Complete Streets Policy in
development projects that incorporate bicycle lanes, and multi-modal           September 2012, and a new Circulation Element      Completed. Delete
opportunities. The city has submitted a Focus grant to provide funding for     in March 2013, which provides policies that        program.
the Highway 29 Corridor – an area of the city with zoning that permits high-   promote greater use of non-automobile transit
density housing and residential mixed use.                                     and reduce greenhouse gas generation.
PROGRAM 2.22.4 (C)
The City shall enforce Title 24 provisions of the California Administrative    The City continues to enforce Title 24 provisions. Maintain as policy.
Code for residential energy conservation measures.
    B-150                                                                                                                    Adopted March 17, 2015

     2015-2023 HOUSING ELEMENT                                                                                         CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON
                                  TABLE 59 EVALUATION OF AMERICAN CANYON 2009 HOUSING ELEMENT
                            2009 Housing Program                                   Evaluation/Achievements (2009-2014)            Recommendation
                                                                                 In April 2013 the City successfully applied for
PROGRAM 2.22.4 (D)                                                               and received a CDBG and HOME grant to fund
The City shall encourage the continued affordability of both rental and          low-income home renovation loan program.
ownership housing by encouraging energy conservation in all existing             This program can be used for improvements
                                                                                 that provide energy efficiency.                  Maintain program.
development. The City will make available an informational fact sheet for
                                                                                 In April 2014 the City approved participation in
distribution that will describe the measures that can be instituted in homes for a PACE program to enable homeowners to
little cost and will save energy and utility expenses.                           obtain loans funded by their property taxes for
                                                                                 energy conservation improvements.
PROGRAM 2.22.4 (E)                                                               In February 2013 the City prepared and adopted
The City shall consider preparation, adoption, and implementation of policies    an Energy Efficiency Climate Action Plan that
for new development projects that include but are not limited to the             includes measures to conserve natural gas and    Delete program.
                                                                                 electricity in new development.
following: energy efficient air conditioners, light-colored roofing materials,   During 2013 the City expedited approval of solar
photovoltaic energy systems, and Energy Star appliances.                         energy panel permits with a ministerial process.
     Adopted March 17, 2015                                                                                                                  B-151
CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON                2015-2023 HOUSING ELEMENT
This page is intentionally left blank.
B-152                                          Adopted March 17, 2015
2015-2023 HOUSING ELEMENT                                             CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON
APPENDIX A
COMMUNITY WORKSHOP SUMMARY (OCTOBER 22, 2014)
The City held a community workshop on October 22, 2014 at the American Canyon Library.
Three people attended the workshop. At the workshop City staff and the Housing Element
consultants from Mintier Harnish presented a brief overview of the Housing Element Update
and facilitated an interactive discussion to solicit ideas from participants about the most critical
housing issues facing American Canyon residents and new ways the City and community
might address these issues. Appendix A contains a summary of the issues and ideas discussed
at the workshop. The input provided at the workshop was used to inform the housing needs
assessment and to shape the Housing Element policies and programs. Below is a summary of
the issues and ideas discussed at the workshop.
Meeting Notes:
     The City has a lot of vacant land.
     The rental vacancy rate is very low in the city.
     There was a severe decline in property values during the recession (especially because a
      lot of housing was built during the subprime mortgage period and there was a high
      foreclosure rate in the city).
     A lot of residents commute out of American Canyon and the county for work. The City
      would like to attract more job opportunities. There may be opportunities to capitalize on
      growth in the medical profession.
     There is a lack of diversity of housing types.
           o   Newer homes tend to be large.
           o   The city could benefit from some smaller homes that would allow people to
               downsize.
           o   The city could also benefit from more premium homes that might attract workers
               with high paying jobs. There is currently an application for 40 custom homes in
               the hillside area.
           o   The city could use more townhouses and condos.
     Watson Ranch (aka Town Center) Specific Plan would allow a range of housing types.
     There is a Priority Development Area (PDA) centered around Highway 29 that has mixed-
      use zoning. The idea is to create more integrated neighborhoods with complete streets.
     One environmental issue in the city is the red legged frog along the eastern hills.
Adopted March 17, 2015                                                                        B-153

CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON                                             2015-2023 HOUSING ELEMENT
               o   New projects are conducting a biological survey.
               o   The Watson Ranch EIR will cover the impacts and take away the uncertainty
                   for developers.
     The City has CDBG funds for lower-income home repair loans (low-interest loan of
      around 1 percent that is deferred until the home is sold).
     The City recently received CDBG grant funds for a first-time homebuyer program.
     The City Council recently approved a $5,000 grant for earthquake repairs for chimney
      damage or earthquake resiliency of mobile home foundations.
     The City is currently updating the Urban Water Management Plan.
          o   Almost all of the City’s water is from the North Bay Aqueduct.
          o   The City also uses some recycled water.
          o   The City adopted a Zero Water Footprint policy that will become an ordinance
              and will require new development to make better use of recycled water.
          o   The City also recently created a Cash for Grass program where residents can
              receive funds for tearing up their lawns and installing water efficient landscaping.
          o   The City is also fixing leaky pipelines.
          o   There are a lot of water conservation opportunities.
B-154                                                                       Adopted March 17, 2015

