


















































Adopted August 20, 201
 Table of Contents
IInnttrroodduuccttiioonn
 Section I — Introduction
 A Overview                                            1
 B Purpose of the Housing Element                      2
 C State Law Requirements for Housing Elements         3
 D Definitions of Key Housing Terms                    4
 E Process for Preparing the Housing Element           7
BBaacckkggrroouunndd
 Section II — Background Overview and Key Findings
 A Summary of Housing Conditions and Trends            9
 B Review of the 2007-2014 Housing Element            13
 C Consistency with the Tiburon General Plan          31
 Section III — Current Housing Conditions and Trends
 A Population, Housing and Jobs Trends                34
 B Special Housing Needs                              44
 C Homeless Needs                                     51
 D Assisted Rental Housing “At Risk” of Conversion    55
 E Available Housing Programs and Funding             57
 Section IV — Future Housing Needs and Opportunities
 A Regional Housing Needs Allocation (RHNA)           63
 B Available Land for Housing                         65
 C Potential Non-Governmental Constraints to Housing  74
 D Potential Governmental Constraints to Housing      80
 E Sustainability, Climate Change and Energy         111
GGooaallss,, PPoolliicciieess aanndd P          mss
                                     Prrooggrraam
 Section V — Housing Goals, Policies and Programs
 A Housing Goals                                     117
 B Housing Policies and Implementation Programs      118

Section VI — Implementation Timeframe
A Overview                                  138
B Implementation Summary Table              139
Section VII — Quantified Housing Objectives
A Overview                                  142
B Quantified Objectives Summary Table       143
Appppeennddiixx
A
Parcel Listing of Potential Housing Sites

Section I
Introduction
  A     Overview
                                        The Town of Tiburon is a community of approximately 8,900
                                        residents located on a relatively narrow four square mile
                                        peninsula extending into San Francisco Bay. The peninsula
                                        rises quickly from the Bay reaching a central spine known
                                        as the Tiburon Ridge. This ridge is prominent from
                                        widespread locations in the San Francisco Bay Area. Most
                                        of the peninsula is sloping land. Neighborhoods vary in age
                                        from the 1890’s to the present. Over 95 percent of the
                                        Town’s land area is comprised of residential
neighborhoods, public parks, and secured open space.
Tiburon is a community of neighborhoods covering a wide range of construction dates, housing
types, architectural styles, and neighborhood design characteristics. At one end of the range is
Old Tiburon, an 1890’s-vintage subdivision of small lots on generally steep slopes with a variety
of housing types and styles. At the other end of the range are newer multi-million dollar homes
located on larger parcels in thoroughly modern estate-style subdivisions that were common in
the 1980’s and 1990’s. In between are numerous subdivisions from the post-war boom of the late
1940’s up through the 1950’s and 1960’s and into the 1970’s. Neighborhoods and homes in
Tiburon are quite well maintained and are desirable and attractive places to live.
       Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                     1

  B      Purpose of the Housing Element
                                    All California cities and counties are required to have a Housing
                                    Element included in their General Plan which establishes housing
                                    objectives, policies and programs in response to community
                                    housing conditions and needs. This Housing Element has been
                                    prepared to respond to current and near-term future housing needs
                                    in Tiburon. It contains updated information and strategic directions
                                    (policies and specific actions) that the Town is committed to
                                    undertaking to address its housing needs.
Even with the downturn in the economy beginning in the last part of 2008, housing affordability in
Marin County and in the Bay Area as a whole is an important issue. Tiburon’s housing conditions
are reflective of many area-wide and even nation-wide trends. Over the past thirty years housing
costs have skyrocketed out of proportion to many people’s ability to pay; and interest rates,
construction costs and high land costs all increase the ultimate cost of housing. This has a
number of implications as it becomes more difficult to fill vacant jobs; roadways are clogged with
workers traveling longer distances; and many young families, longtime residents, and other
community members relocate because they can no longer afford to live in the community.
This Housing Element builds upon the goals, policies and implementing programs contained in
the Town’s 2007-2014 Housing Element, which was adopted in February 2012 and certified by
the California Department of Housing and Community Development (HCD). As with the 2007-
2014 Housing Element, this element recognizes there are limitations as to what the Town can do
about these problems due to the limited availability of developable land. The Town is currently at
just about total build-out. With the exception of infill and mixed-use areas, most other available
residential sites are limited to small or steep sites with limitations due to access problems, soil
stability, drainage, parking, etc.
However, there are opportunities that exist on a limited number of relatively flat sites located near
bus transit and shopping. In particular as it relates to potential sites for housing, the primary
challenge of Tiburon’s Housing Element is to properly address local housing needs while
ensuring that new housing will fit with the existing and planned character, quality, environmental
constraints and resources of the community. Questions include:
          What Kind of Housing Do We Need? What kind of housing (size, type,
             location and price) best fits with our workforce housing needs, household
             characteristics, and ability to pay for housing?
        Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                        2

          Where Can We Appropriately Put New Housing? Where in our
             community can additional residential units be accommodated, especially
             for very low, low, and moderate income households?
          How Can We Effectively Work Together? What can the Town do –– in
             collaboration with community organizations, other agencies, non-profits,
             and for-profit developers –– to encourage the construction of needed
             workforce and special needs housing?
          How Can We Effectively Help Special Needs Groups? What can be
             done to assist those households with special needs including, but not
             limited to the elderly, homeless, people living with physical or emotional
             disabilities?
  C       State Law Requirements for Housing Elements
State law requires each city and county in
California to adopt a General Plan containing at
least seven elements including a Housing Element.
Regulations regarding Housing Elements are found
in the California Government Code Sections
65580-65589. Although the Housing Element must
follow State law it is by nature a local document.
The focus of the Tiburon Housing Element is on the
needs, desires and vision of Tiburon residents as it
relates to housing in the community. Within these
parameters, the intent of the element is also to comply with State law requirements.
Unlike the other mandatory General Plan elements, the Housing Element is required to be
updated every eight years and is subject to detailed statutory requirements and mandatory
review by the State of California Department of Housing and Community Development (HCD).
According to State law, the Housing Element must:
 Provide goals, policies, quantified objectives and scheduled programs to preserve,
     improve and develop housing
 Identify and analyze existing and projected housing needs for all economic segments
     of the community.
        Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                3

 Identify adequate sites that will be zoned and available (prior to Housing Element
     adoption) within the 8 year housing cycle to meet the Town’s fair share of regional
     housing needs at all income levels
 Be internally consistent with other parts of the General Plan
 Be submitted to the State Department of Housing and Community Development
     (HCD) to determine if HCD “certifies” the Housing Element is in compliance with state
     law.
State Law establishes detailed content requirements for Housing Elements and requires a
regional “fair share” approach to distributing housing needs. State Housing Element law
recognizes that in order for the private sector to address housing needs and demand, local
governments must adopt land-use plans and implementing regulations that provide opportunities
for, and do not unduly constrain, housing development.
In accordance with State law, the Housing Element must be consistent and compatible with other
General Plan elements. Additionally, the Housing Element should provide clear policy and
direction for making decisions pertaining to zoning, subdivision approval, housing allocations,
and capital improvements. The housing action program must also identify adequate residential
sites available for a variety of housing types for all income levels; assist in developing adequate
housing to meet the needs of low and moderate income households; address governmental
constraints to housing maintenance, improvement, and development; conserve and improve the
condition of the existing affordable housing stock; and promote housing opportunities for all
persons.
  D      Definitions of Key Housing Terms
In the context of Housing Elements, “Affordable Housing” generally focuses on housing for
extremely low, very low, low and moderate income households, but may also address housing
for above moderate income households. Generally, housing that costs no more than 30% of
household income is considered affordable. This is especially true for lower income families. So
how much do extremely low, very low, low and moderate income households earn and who are
they? The definitions below are used throughout this Housing Element.
ο     Accessible Housing: Units accessible and adaptable to the needs of the physically disabled.
        Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                       4

ο Emergency Shelter. Emergency shelter means housing with minimal supportive services for
  homeless persons that is limited to occupancy of six months or less by a homeless person. No
  individual or household may be denied emergency shelter because of an inability to pay.
ο Housing Affordability: The generally accepted measure for determining whether a person can afford
  housing means spending no more than 30% of one's gross household income on housing costs,
  including utilities, principal and interest. For example, a teacher earning $50,000 per year can afford
  $1,250 per month for housing. A police officer or fire fighter earning $60,000 can afford up to $1,500
  per month.
ο Housing Density: The number of dwelling units per acre of land. Gross density includes all the land
  within the boundaries of a particular area and excludes nothing. Net density excludes certain areas
  such as streets, open spaces, easements, water areas, etc.
ο Income Categories: Household income classifications, defined as a percentage of area median
  household income, as follows:
          o   Extremely Low Income Households: Government Code Section 65583(a) requires local
              Housing Elements to provide “documentation of projections and a quantification of the
              locality's existing and projected housing needs for all income levels, including extremely
              low income households (GC 65583 (a)(1)).” Extremely low income is a subset of the very
              low-income regional housing need and is defined as households earning less than 30% of
              the median household income –– which, for family of four as of February 2013, would be
              less than $33,950/year.
          o   Very Low Income Households: California Health and Safety Code Section 50105
              provides that HUD very-low income limits are used, which are households earning less
              than 50% of the median household income (adjusted as described for low-income
              households above). As of February 2013, a family of four earning less than $56,550 per
              year was considered very low income according to HCD’s state income limits.
          o   Low Income Households: California Health and Safety Code Section 50079.5 provides
              that the low-income limits established by HUD are the state limit for low-income
              households. Low-income households earn 50-80% of the median household income,
              adjusted for family size, with some adjustment for areas with unusually high or low
              incomes relative to housing costs. As of February 2013, a family of four earning between
              $56,550 and $90,500 per year was considered low income according to HCD’s state
              income limits.
          o   Moderate Income Households: Defined by Section 50093 of the California Health and
              Safety Code as households earning 80-120% of the median household income. As of
              February 2013, a family of four earning between $90,500 and $123,600 per year was
              considered moderate income according to HCD’s state income limits.
          o   Above Moderate Income Households: Defined as households earning over 120% of the
              median household income. As of February 2013, a family of four earning more than
              $123,600 per year per year was considered above moderate income.
    Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                             5

ο Income Limits: Each year, the California Department of Housing and Community Development
  publishes income limits for households according to income categories and household sizes. With a
  median income of $103,000 in 2013, Marin County has one of the highest median household incomes
  in the state (Santa Clara County leads the state with $105,500 in median income). Income limits,
  adjusted according to family size, are shown below. HCD’s state income limits are based on federal
  income limits published by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development. For additional
  information, see the HCD website at http://www.hcd.ca.gov/hpd/hrc/rep/state/incNote.html.
    Marin County FY 2013 Median Household Income Schedule
     Family       Extremely Low           Very Low         Low         Median        Moderate         Above
      Size               30%                 50%           80%          100%            120%         Moderate
        1              $23,750             $39,600        $63,350      $72,100         $86,500       >$86,500
        2              $27,150             $45,250        $72,400      $82,400         $98,900       >$98,900
        3              $30,550             $50,900        $81,450      $92,700        $111,250      >$111,250
        4              $33,950             $56,550        $90,500     $103,000        $123,600      >$123,600
        5              $36,650             $61,050        $97,700     $111,250        $133,500      >$133,500
        6              $39,400             $65,600       $104,950     $119,500        $143,400      >$143,400
    Source: California State Department of Housing and Community Development, effective February 25, 2013
ο Jobs/Housing Balance: The relationship of the number and types of jobs in a community with the
  amount and affordability of housing. An appropriate balance is commonly thought to be 1.5 jobs for
  every 1 housing unit.
ο Median Household Income: The middle point at which half of the Town's households earn more and
  half earn less. In 2013, the HCD median household income for a family of four in Marin County as
  used for Tiburon was $103,000.
ο Persons per Household: Average number of persons in each household.
ο Senior Housing. Defined by California Housing Element law as projects developed for, and put to
  use as, housing for senior citizens. Seniors are persons at least 62 years of age.
ο Supportive Housing. Supportive housing is permanent rental housing linked to a range of support
  services designed to enable residents to maintain stable housing and lead fuller lives. This type of
  housing has no limit on length of stay, is occupied by the target population (such as low-income
  persons with disabilities and certain other disabled persons) and is linked to onsite or offsite services
  that assist the supportive housing resident in retaining the housing, improving his or her health status,
  and maximizing his or her ability to live and, when possible, work in the community.
ο Transitional Housing. Transitional housing and transitional housing development mean rental
     Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                                      6

     housing operated under program requirements that call for the termination of assistance and
     recirculation of the assisted unit to another eligible program recipient at some predetermined future
     point in time, which shall be no less than six months. Transitional housing is a type of supportive
     housing used to facilitate the movement of homeless individuals and families to permanent housing. A
     homeless person may live in a transitional apartment for up to two-years while receiving supportive
     services that enable independent living.
ο    Workforce Affordable Housing: Housing that is affordable to the workforce in the community.
  E     Process for Preparing the Housing Element
The Tiburon Housing Element update process began with a community workshop held on
February 25, 2014, to solicit comments from the community on directions for the Housing
Element. This input helped identify key issues and strategic directions to pursue in the Housing
Element update.
                                           The overall intent of the community workshop was to solicit
                                           ideas for the update of the Town of Tiburon Housing
                                           Element. Specific purposes of the community workshop
                                           were to (1) share information on demographic trends,
                                           housing needs, existing housing conditions; (2) review
                                           progress made to date in implementing the housing element
                                           and provide a forum to hear from community members
                                           about how the Town can improve housing policies and
                                           programs, (3) identify possible housing strategies to
                                           consider in the Town of Tiburon Housing Element Update,
                                           (4) share perspectives on barriers and opportunities for the
                                           development of affordable housing in Tiburon, and (5)
                                           identify/refine possible affordable housing opportunity sites
                                           to include in the Town’s Housing Element Update.
Noticing for the community workshop included outreach on the Town’s website, contact with
affordable housing advocates and providers, notice in the locally published newspaper, and
notices mailed to all property owners’ associations in Tiburon. A Housing Needs Assessment
document, containing much of the introductory and background material contained in this
element, was prepared and provided on the Town’s website. Copies were also distributed to
workshop participants. The following organizations were notified of the workshop, as well as
Planning Commission and Town Council meetings: EAH; Fair Housing of Marin; Housing
Leadership Alliance; League of Women Voters; Legal Aid of Main; Marin Center for Independent
       Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                            7

Living; Marin Community Housing Action Initiative; Marin Grassroots; Marin Partnership to End
Homelessness; Northbay Family Homes; Public Advocates; Ritter Center; West Bay Housing;
and all 51 homeowners’ associations in Tiburon.
Among the items identified in the community outreach effort that are addressed in the updated
Housing Element through current, modified and/or new policies or programs include:
(1)     Improve housing options for seniors.
(2)     Encourage the development of second units, recognizing that these can provide an
        important source of income for lower-income seniors who want to age in place, as well as
        affordable housing for caretakers and other lower-income service providers.
(3)     Consider commercial sites that can accommodate mixed use housing. Provide incentives
        to encourage property owners to build mixed-use developments.
(4)     Look at underutilized sites with aging and/or functionally obsolete buildings for potential
        affordable housing sites.
(5)     Pursue a housing impact fee for larger new homes.
(6)     Rezone the Beach Road parking lot and the Shark’s Deli site as Affordable Housing
        Overlay sites in order to accommodate the Town’s RHNA for lower-income households.
Other community outreach includes
public work sessions on the Preliminary
Draft Housing Element with the Tiburon
Planning Commission and Town
Council, review of the Draft Housing
Element by the public and the
California Department of Housing and
Community Development (HCD) as
required by State law, and then public
hearings on the Draft Housing Element
with the Planning Commission and
Town Council.
       Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                     8

Section II
Background Overview and Key Findings
  A    Summary of Housing Conditions and Trends
                                       The “housing crisis” in the Bay Area has been an evolving
                                       phenomenon over the past 35 years as high demand (and
                                       need) has continually exceeded supply and affordability.
                                       There has been a substantial movement in the Bay Area,
                                       intensified by concerns about climate change, to find ways
                                       to grow sustainably. That is, to encourage regional
                                       development patterns that are more compact, transit-
                                       oriented, pedestrian-oriented, attractively designed, and
                                       highly livable. A central focus of this movement — the very
                                       foundation for achieving a more sustainable and livable Bay
                                       Area — is rethinking the way in which we plan, design,
                                       rehabilitate, preserve and manage housing in conjunction
                                       with transportation systems, jobs and services.
Below are key findings of the housing needs analysis that summarize important trends and
considerations for the Housing Element:
ο   Population and housing units in Tiburon has risen only slightly over the past decade.
    Between 2000 and 2010 the population in Tiburon increased by 296 people (population of
    8,962 in 2010), and the number of housing units increased by 132 (4,025 housing units in
    2010). In 2010, there were 2.39 persons per household in Tiburon, which is slightly above
    the County average household size of 2.36 persons per household. Approximately 7.3
    percent of the housing units were vacant, similar to the countywide vacancy rate. (Houses
    can be vacant for many reasons, including being for sale.)
ο   Minimal amount of future growth. The amount of growth projected for Tiburon is minimal.
    Tiburon will always predominantly have single family detached homes, which currently
    account for over 60% of the housing units in Tiburon.
ο   About 30 percent of the Town’s Households Are Considered Lower Income. The exact
    income category of a household is dependent upon the size and overall income of the
    household. In a general way, about fifteen percent of the households in Tiburon are
      Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                      9

  estimated to be extremely low income, seven percent are estimated to be very low income,
  and eight percent are estimated to be low income.
ο Market Rate Ownership Housing Continues to be Affordable Only to Above Moderate
  Income Households. Even with the downturn in the housing market, market rate for sale
  housing is only affordable to above moderate income households. The median price for a
  detached single family home in Tiburon in 2012 was $1,600,000.
ο Market Rate Rental Housing is Generally Affordable to Moderate Income Households.
  While rents in Tiburon are generally high for various size units, some market rate rental
  housing is affordable to moderate income
  households. Market rate ownership housing
  continues to be affordable only to above moderate
  income households. About 30% of the Town’s
  households are considered lower income (earning
  less than 80% of median income).
ο Tiburon has a mix of housing types. In 2010, the
  Census estimated that there were 4,025 housing
  units in Tiburon. About 64 percent of the housing in
  Tiburon are single-family detached homes. Of the
  remaining housing, there is a mix of housing types,
  with ten percent single family attached homes, ten
  percent in structures of two to four units, and 16
  percent in structures with five or more units.
ο Many of Marin’s employees cannot find housing in the county. The average weekly
  wage in Marin is $1,124 (U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics) and an employee making this
  wage can get a mortgage for approximately $290,000. In other words, they cannot buy in
  Tiburon.
ο The senior population in Marin County (age 65+) is projected to increase by 57
  percent from 2010 to 2030. The senior population in Marin County (age 65+) is projected to
  peak by 2040 and then gradually decrease as the baby boom generation ages and declines
  in number according to the California Department of Finance. Most seniors, 93 percent in
  some surveys, prefer to age in place (stay in their homes as they age) or stay in their
  community.
    Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                  10

ο Rental housing is more affordable than owner occupied housing. The average two
  bedroom apartment rented for $1,789 in 2012 in Marin County, which is affordable to some
  low income residents (RealFacts). The median priced home, approximately $1.6 million for a
  single family home and around $853,000 for a condo or townhome in Tiburon, is out of reach
  of most employees (Marin County Assessor). There had been a 14 percent year-over-year
  increase in home value by the end of 2012 (Zillow).
ο Need for special needs housing and facilities for the homeless. There are
  approximately 924 homeless people in Marin County (one day count conducted in January
  2013). Approximately 20 percent of the homeless are unsheltered (184 people). Other
  housing needs include single parent households, persons living with disabilities, and the
  provision of transitional housing for the homeless.
ο Housing affects sustainability in multiple ways. Sustainability generally means living in a
  way that does not compromise the ability of future generations to enjoy the same quality of
  life. Housing affects sustainability in many ways including water quality, air quality, use of
  resources and climate change. Housing has both direct effects (heating, cooling and
  powering homes) and indirect effects (transportation patterns). Promoting walk-able, transit-
  oriented neighborhoods is the single greatest thing that a community can do to promote
  sustainability in its land use planning.
ο The type and location of housing affects climate change. Climate change, caused in
  part by the release of carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gases, is an important issue in
  California and in Marin County. Major concerns include potential for rising sea levels and
  decreased water supplies due to smaller snow packs. Additionally, change of temperature
  and rain patterns may hurt agricultural parts of the county. Based on maps that assume one
     Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                     11

meter (a little over three feet) of sea level rise this century, which is expected, Marin County
is likely to suffer flooding from the Bay and the Ocean.
Housing affects climate change in two ways. The houses themselves take energy to heat,
cool and power, and the energy production contributes to climate change. Additionally,
housing patterns affect how often and how far people have to drive. Since vehicles
contribute over 40 percent of greenhouse gases in Tiburon, and over 50 percent in the Bay
Area, finding ways to allow people to drive fewer miles is important. A critical question facing
the Town is: Where in our community should additional residential units be accommodated,
especially those that can meet future housing needs?
   Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                     12
  B     Review of the 2007-2014 Housing Element
                                                          The most recent update of the Tiburon
                                                          Housing Element was adopted in
                                                          February 2012. On April 18, 2012, the
                                                          California Housing & Community
                                                          Development Department (HCD)
                                                          certified the Town’s Housing Element
                                                          pursuant to California Government
                                                          Code Section 65585.
                                                          The implementation of the Housing
                                                          Element programs, as well as the
                                                          Town’s continued engagement with the
                                                          property owners who control virtually all
                                                          of the potential affordable housing sites
                                                          identified in the Housing Element, is
                                                          contributing to a positive environment
                                                          for provision of housing.
Each year since adoption the Town has conducted an annual review of the current Housing
Element and the General Plan as a whole. This section highlights some of the key
accomplishments during the previous Housing Element cycle from 2007 to date, with the intent of
building upon the successes of the current Housing Element, and modifying or adding policies or
programs where appropriate. Staff’s preliminary review of the goals, policies and programs
contained in the 2007-2014 Tiburon Housing Element has determined that many remain viable
and current as the Town moves forward during the next planning period (2015-2023).
Accomplishments of the 2007-2014 Housing Element
The Town of Tiburon’s 2005 General Plan identifies several large undeveloped parcels, mostly
located on the Town’s scenic ridgelines and steep hillsides, as containing the majority of the
Town’s future low-density housing development. The General Plan goals and policies that
constrain the development of additional medium and high density housing on these sites
acknowledge that underlying physical conditions effectively prevent their development with
affordable housing. These physical conditions include the following:
(1)     Approximately 90% of the large undeveloped parcels in the Tiburon Housing Element
        Area have slopes over 30 percent, which significantly increases the cost of land
        development. Much of the remaining area under 30 percent in slope lies at the top of the
       Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                   13

          Town’s significant ridgelines, the protection of which is critical to preserving Tiburon's
          visual character.
(2)       Nearly all of the parcels contain unstable areas and multiple landslides that would require
          expensive remediation or repair, and specialized foundations for buildings and retaining
          walls, dramatically increasing the cost of development.
(3)       The remaining large undeveloped parcels comprise the majority of Tiburon's remaining
          open space and habitat areas.
(4)       Paradise Drive, the solitary access to the Paradise Drive Unincorporated Area where the
          majority of new housing units on large undeveloped parcels would be located, is a
          winding, narrow, two-lane road with very limited opportunities for improvement. This
          substandard road is considered a major constraint to development of additional housing
          units in this area, as the cost of making frontage improvements to serve housing
          developments, including the provision of safe and adequate sight distances, would be
          prohibitive.
(5)       Virtually all of the large undeveloped parcels lack basic infrastructure, including streets,
          water supply, sanitary sewer lines, gas and electricity. This total lack of infrastructure
          greatly increases the development costs.
Accepting these financial realities, the Town identified alternative sites for high-density affordable
housing in the Housing Element adopted in 2012. These sites are:
     1555 Tiburon Boulevard, a 1-acre parking lot next to Chase Bank, with capacity for 20
          housing units.
     Cove Shopping Center, a .6 acre portion of the site to the east of the shopping center and
          parking lot, with capacity for 12 units.
     Reed Elementary School, a 1.8 acre site with capacity for 35 units.
Due to increasing enrollment, the Reed Union School District subsequently determined that the
Reed Elementary School site needed to be reserved for potential future expansion of school
facilities and requested that the Town remove the site from its inventory of affordable housing
sites. As a result, the Town identified two new high-density, affordable housing opportunity sites
to replace the loss of the Reed School site. These sites are:
       1601 Tiburon Boulevard, a 1.06-acre parking lot adjacent to Bank of America, with a
           capacity of 21 housing units.
       1600 Tiburon Boulevard, a 0.4 acre underutilized site, with a capacity of 8 units.
         Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                      14

These two sites, providing a total development potential of 29 units, were rezoned for the
Affordable Housing Overlay (AHO) designation. Together with the remaining affordable housing
opportunity sites, the Town had AHO sites available to accommodate 61 lower-income units,
exceeding the Town’s RHNA requirement for 57 units affordable to lower-income households for
the 2007-2014 housing element period.
New housing development was relatively slow in Tiburon between 2007-2014, primarily due to
the foreclosure crisis and subsequent recession. Eight new single family homes and five second
units were approved. These second units were determined to provide affordable housing for
three lower income and two moderate income households.
Although no new deed-restricted affordable housing was produced during the 2007-2014 period,
the Town has achieved success in providing and maintaining housing developments containing
affordable units, such as Hilarita Apartments (91 affordable units out of a total of 102 units),
Tiburon Hill Estates (16 affordable units out of 164 total units), Point Tiburon Marsh (20
affordable units out of 34 total units), Cecilia Place (16 affordable units), Bradley House (15
affordable units), and most recently, Chandler’s Gate (4 affordable units out of 25 total units).
These developments provide 104 very low-income, 38 low-income, and 20 moderate-income
housing units, for a total of 162 affordable housing units for both families and seniors. In addition,
the approximately 35 legal secondary dwelling units in the Town are nearly all affordable units
based upon the findings of the Town’s rental survey.
Review of the Programs Contained in the 2007-2014 Housing Element
In 2012, the Town adopted an ordinance which implemented all of the zoning code amendments
identified in the 2007-2014 Housing Element. These amendments include procedures to review
and approve requests for reasonable accommodation from zoning requirements. More flexible
parking standards and higher densities for smaller studio and one-bedroom units were
established for the Affordable Housing Overlay zone. In addition, the Town modified the
inclusionary zoning requirements to include a minimum of 25% affordable housing units for
market-rate housing projects and a minimum 20% affordable units for projects located on smaller
sites within the Affordable Housing Overlay zone that would yield ten or fewer units.
A review of specific programs is contained in the following table. The overall conclusion of the
review of the 2007-2014 Housing Element is to continue most of the existing programs, and to
either delete or modify programs that include actions that were completed during the housing
element period.
        Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                   15

                                 Evaluation of 2007-2014 Housing Element Programs
                                                                                                                                     Continue,
                     Program Title                          Objective                     Achievements/Evaluation
                                                                                                                                     Modify or
                                                                                                                                      Delete
H-a Focus Town Resources on Key Housing              Construction of housing   In the limited time (less than 18 months) since    Continue based
Sites. Focus Town-controlled resources toward the    on one or more of the     adoption of the Town’s most recent Housing         on sites list
design, approval, financing, and construction of     key housing sites.        Element, there has been limited progress in        from 2015-
housing, especially affordable housing, on key sites                           advancing the development of a new affordable      2023 Element.
identified in the Tiburon Housing Element. This                                housing project. The Town’s available funding
would include all actions described in Housing                                 resources (in-lieu fees and set-aside funds) are
Element Programs H-g, H-h, H-I, H-j, H-y, H-z, and                             in place and available for use. As of June 2013,
H-aa.                                                                          the Low & Moderate Income Housing Fund had
                                                                               an estimated balance of $1.07 million, and
                                                                               approximately $862,000 was available in set-
                                                                               aside funds. Efforts to induce property owners to
                                                                               advance their sites for affordable housing
                                                                               projects have not been fruitful to date, perhaps
                                                                               as a result of a struggling economy.
H-b Improve Community Awareness of Housing           Obtain and distribute     A link to the Marin Housing Authority website has  Continue
Needs, Issues, and Programs. The Town will           materials; coordinate     been created; informational housing-related
promote the availability of Marin County programs    with other organizations. handouts are kept at the public counter; selected
for housing construction, homebuyer assistance,                                Town staff has been trained to provide referral
rental assistance, Marin Housing Authority                                     information; on-going collaboration with County
information, code enforcement, information about                               Housing Authority and EAH on potential housing
affordable housing, fair housing and housing                                   projects; housing-related materials distributed at
rehabilitation through the following means:                                    annual homeowner association summit.
     (a) Create a link on the Town’s website that
         describes housing programs and provides
         direct links to County agencies that
         administer the programs.
     (b) Include contact information on County
         programs in Town newsletters and other
         general communications that are sent to
         Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                      16

         residents.
     (c) Maintain information and handouts at the
         Town’s public counter.
     (d) Train selected Town staff to provide
         referrals.
     (e) Distribute information on programs at public
         locations (library, schools).
     (f) Collaborate with other agencies (County of
         Marin, Tiburon Ecumenical Association,
         Marin Housing Authority, Rotary, Chamber
         of Commerce, Ecumenical Association for
         Housing, Housing Council) to prepare
         presentations and distribute informational
         materials to improve awareness of housing
         needs, issues and available housing
         programs.
     (g) Distribute materials to neighborhood groups,
         homeowner associations, religious
         institutions, businesses, and other interested
         groups (Rotary, Chamber of Commerce,
         etc.) in the Tiburon area.
H-c. Community Outreach When Implementing               Undertake outreach       The Town conducted public hearings, published      Continue
Housing Element Programs. Coordinate with local         annually and for each    notices in the local paper, posted notices at
businesses, housing advocacy groups,                    Housing Element          Town Hall and on the Town’s website, and sent
neighborhood groups, and the Chamber of                 program per the          notices to all interested parties when considering
Commerce and participate in the Marin Consortium        schedule for the         and adopting Ordinance 541, which implemented
for Workforce Housing in building public                implementing programs    several housing element programs.
understanding and support for workforce, special        contained in the Housing
needs housing and other issues related to housing,      Element.                 In 2012, the Town prepared an updated
including the community benefits of affordable                                   informational guide on the second unit
housing, mixed use and pedestrian-oriented                                       application form and approval process. The
development. The Town will notify a broad                                        guide is available on the website.
representation of the community when housing
programs are discussed by the Planning
         Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                        17

Commission or Town Council. Specific actions
should be linked to the preparation and distribution
of materials as identified in Program H-b. Specific
outreach activities include:
     (a) Maintain the Housing Element mailing list
          and send public hearing notices to all
          interested public, non-profit agencies and
          affected property owners.
    (b) Post notices at Town Hall, the library, and
          the post office.
    (c) Publish notices in the local newspaper.
    (d) Post information on the Town’s website.
     (e) Conduct outreach (workshops,
          neighborhood meetings) to the community
          as Housing Element programs are
          implemented.
     (f) Provide an informational guide to
          homeowners explaining the benefits, “best
          practices” and procedures for adding or
          legalizing a secondary dwelling unit.
H-d Foster Meaningful Assistance from Other                                    Town staff continues to work with special districts Continue
Agencies. Town staff will meet and work with other   Assistance and            to streamline processing and reduce fees for
public agencies and special districts (water, fire,  incentives for affordable secondary dwelling units.
schools, sanitary districts, etc.) to promote        housing.
affordable housing through the provision of fee                                Staff participated in the regional and Marin
waivers, fee reductions, development of property, or                           County-based efforts related to the SCS process.
other assistance for affordable housing projects. In
addition, participate in ongoing regional planning
activities related to housing and the Sustainable
Communities initiative.
H-e       Review the Housing Element Annually.       Annual review of          The Town Council annually reviews the Housing       Continue
As required by State law, the Town will review the   Housing Element           Element programs and submits the report to
status of Housing Element programs by April of each  implementation            HCD and the Office of Planning & Research as
year, beginning April 2012.                          progress; submittal of    required by law.
                                                     approved form to HCD.
          Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                    18

H-f      Update the Housing Element. In                  Consistency with SB375   Housing Element for 2015-2023 planning period      Continue.
coordination with other jurisdictions in Marin County,   and Housing Element      will be submitted to HCD prior to the due date of  Delete “In
update the Tiburon Housing Element to be                 law.                     January 31, 2015.                                  coordination
consistent with State law requirements by 2014.                                                                                      with other
                                                                                                                                     jurisdictions in
                                                                                                                                     Marin County”,
                                                                                                                                     as this in not
                                                                                                                                     applicable.
H-g      Redevelopment Agency (Town of Tiburon           Affordable housing       The Town continues to hold an Agreement with       Continue.
as Successor Agency). In addition to expending           projects on sites within the Marin Housing Authority to expend remaining
Housing Set Aside Funds for meritorious affordable       the Redevelopment Area   set-aside funds on meritorious affordable
housing projects, the Town, in conjunction with the                               housing projects.
Marin Housing Authority, will use Redevelopment
funding where possible for affordable housing.
H-h      Apply for State Funds for Affordable            Accumulation of funds    This action was not undertaken due to the lack of  Continue.
Housing. Apply for State affordable housing funds        for affordable housing.  specific affordable housing projects for which to  Delete
including, but not limited to, the Multifamily Housing                            target grant funds. Past experience has shown      reference to
Program, the Cal-Home Program, and the                                            that affordable housing projects in Tiburon are    applying for
Homebuyer’s Down-payment Assistance Program.                                      often less competitive for many of these types of  funding every
Commit these funds to one or more projects located                                grants.                                            two years.
on designated housing sites as shown in the Town’s
Housing Element. Apply for funding every two years.
H-i      Apply for and Utilize Local Funds for           Accumulation of funds    This action was not undertaken due to the lack of  Continue
Affordable Housing. Potential sources of funds           for affordable housing.  specific affordable housing projects for which to
could include, but would not be limited to:                                       solicit donations and target such funds. The
     (a) Marin Workforce Housing Trust                                            affordable housing impact fee and inter-
     (b) Marin Community Foundation                                               jurisdictional housing trust fund were not pursued
     (c) Federal Grants                                                           due to staff availability and work-load.
     (d) Transportation Authority of Marin
     (e) Voluntary donations (such as bequeaths,
         trusts, donations of land and buildings, etc.).
     (f) Affordable Housing Impact Fee on larger
         single-family homes. (Size to be determined
         Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                         19

         — for example, Marin County has a sliding
         scale housing impact fee on homes over
         2,000 square feet in size).
     (g) Inter-Jurisdictional Housing Trust Fund (with
         Belvedere and Marin County) that could
         include housing impact fees, in-lieu fees, co-
         funding one nexus study for a housing
         impact, and the accumulation of any other
         housing-related monies for use in a mutually
         beneficial way to meet each jurisdiction's
         RHNA through a combination of
         contributions to the Fund and units created.
H-j      Work with Non-Profits on Housing. The          Ongoing working            The Town worked with the Ecumenical               Continue
Town will work with non-profits to assist in achieving  relationship with non-     Association for Housing (EAH) on a potential
the Town’s housing goals and implementing               profit housing sponsors.   housing project in 2012; the property owner
programs. Coordination should occur on an ongoing                                  subsequently withdrew from negotiations.
basis, and as special opportunities arise related to
specific housing sites and as the Housing Element is
implemented.
H-k      Work with the Marin Housing Authority.         Implement agreements       The Town recently renewed its Agreement for       Continue
Continue to implement the agreement with the Marin      to maintain affordability. BMR Portfolio Management with the Marin
Housing Authority (MHA) for management of the                                      Housing Authority.
affordable housing stock in order to ensure
permanent affordability, and implement resale and
rental regulations for very low, low and moderate
income units, and assure that these units remain at
an affordable price level.
H-l      Staff Training. Conduct a training session     Conduct training           Housing discrimination complaints are handled     Continue
for Town employees regarding the receipt,               sessions linked to         by select Town staff members who are aware of
documentation, and proper referral of housing           Housing Element            the proper referrals related to housing programs.
discrimination complaints and other information         implementation
related to housing programs.                            programs.
         Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                        20

H-m      Housing Discrimination Complaints.           Implementation of Fair  Housing discrimination complaints are handled     Continue
Refer discrimination complaints to the appropriate    Housing laws.           by select Town staff members who are aware of
legal service, county, or state agency or Fair                                the proper referrals related to housing programs.
Housing of Marin. The Community Development
Director is the designated person in Tiburon with
responsibility to investigate and deal appropriately
with complaints. Discrimination complaints will be
referred to Fair Housing of Marin, the Marin Housing
Authority, Legal Aid, HUD, or the California
Department of Fair Employment and Housing, as
appropriate. Information regarding the housing
discrimination complaint referral process will be
posted on the Town’s website and available
consistent with Program H-1c above.
H-n      Provision of Affordable Housing for          Construction of housing Inclusionary zoning is in place; lack of new      Continue
Special Needs Households. The Town will               for people living with  affordable projects being proposed has limited
continue to facilitate programs and projects which    special needs.          the ability to implement this program.
meet federal, state and local requirements to provide
accessibility for seniors, persons with disabilities,
large families, and single-person and single parent
households. In addition, the Town will apply current
inclusionary housing provisions to 10% of new units
required to meet the special housing needs in the
categories listed. Specific types of housing include:
     (a) Smaller, affordable residential units,
         especially for lower income single-person
         and single parent households.
     (b) Affordable senior housing to meet the
         burgeoning needs of an aging population,
         including assisted housing and board and
         care (licensed facilities).
     (c) Affordable units with three or more
         bedrooms for large family households.
     (d) Affordable housing that is built for, or can
         easily and inexpensively be adapted for, use
         by people with disabilities (specific
         Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                     21

          standards are established in California Title
          24 Accessibility Regulations for new and
          rehabilitation projects, augmented by
          Americans with Disabilities Act guidelines).
H-o       Adopt Procedures for Reasonable               Zoning Ordinance         Ordinance 541, adopted on August 15, 2012,         Completed.
Accommodation. Establish internal review                amendment or             implemented this program by adding Title IX to     Delete.
procedures or ordinance to provide a process for        administrative           the Municipal Code. The ordinance established
individuals with disabilities to make requests for      procedures approved.     procedures for requesting reasonable
relief from the various land use, zoning, or building                            accommodation when a zoning law or building
laws, rules, policies, practices and/or procedures of                            regulation acts as a barrier to fair housing
the Town that may be necessary to ensure equal                                   opportunities.
access to housing.
H-p       Modify the Definition of “Family” in the      Zoning Ordinance         The definition for “Family” is one or more persons Completed.
Zoning Ordinance. Revise the definition of family       amendment.               occupying a dwelling and living as a single,       Delete.
contained in the Zoning Ordinance to ensure the                                  domestic housekeeping unit, as distinguished
definition cannot distinguish between related and                                from a group occupying a hotel or motel, club,
unrelated persons, and does not impose numerical                                 fraternity or sorority house. (Ord. 541, 8/15/12)
limitations on the number of persons that constitute
a family.
H-q       Emergency Housing Assistance.                 Respond to County        Certain local places of worship have participated  Continue
Participate and allocate funds, as appropriate, for     requests for assistance. in the Rotating Emergency Shelter Program,
County and non-profit programs providing                                         sponsored by the St. Vincent de Paul Society of
emergency shelter and related counseling services.                               Marin. In Tiburon, the program provides shelter
                                                                                 for 40 men and runs for approximately 20 weeks,
                                                                                 from November 15 – April 15. The Town
                                                                                 contributes approximately $8,850 annually to this
                                                                                 program.
H-r       Develop and Adopt an Employee                 Action program for       There is currently no balance remaining in this    Continue
Housing Assistance Policy and Program. Identify         providing employee       fund; hence no recent activity.
opportunities for local government employees            housing assistance.
(especially public safety personnel) to find housing
locally through such efforts as construction of
workforce housing at public facilities or parking lots
or subsidizing mortgages or rents.
          Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                       22

H-s      Rehabilitation Loan Programs. In                 Provide residential        One new loan was made in 2010.                    Continue
cooperation with the Marin Housing Authority (MHA),       rehabilitation loans to 3
and in coordination with Housing Element Programs         low income units.
H-b, H-c, H-d, H-k, H-t, H-x, the Town shall improve
citizen awareness and will continue to support
rehabilitation loan subsidy programs.
H-t      Conduct Residential Building Report              75 Residential Building    Over 160 Residential Building Report Inspections  Continue
Inspections. The Town will continue to inspect and        Reports per year           were performed in 2012 and 195 inspections
report on all residential units prior to resale, with the                            were completed in 2013.
intent to maintain and upgrade the safety of housing
within the town consistent with adopted Uniform
Building and Housing Codes, which provide
standards for safe dwelling units. In addition to the
health and safety concerns, the residential building
report discloses the authorized use, occupancy and
zoning of the property and an itemization of
deficiencies in the dwelling unit.
H-u      Acquisition of Rental Housing. Contact           Acquisition and            This action was not undertaken due to staff       Continue
potential non-profits (such as Tiburon Ecumenical         rehabilitation of existing availability and workload, and opportunities for
Association, Ecumenical Association for Housing,          affordable rental          acquisition of rental housing. The Town has
Citizens Housing, BRIDGE Housing, etc.) who may           housing.                   funding available to subsidize additional
be seeking to acquire and rehabilitate rental housing                                affordable housing in Tiburon, and expects to
units in order to maintain ongoing affordability of the                              augment funds through continued application of
units. Provide assistance that will include, but not be                              its “In–Lieu” Housing Fee.
limited to: (1) support necessary to obtain funding
commitments from governmental programs and non-
governmental grants; (2) assistance in permit
processing; (3) waiver or subsidy of fees; and (4)
use of local funds if available.
H-v      Use of Rental Assistance Programs.               Publicity and increased    As of August 2013, there were 27 Section 8        Continue
Continue to publicize and participate in rental           use of Section 8           vouchers currently in use in Tiburon, an increase
assistance programs such as Section 8, Project            vouchers (2 additional,    of 8 vouchers over the prior planning period. The
Independence, Marin Renters Rebate, and other             21 total).                 Section 8 waiting list has been closed since
available rental programs.                                                           2008, and the Marin Housing Authority reports
         Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                           23

                                                                                 that until further notice, no additional vouchers
                                                                                 are expected to become available in the future.
H-w      Condominium Conversions. Preserve            Protection of the Town’s   Due in part to the Town’s policies and            Continue
rental housing by enforcement through the Town's      rental housing stock and   ordinances, no multi-family units have been
condominium conversion ordinance and Housing          the availability of rental allowed to be converted to condominiums in at
Element policy.                                       housing during periods     least the past 15 years.
                                                      of low rental housing
                                                      vacancies.
H-x      Link Code Enforcement with Public            Upgrades to the Town’s     In partnership with Marin County Energy Watch,    Continue
Information Programs on Town Standards,               housing stock and          the Town publicized energy efficiency programs
Rehabilitation and Energy Loan Programs.              compliance with codes.     available through Energy Upgrade California and
Implement housing, building and fire code                                        the California Youth Energy Services (CYES).
enforcement to ensure compliance with basic health                               Three Tiburon homeowners participated in
and safety building standards and provide                                        Energy Upgrade California, improving their
information about rehabilitation loan programs for                               homes’ energy efficiency by an average of 33
use by qualifying property owners who are cited.                                 percent. CYES served 29 households, saving
Specific actions include:                                                        18,000 kWh of electricity annually.
     (a) Coordinate with the Marin Housing Authority
         and PG&E to make available loan programs                                The Town’s Residential Resale Inspection
         to eligible owner and renter-occupied                                   process, continuously implemented over the past
         housing.                                                                40 years, has greatly aided the condition of the
     (b) Provide public information on alternative                               Town’s housing stock by requiring mandatory
         energy technologies for residential                                     corrections.
         developers, contractors and property
         owners.
     (c) Publicize tenant assistance and energy
         conservation programs and weatherization
         services that are available to provide
         subsidized or at cost inspection and
         corrective action.
     (d) Contact owners of structures that appear to
         be in declining or substandard condition,
         offer inspection services, and advertise and
         promote programs that will assist in funding
         needed work.
         Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                        24

     (e) Provide an informational guide to
         homeowners explaining the benefits, “best
         practices” and procedures for adding or
         legalizing a secondary dwelling unit.
H-y      Facilitate Development at Key Housing           Review progress        (a) The Town established variable densities in      Completed.
Opportunity Sites. Implement actions to encourage        annually as part of    the AHO zone as follows: Densities toward the       Delete.
and facilitate development at key housing                Program H-e and        top of the range may be appropriate where units
opportunity sites within the Town. Key housing           encourage development  are significantly smaller and would have fewer
opportunity sites include: Downtown parcels, Reed        of one or more key     impacts than the market norm. For purposes of
School parcel, and The Cove Shopping Center              housing sites by 2014. calculating densities, the number of studio
parcel. The Town will establish additional                                      dwelling units counted toward the total number of
development incentives for key housing opportunity                              dwelling units allowed at a 1.5:1 ratio provided
sites based on the most up-to-date empirical studies                            that each studio unit does not exceed six
to allow exceptions and incentives on infill housing                            hundred 600 square feet in floor area. The
sites that are of sufficient size and are located close                         number of one bedroom units are counted 1.25:1
to transit and services. The following items will be                            ratio provided that each one bedroom unit does
undertaken in 2012:                                                             not exceed eight hundred 800 square feet in floor
                                                                                area. (Ord. 541, adopted 8/15/12)
     (a) Variable Density Standards. Establish unit
         densities for studio and one-bedroom units                             (b) and (c) The Town implemented reduced and
         based on “density unit equivalents” or the                             flexible parking standards depending on project
         size of the unit.                                                      characteristics and availability of on street
                                                                                parking. Flexible parking standards may include
     (b) Reduced Parking Standards for Senior                                   shared parking joint use parking, off-site parking,
         and Affordable Housing. Provide reduced                                allowances for reduced standards depending on
         parking standards to support affordable and                            location (such as near transit), and modified
         senior housing development.                                            parking stall dimensions and tandem parking.
                                                                                (Ord. 541, adopted 8/15/12)
     (c) Flexible Parking Strategies. Provide
         flexible parking requirements that help to                             (d) The Town amended the municipal code to
         facilitate infill, affordable, transit-oriented                        provide financial contributions toward the
         and mixed use development, while at the                                construction of utilities, public road improvements
         same time avoiding off-site parking impacts.                           and other traffic improvements; soils remediation;
         Examples include joint use parking, off-site                           plan preparation and development; construction
         parking (currently allowed), allowances for                            subsidies for the affordable units; and,
         Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                      25

    reduced standards depending upon location     assistance and support in securing public
    (such as near transit), parking stall         financing such as bonds or tax credits. (Ord. 541,
    dimensions, “grandfathering” non-compliant    adopted 8/15/12)
    buildings and uses, etc.
                                                  (e) Following extended discussions with the
(d) Other Incentives and Contributions.           Reed Union School District, RUSD sent a letter
    Financial contributions for the construction  informing the Town that due to continued
    of utilities, public road improvements and    increasing enrollments, it would not consider its
    other traffic improvements; soils             site for an affordable housing project at this time.
    remediation; plan preparation and             As a result, the Town rezoned two downtown
    development; construction subsidies for the   sites on Tiburon Boulevard for the Affordable
    affordable units; and, assistance and         Housing Overlay zone that provide capacity for
    support in securing public financing, such as 29 lower-income housing units. Together with
    bonds or tax credits. Examples of programs    the remaining affordable housing opportunity
    include Mortgage Revenue Bonds,               sites, the Town had AHO site available to
    Mortgage Credit Certificates and              accommodate 61 lower-income units, exceeding
    Redevelopment Agency Tax Increment            the Town’s RHNA requirement for 57 units
    Financing, including subsidies for extremely  affordable to lower-income households for the
    low income, very low income, and low          2007-2014 housing element period.
    income housing, by providing technical
    assistance on available programs and
    supporting data, structuring development
    agreements and other requirements to
    match program funding criteria, as
    appropriate and possible, and leveraging tax
    increment financing when possible.
(e) Reed School District Site. The Town will
    actively work with the Reed Union School
    District (RUSD) and will undertake the
    following specific steps to encourage
    residential development: (1) conduct a
    meeting with the RUSD Superintendent in
    2011; (2) provide background material in
    support of the RUSD discussion of the issue
    in 2011; (3) conduct a meeting with the
    Housing Element Update 2015-2023                              26

         RUSD Board of Directors to discuss
         residential development of the property in
         2012; and (4) undertake follow-up actions
         based on discussions to implement the
         incentives. In the event that RUSD opts not
         to declare the site surplus or there is no
         progress toward development of the site for
         housing in 2012, then the Town commits to
         identify an alternate site or sites by 2013.
H-z      Work with Non-Profits and Property           Review progress        During the past 18 months, Town staff worked      Continue
Owners on Housing Opportunity Sites. In               annually as part of    with EAH toward development of one of the
coordination with actions to be undertaken as part of Program H-e and        identified affordable housing sites. The property
Housing Element Program H-y, encourage                encourage development  owner subsequently withdrew from negotiations.
cooperative and joint ventures between owners,        of one or more key
developers and non-profit groups in the provision of  housing sites by 2014.
below market rate housing. Work with non-profits
and property owners to seek opportunities for an
affordable housing development on one of the key
housing opportunity sites. Undertake the following
actions to encourage development of multi-family,
affordable housing:
    (a) Meet with non-profit housing developers
         (EAH, MHA, others) and property owners to
         identify housing development opportunities,
         issues and needs during 2012.
    (b) Select the most viable site during 2012.
    (c) Undertake community outreach in
         coordination with the potential developer
         and property owner during 2012.
    (d) Complete site planning studies, continued
         community outreach, and regulatory
         approvals in coordination with the
         development application.
         Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                    27
    (e) Facilitate development through regulatory
        incentives, reducing or waiving fees, fast
        track processing, and assistance in
        development review.
    (f) Develop ongoing and annual outreach and
        coordination with non-profit housing
        developers and affordable housing
        advocates to assist in the development of
        housing for extremely low-income
        households.
    (g) Facilitate development of housing for
        extremely low-income households by
        allowing housing as a use by-right as part of
        the “Affordable Housing Overlay Zone.”
    (h) Review funding options as part of the annual
        Housing Element review and apply for
        funding or support funding applications as
        opportunities are available, and will
        undertake other actions (such as
        modifications to parking requirements and
        granting concessions and incentives) to
        assist in the development of housing for
        extremely low income households.
H-aa Modify and Implement “Affordable                     Modification to the AHO  Municipal Code Section 16-23.030 D modified to    Modification
Housing Overlay Zone” Zoning for Affordable               Zoning by 2012 and       include a minimum of 5% very low, 10% low and     complete;
Projects. Annually monitor the effectiveness of the       review progress annually 10% moderate income units. Moderate income        continue with
“Affordable Housing Overlay Zone” as part of the          as part of Program H-e   units must be 90% of median income. (Ord. 541,    implementation
annual Housing Element review (see Program (H-e),         to encourage             adopted 8/15/12.) On smaller sites that would
and implement the affordable housing overlay zone         development of one or    yield 10 or fewer total units at minimum density,
where residential densities will be increased up to       more key housing sites   the minimum affordable component was
100% if a specified level of affordability is achieved.   by 2014.                 established at 20% of total units, with at least
As part of the annual review there will be a review as                             50% required to be affordable to very low or low
to whether the program has been effective in                                       income households.
encouraging very low and low income housing. The
program will be revised if it is found to be ineffective.
        Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                          28

Initially, this zone shall be modified so that proposals
must include a minimum of 15 percent very low and
low and 10 percent moderate income housing units
(25% of the project shall be dedicated to very low,
low and moderate income units). Facilitate
development of housing for extremely low-income
households by allowing housing as a use by-right as
part of the Affordable Housing Overlay Zone.
H-bb Bonuses for Affordable Housing Projects             Application of State       The Town continues to offer these bonus            Continue
Consistent with State Density Bonus Law. The             Density Bonus law.         provisions.
Town will offer density bonuses consistent with the
State Density Bonus Law.
H-cc Implement Sustainable Design Practices              Additional design criteria The Town amended architectural design              Modification
for Multi-Family Housing. The Town will continue         and direction for multi-   standards to encourage shared common spaces        complete;
to conduct design review to assure excellence of         family projects.           in order to reduce the size of individual living   continue with
design in new development. The Town will also                                       units and increase community interaction.          implementation
implement building height exceptions criteria linked                                Examples include co-housing, live-work housing
with encouraging affordable housing near transit,                                   opportunities, or other types of housing that
and standards to encourage shared common spaces                                     create shared spaces. (Ord. 541, adopted
in order to reduce the size of individual living units                              8/15/12.) The Affordable Housing Overlay zone
and increase community interaction (such as co-                                     allows heights up to three stories or 38 feet
housing, live-work housing opportunities, or other                                  (whichever is less); the height limit in all other
types of housing that create shared spaces). These                                  residential zones is 30 feet.
items are covered under Housing Element Programs
H-y and H-aa.
H-dd Housing Impact Fee for Larger Homes.                Additional funding for     This action was not undertaken due to staff        Continue
Consider an affordable housing impact fee on larger      affordable housing         availability and workload.
single-family homes.                                     based on impacts of
                                                         larger homes.
H-ee Implement Second Dwelling Unit                      4 new low income           The Town has approved five secondary dwelling      Continue
Development Standards and Permit Process.                second units by 2014       units between January 1, 2007, and December
Continue to allow second dwelling units.                                            31, 2013.
           Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                        29
H-ff     Jobs/Housing Fee. Adopt a Jobs/Housing         Additional funding for  This action was not undertaken due to staff         Consider for
Linkage Fee Ordinance that includes the following or    affordable housing from availability and workload, a total lack of new      deletion
similar exaction requirements:                          commercial              commercial development in the past several
     (a) Exaction requirements for dwelling units       development             years, and low potential for substantive new
         and/or in-lieu fees should be set according                            commercial development in the future.
         to empirically based evidence and must
         comply with all other legal tests.
     (b) The inclusion of affordable housing units
         within developments of hotels, offices, or
         other commercial buildings if feasible
         (options may include housing on-site, off-
         site, subsidizing mortgages or rents, or
         paying an in-lieu fee for housing production),
         or
     (c) Payment into the Housing Fund of in-lieu
         fees based on a dollar amount per square
         foot of office, commercial, and industrial
         building development.
     (d) In-lieu fees would be waived in projects
         containing significant affordable housing
         components
H-gg Encouraging Residential on Mixed Use               Residential development The Town amended Municipal Code Section 16-         Modification
Sites. Encourage residential development on key         on mixed use sites.     23.050 to implement allowances for shared           complete;
housing sites that are designated for mixed use.                                parking, streamlined review, reduced fees, and      continue with
Incentives are identified in the Affordable Housing                             other incentives and financial contributions in the implementation
Overlay zone, which would be supplemented by the                                Neighborhood Commercial/Affordable Housing
following additional incentives to encourage                                    Overlay zone. (Ord. 541 adopted 8/15/12.)
residential use:                                                                These provisions remain in place but no
     (a) Allowances for shared parking.                                         affordable housing projects have occurred to
     (b) Streamlined review.                                                    report progress in their use.
     (c) Reduced fees.
     (d) Use of Redevelopment funds.
         Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                      30
  C      Consistency with the Tiburon General Plan
                                  The Tiburon General Plan serves as the ‘constitution’ for
                                  development in the Town of Tiburon. It is a long-range policy
                                  document that describes goals, policies and programs to guide
                                  decision-making. Once the General Plan is adopted, all
                                  development-related decisions in the Town must be consistent with
                                  the Plan. If a development proposal is not consistent with the Plan,
                                  it must be revised or the Plan itself must be amended. State law
                                  requires a community’s General Plan to be internally consistent.
                                  This means that the Housing Element, although subject to special
                                  requirements and a different schedule of updates, must function as
                                  an integral part of the overall General Plan, with consistency
                                  between it and the other General Plan elements.
The Town adopted its most recent General Plan in September of 2005. The 2005 General Plan
emphasizes, among other policy choices, the Town's desire to maintain a low-density residential
character while providing adequate sites for high-density affordable housing, maintain adequate
traffic service levels, protect sensitive resource areas, restrict development on hazardous areas
and provide substantial open space areas. Goals, policies and programs contained in the 2005
General Plan attempt to strike a balance between resource protection, quality of life and the
demand for additional housing.
                                                           Since the entire General Plan, including the
                                                           Housing Element, was adopted together in
                                                           2005, all the elements of the General Plan
                                                           were found consistent with one another. In
                                                           October 2007 the Governor signed AB 162
                                                           which requires cities and counties to address
                                                           flood-related matters in the land use,
                                                           conservation, safety, and Housing Elements
                                                           of their General Plans. The entire Tiburon
                                                           General Plan addresses flooding issues
                                                           consistent with this requirement.
In 2011, the Governor signed SB 244 which requires local governments to make determinations
regarding “disadvantaged unincorporated communities,” defined as a community with an annual
median income that is less than 80 percent of the statewide annual median household income.
The Town has determined that there are no unincorporated island, fringe or legacy communities,
as defined in the legislation, inside or near its boundaries.
        Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                       31

Land Use Element. The 2005 Land Use Element includes density standards ranging from 0.1
dwelling unit per acre to 18.4 dwelling units per acre. Allowable densities and corresponding
categories are as follows:
Land Use Designations and Allowable Density
L (Low Density Residential)                            Up to 0.5 du/acre
PD-R (Planned Development - Residential)               Up to 1.0 du/acre
ML (Medium Low Density Residential)                    Up to 1.1 du/acre
M (Medium Density Residential)                         Up to 3.0 du/acre
MH (Medium High Density Residential)                   Up to 4.4 du/acre
H (High Density Residential)                           Up to 11.6 du/acre
VH(Very High Density Residential)                      Up to 12.4 du/acre
VH/AHO (Very High/Affordable Housing Overlay)          Up to 18.4 du/acre (24.8 w/density bonus)
NC/AHO Neighborhood Commercial/
Affordable Housing Overlay                             Up to 15.3 du/acre (20.7 w/density bonus,
                                                       Residential component only)
These densities are generally considered to be low, and this constrains the development of
affordable housing, although land values are high enough in Tiburon that these low densities do
not significantly constrain development of market-rate housing, as evidenced by the Town’s
ability to exceed its 1999-2007 needs for market-rate housing. Densities were increased
substantially in 2005 with the creation of the Affordable Housing Overlay to facilitate the
development of affordable housing. This overlay zone applies to all affordable housing sites
identified in this Housing Element.
Open Space and Safety Elements. A number of Open Space Element and Safety Element
policies may be considered to constrain the Town's ability to provide additional housing.
Examples of these policies, which would have an impact primarily on the large undeveloped
properties, include the following:
(1)      Policy OSC-5, which establishes the goal of protecting 50% of large vacant parcels in
         open space.
(2)      Policies OSC-9, 10, 11, and 12, which call for development to be located well below
         ridgelines due to the overriding visual significance to the Town of such ridges.
(3)      Policy OSC-22, which requires open space buffers along riparian corridors.
(4)      Policy OSC-27, which discourages development on slopes exceeding 40% wherever
         possible.
        Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                   32

(5)     Policy SE-2, which requires new development, to the extent feasible, to be located in
        areas where there are no geologic or non-geologic hazards.
(6)     Policy SE-5, which requires physical improvements to landslides and to potential
        landslide areas in instances where avoidance is not feasible or appropriate.
As with the low permitted densities, these policies reflect the highly constrained physical
conditions of the large undeveloped properties in the Tiburon Housing Element area. Accepting
the reality that these large undeveloped parcels have limited development potential and are not
efficient ways to provide affordable housing, the Town has developed the list of housing
development opportunity sites that avoids these constraints. The large undeveloped parcels
serve as sources of substantial affordable housing in-lieu fees that will be more effectively
expended on flat, less-constrained sites.
                                                    Circulation Element. The Circulation Element
                                                    contains policies establishing desired traffic
                                                    service levels, and requires the payment of a
                                                    pro rata share of the costs of needed traffic
                                                    improvements to maintain the desired level of
                                                    service. These policies could potentially
                                                    constrain the development of additional
                                                    housing. However, the Town has adopted and
                                                    routinely implements traffic impact fee waivers
                                                    for all affordable housing units. Therefore,
                                                    these policies do not act as actual constraints
                                                    to the development of affordable housing.
Parks & Recreation Element. The Parks & Recreation Element requires the payment of park in-
lieu fees for residential development, and this could act as a constraint to affordable housing.
The Town waives these fees for affordable housing units, thereby eliminating the constraint.
       Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                   33
Section III
Current Housing Conditions and Trends
 A         Population, Housing and Jobs Trends
                                                         The population of Marin County continues to
                                                         grow, but the rate of growth is slowing. In 2010,
                                                         the population was 252,409 (U.S. Census 2010),
                                                         up 2.1 percent from the 2000 figure of 247,289
                                                         (U.S. Census 2000). Over the next two decades,
                                                         the growth rate- is projected to increase 3.4
                                                         percent between 2010 and 2020 and 4.2 percent
                                                         between 2020 and 2030 (ABAG 2013). Tiburon’s
                                                         population grew 3.4 percent between 2000 and
                                                         2010. Population projections below are through
                                                         the year 2030.Tiburon’s population is expected
                                                         to increase 2.7 percent between 2010 and 2020,
and by another 3.3 percent by 2030.
 City and County Growth Rates
                                                              Growth Rate
                                     2000           2010                                 2020       2030
                                                                2000-2010
 Belvedere                           2,125         2,068             -2.7%              2,100       2,200
 Corte Madera                        9,100         9,253              1.7%              9,500       9,800
 Fairfax                             7,319         7,441              1.7%              7,600       7,900
 Larkspur                          12,014         11,926             -0.7%             12,400      12,900
 Mill Valley                       13,600         13,903              2.2%             14,000      14,800
 Novato                            47,630         51,904              9.0%             53,200      54,700
 Ross                                2,329         2,415              3.7%              2,500       2,600
 San Anselmo                       12,378         12,336              3.7%             12,600      13,000
 San Rafael                        56,063         57,713             -0.3%             60,800      64,400
 Sausalito                           7,330         7,061              2.9%              7,300       7,600
 Tiburon                             8,666         8,962              3.4%              9,200       9,500
 Unincorporated County             68,735         67,427             -1.9%             69,600      72,700
 Countywide                       247,289        252,409              2.1%            261,100     272,100
 Source: 2000 Census (SF1:P1); 2010 Census (SF1:QT-P1); ABAG Plan Bay Area Projections 2013
         Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                        34

In Tiburon, population trends by age group show a dramatic increase in the number of seniors 65
years of age and older over the past twenty years, and a significant increase in the number of
children under 20 years. The proportion of seniors has risen from 14 percent of the Tiburon
population in 1980 to 21 percent of the population in 2010, while the number of children has
increased from 20 percent to 25 percent
of the population. Age groups between
20 and 54 years have all decreased in
size, with the largest decline occurring in
the 25 to 34 age group, which fell from 12
percent to 5 percent of the population.
The data suggests that while Tiburon’s
population is aging, an increasing number
of families with young children are moving
into the area. Young adults are choosing
not to live Tiburon, perhaps because they
have been priced out of the real estate
market, seek other types and location of
housing based on lifestyle preferences, or
a combination of these factors.
Age Groups, 1990-2010
         Age                  1990                   2000                    2010
        Group         Number      Percent    Number       Percent    Number      Percent
 0 to 9 years            726        10%        1,083        12%        1,170       13%
 10 to19 years           760        10%         893         10%        1089        12%
 20 to 24 years          293         4%         164         2%          186        2%
 25 to 34 years          874        12%         655         8%          410        5%
 35 to 44 years         1,431       19%        1,461        17%        1172        13%
 45 to 54 years         1,424       19%        1,696        20%        1497        17%
 55 to 64 years          958        13%        1,280        15%        1540        17%
 65 to 74 years          686         9%         790         9%         1085        12%
 75 to 84 years          299         4%         486         6%          599        7%
 85 years and over        81         1%         158         2%          214        2%
 Source: 1990 Census (STF 1:P011), 2000 Census (SF1:P12; 2010 Census (SF1: QT:P1)
        Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                 35

The aging population has lifted the median age of Tiburon residents from 45.4 years in 2000 to
48 years in 2010. Tiburon’s median age is higher than the Marin County median and more than
ten years higher than the California and national median age.
The Marin County economy is predominantly white collar – over half the working population is
employed in professional, management, or financial business occupations. Biomedical and
software engineering companies have a strong presence. The County’s five largest private-
sector employers include Kaiser Permanente, Marin General Hospital, Autodesk, BioMarin
Pharmaceutical, and Fireman’s Fund Insurance (North Bay Business Journal). However, the
typical business is small. While there are approximately 25 businesses with over 250 employees
in Marin County, there are over 8,600 payroll businesses with less than 20 employees,
representing over 90 percent of all payroll business. Marin County is also home to another
35,000 self-employed or home-based businesses that have fewer than four employees (Marin
Economic Forum).
Tiburon residents are employed in a variety of industries, with the majority working in
professional, management and financial services. Approximately 20 percent of the employed
residents are self-employed (American Community Survey, 2011).
       Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                 36

Employment by Industry
 Industry                                                                  Number   Percent
  Agriculture, forestry, fishing and hunting, and mining                       0      0%
  Construction                                                               107      3%
  Manufacturing                                                               94      3%
  Wholesale trade                                                            117      3%
  Retail trade                                                               256      7%
  Transportation and warehousing, and utilities                               84      2%
  Information                                                                153      4%
  Finance, insurance, and real estate                                        708      20%
  Professional, scientific, management, and administration                   933      27%
  Education, health care and social services                                 572      16%
  Arts, entertainment, recreation, and accommodation and food services       248      7%
  Other services                                                             151      4%
  Public administration                                                       56      2%
 Source: 2011 American Community Survey 5-year estimates (DP03)
Employment by Occupation
 Occupation                                                         Number  Percent
  Management, business, science, and arts occupations               2,075   60%
  Service occupations                                               286     8%
  Sales and office occupations                                      891     26%
  Natural resources, construction, and maintenance occupations      125     4%
  Production, transportation, and material moving occupations       102     3%
 Source: 2011 American Community Survey 5-year estimates (DP03)
Tiburon is expected to add 240 jobs to its employment base between 2010 and 2030, an
increase of 10 percent (ABAG Plan Bay Area Projections 2013). This is slightly lower than the
countywide job growth projection of 12 percent.
        Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                    37
                                                                                             The economic impacts of inadequate
Example Salaries and Affordable Monthly Housing Costs
                                                                                             workforce housing on businesses
                                                                    Affordable Monthly
                                                                                             include: (1) the cost of recruitment
                                                  Annual Salary          Housing Cost        and retention of employees; (2) loss
SINGLE WAGE EARNER                                                                           of experienced personnel; (3) lost
Senior of Social Security                             $15,000                    $375        investment in staff training; and (4)
Retail Salesperson                                    $28,421                    $711        money earned locally being spent
Postal Service Clerk                                  $53,833                   $1,346
                                                                                             elsewhere. The economic vitality of
Middle School Teacher                                 $69,498                   $1,737
                                                                                             smaller businesses and very low
Physician Assistant                                   $89,956                   $2,249
Computer Programmer                                   $98,896                   $2,472
                                                                                             wage jobs may also be
Civil Engineer                                       $106,293                   $2,657       disproportionately impacted. Public
Lawyer                                               $177,407                   $4,435       agencies, school districts, social
TWO WAGE EARNER HOUSEHOLDS
                                                                                             services, and child and elder care will
Retail Salesperson and Graphic Designer               $98,508                   $2,463       continue to have a difficult time
Accountant and Middle School Teacher                 $156,711                   $3,918       attracting people to work in Tiburon
Source: California Economic Development Department, Occupational Employment Statistics,      as affordable housing becomes more
2012 - 1st Quarter. Affordable housing costs are 30% of monthly salary.
                                                                                             difficult to find. While the median
                                                                                             countywide household income was
 $103,000 in 2010 (all Marin households, HCD), the median household income in in Tiburon was
 $136,250 in 2011 (American Community Survey). The tables below show incomes for Tiburon
 households, and the commute methods and times for Tiburon residents.
  Tiburon Household Income
                                                    2000                              2011
                                        Number            Percent           Number Percent
    Under $25,000                          347                9%               534         15%
    $25,000 to $34,999                      98                3%               158         4%
    $35,000 to $49,999                     362               10%               256         7%
    $50,000 to $74,999                     571               15%               286         8%
    $75,000 to $99,999                     393               10%               180         5%
    $100,000 to $149,999                   542               14%               489         14%
    $150,000 to $199,999                   301                8%               432         12%
    $200,000 or more                      1,137              30%              1,273        35%
  Source: U.S. Census 2000, American Community Survey 2011 5-year estimates.
            Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                                               38
 Commute Method for Tiburon Residents
                              Number           Percent
 Drive Alone                    2,080            61%
 Carpool                         391             11%
 Public Transportation           385             11%
 Worked from home                439             13%
 Walked                          55               2%
 Other                           59               2%
 Source: American Community Survey 2011 5-year estimates.
 Travel Time to Work for Tiburon Residents
                              Number           Percent
 Less than 15 minutes            490             16%
 15-29 minutes                   841             28%
 30 to 44 minutes               1,006            34%
 45 to 59 minutes                416             14%
 60+ minutes                     217              7%
 Source: American Community Survey 2011 5-year estimates.
In 2010, there were approximately 103,000 households in Marin County. Of these, 63 percent
owned the home they lived in. The owner-occupant rate in Tiburon is higher, at 68 percent.
 Tiburon Households by Tenure
                           1990                           2000                 2010
                 Number          Percent        Number         Percent Number        Percent
 Owner             2,166            66%          2,591           70%    2,530          68%
 Renter            1,107            34%          1,121           30%    1,199          32%
 Total             3,273           100%          3,712          100%    3,729         100%
 Source: U.S. Census 1990, 2000 and 2010
Just under half of the households in Marin County consisted of married couple families with or
without children. It should be noted that 28 percent of all households in Tiburon are comprised of
people living alone. This was significantly higher than the overall State figure of 23 percent. The
        Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                   39
types of households in Tiburon are shown in the table below.
Tiburon Households by Type
                                                      2010
                                         Number            Percent
Family without kids                        1,359            36%
Family with kids                           1,123            30%
Single person                              1,029            28%
Nonfamily multi-person household            218              6%
Source: U.S. Census 2010
Most Tiburon residents live in single family homes. Detached single family homes comprised 64
percent of the housing stock in 2011, while multi-family units comprised 26 percent.
 Tiburon Housing Units by Type
                                          2011
 Unit Type                        Number      Percent
 Single Family (detached)          2,571        64%
 Single Family (attached)           394         10%
 2-4 units                          380         10%
 5+ units                           638         16%
 Mobile Home & Other                 12        <1%
 Total                             3,995       100%
 2011 American Community Survey 5-year estimates
Countywide, 7.2 percent of all housing units were vacant in 2010, and 5.2 percent of rental units
were vacant. According to Census estimates, Tiburon had a total vacancy rate of 5.0 percent in
2010. Real estate economists generally consider a vacancy rate of 5.0 percent as a sign of a
“balanced” market that allows adequate rents for landlords and mobility for tenants. Low
vacancy rates often stimulate higher rental rates, which puts rents out of reach for lower income
households.
 In the fourth quarter of 2012, the average rental price for a studio apartment was $1,261 in
        Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                 40

Marin County; a one bedroom, one bath apartment was $1,784; and a two bedroom apartment,
one bath apartment was $1,789 (RealFacts).
There is a gap between affordable housing costs and actual housing costs for all low income
groups in Marin County. The table below shows average rental rates in Marin County and
affordability levels for various unit sizes. In general, apartments are only affordable to low income
households earnings earning at least 50% of the median income. In Tiburon, where house
prices are significantly higher than the countywide average, apartment rental rates are affordable
only to some moderate income households. Lower income households are priced out of the
housing market.
The median sale price for market-rate housing in Tiburon is affordable only to households
earning considerably more than a moderate income in Marin County. In 2012, the median sales
price was $1.6 million for a single family home and $853,000 for a condo or townhome (Marin
County Assessor).
 Rental Rates and Affordability Levels
                                                      Studio         1 BR/1BA          2BR/1BA           3BR
 Marin County Average Rent                             $1,261          $1,784            $1,789         $2,937
 Annual Income Required for Rent to be
                                                      $50,440         $71,360           $71,560        $117,480
 Affordable
 Affordable to Extremely Low Income
                                                         No              No                No             No
 Households?
 Affordable to Very Low Income
                                                         No              No                No             No
 Households?
 Affordable to Low Income Households?                  Some            Some              Some             No
 Affordable to Moderate Income
                                                         Yes            Yes               Yes            Yes
 Households?
 Source: RealFacts, Q3 2012. Affordability levels assume one person per studio, two people per one-bedroom unit,
 three people per two-bedroom unit, and four people per three-bedroom unit, per Health and Safety Code 50052.5(h).
Around 37 percent of Tiburon households spend 30 percent or more of their household income
on housing. It is estimated there are 330 lower income owner-occupied households and 275
lower income renter households overpaying for housing in Tiburon, for a total of 605 households.
Of the lower income owner-occupied households about 91 percent, or 300 households, spend
more than half their income on housing. Approximately 76 percent lower income renter
        Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                                         41
households, or 210 households, spend more than half their income on housing (CHAS, 2006-
2010).
 Tiburon Households Overpaying for Housing
  Income Category           Renter-Occupied Units    Owner-Occupied Units
                          Number       % Overpaying Number      % Overpaying
 Extremely Low               115          53%         155           72%
 Very Low                     75          71%          90           56%
 Low                          85          85%          85           50%
 Moderate and Above           75          12%         620           31%
 Total                       350          33%         950           38%
 Source: CHAS, 2006-2010
Programs like Section 8 or units built with affordability controls can help meet the needs of low
income households. To meet this need it may be important to provide deeper levels of subsidy or
housing with supportive services.
Extremely low income households are households with income under 30 percent of the area
median income level. There are an estimated 215 extremely low income owner households and
215 extremely low income households in Tiburon, for a total of 430 households (CHAS, 2006-
2010). In many cases, the most appropriate housing choice for extremely low income
households is rental. Many individuals with extremely low incomes will have trouble saving for a
down payment or emergency repairs. Extremely low income households typically require
targeted programs to provide affordable housing solutions, including deeper income targeting for
subsidies, housing with supportive services, single room occupancy units, shared housing, and
rent subsidies.
The State defines an overcrowded unit as one occupied by more than 1.01 people per room
excluding bathrooms and kitchens. A unit with more than 1.5 people per room is severely
overcrowded. In Marin County, 0.7 percent of owner occupied households are overcrowded, and
0.2 percent are severely overcrowded. Overcrowding is much more prevalent in rental housing.
In rented units in Marin County, 6.3 percent of households are overcrowded and 2.7 percent are
severely overcrowded. The Census Bureau reports that there are no overcrowded housing units
in Tiburon (American Community Survey, 2011). This is a decrease from 2000 when 0.5% of
rental units and 0.2% of owner units were overcrowded.
       Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                  42
Most of Tiburon’s housing units, 58 percent, were built more than 40 years ago and 34
percent of Tiburon’s housing stock was constructed from 1970 to 2000. The age of housing
from the 2000 U.S. Census is shown in the table below.
Age of the Housing Stock in Tiburon
Year Built                       Number             Percent
2005 or later                        9                <1%
2000 to 2004                       271                 7%
1990 to 1999                       325                 8%
1980 to 1989                       418                10%
1970 to 1979                       635                16%
1960 to 1969                      1,115               28%
1950 to 1959                       870                22%
1940 to 1949                       128                 3%
1939 or earlier                    224                 6%
Total                             3,995              100%
Source: 2011 American Community Survey 5-year estimates
In general, the condition of Tiburon’s housing stock is excellent. According to Town Building staff
there are a small number of units that suffer from lack of maintenance. Approximately 20 units in
the Town need significant rehabilitation. There are fewer than five units in Tiburon in need of
replacement. The Town continues to participate in the CDBG Rehabilitation Loan Program that
has served three residences, with the most recent loan made in 2010. Specific programs include
single-family home repair loans, emergency repair and accessibility grants, exterior
enhancement rebates, weatherization and home security grants for seniors, and a multi-family
rehabilitation loan program.
        Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                  43

 B       Special Housing Needs
                                             In addition to overall housing needs, cities and
                                             counties must plan for the special housing needs of
                                             certain groups. State law (65583(a)(6)) requires that
                                             several populations with special needs be addressed
                                             — homeless people, seniors, people with disabilities,
                                             large families, and female-headed households. The
                                             Housing Element should take into account any local
                                             factors that create an extraordinary need for housing,
                                             and should quantify those needs as well as possible.
                                             Farmworker housing is also required by State law to
                                             be addressed in local Housing Elements if it is a local
need. In Marin County, less than one percent of the population is employed in farming, fishing
and forestry combined (American Community Survey 2011). While there is a need for
farmworker housing in Marin County (primarily West Marin) there is no need for farmworker
housing in Tiburon so it is not included in this analysis.
“Special Needs” groups include many persons in the community, from the homeless and those
with substance abuse or domestic violence problems to lower income families who face
economic challenges in finding housing. While many persons in this broad group need
permanent low income housing, others require more supportive environments and assistance.
Seniors
Senior households can be defined, in part, by the age distribution and demographic projections
of a community’s population. This identifies the maximum need for senior housing. Particular
needs, such as the need for smaller and more efficient housing, for barrier-free and accessible
housing, and for a wide variety of housing with health care and/or personal services should be
addressed, as should providing a
continuum of care as elderly
households become less self-
reliant. In 2010, there were
approximately 42,192 people
aged 65 or over in Marin County
– 17 percent of the total
population (U.S. Census 2010).
In Tiburon, seniors aged 65 or
over represented 21 percent of
the population in 2010, up from
17 percent in 2000. Eighty
        Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                   44

percent of seniors in Tiburon own their own home, and 20 percent are renters.
The senior population is growing steadily. The Department of Finance predicts significant
increases in Marin’s elderly population as the baby boom generation ages. While the total
population is expected to increase 13 percent between 2010 and 2040, the number of seniors 65
years and over is projected to increase 59 percent. Many of these older residents will choose to
“age in place,” increasing demand for home supportive services. The aging population is also
expected to increase demand for assisted living and senior residential facilities.
                                                                  High among concerns for
                                                                  seniors is their ability to pay for
                                                                  necessities. In a recent study of
                                                                  Marin senior homeowners, 17
                                                                  percent reported experiencing
                                                                  difficulty with affording home
                                                                  repairs over the past year (Marin
                                                                  County Aging Area Plan, 2012-
                                                                  2016). Affording home repairs
                                                                  was most difficult for those who
                                                                  have been in their homes for
                                                                  more than 30 years, illustrating
Marin seniors’ predicament of being “house rich but cash poor.” While most seniors prefer to stay
in their homes, many find that the costs associated with the upkeep of their properties make that
impossible.
It costs approximately $27,095 a year for an elderly couple to live in Marin if they own their home
without a mortgage and $35,454 if they rent (based on a one bedroom apartment, Center for
Community Economic Development, Elder Economic Security Standard Index by County, 2009).
Social security payments average only $20,146 for couples, meaning that some seniors will have
to leave the county because of housing costs. Renters, women, older seniors and those with low
income are most at risk for displacement.
In Tiburon, there are an estimated 465 lower-income senior households who own their own
home. About 48 percent of these households have unaffordable housing costs, defined as
paying 30 percent or more of household income on housing costs. Senior households also make
up about 68 percent of all lower income owner-occupied households overpaying for housing in
Tiburon. Approximately 195 senior households who own their own homes pay more than 50
percent of their income on housing (CHAS, 2006-2010).
        Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                    45

There are an estimated 185 lower-income senior households who rent their home in Tiburon.
Approximately 70 percent of these households have unaffordable housing costs. Senior
households also comprise about 47 percent of all lower income renter households overpaying for
housing. About 100 senior renter households spend more than half of their income on housing
(CHAS, 2006-2010).
Persons Living with Disabilities
There are around 21,000 people with disabilities in Marin County
(American Community Survey, 2011). Many of these people have
special housing needs. The type of housing need depends on the
type of disability. For example, 35 percent of this group identified
as having an “independent living” disability. This means that they
have difficulty leaving their home unassisted, for example to shop
or to visit a doctor’s office. This figure rises to 43 percent among
the disabled population aged 65 and over.
People with disabilities often have trouble finding housing.
Relatively small physical obstacles, like a shower that requires a step, may make a house
unusable for an individual with a disability. Many seniors have to move from their houses
because of barriers like these. There are a number of policies that jurisdictions have pursued to
make houses more accessible. Ideas include:
 Allow reasonable accommodations for disabilities – Develop simple procedures for
    individuals to get permission to alter their house to make it accessible (for instance by adding
    a ramp).
 Information and enforcement - Designate a staff person as the primary contact for disability
    issues. This person can disseminate information and investigate allegations of discrimination.
 Promote universal design – Universal design refers to building in a way that makes it
    accessible to everyone. For instance, levels instead of knobs on doors make them easier to
    open.
 Provide low interest loans to retrofit houses to increase their accessibility.
       Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                    46

Persons Living with Disabilities
                                                       Percent in    Estimated Number
                                                    Marin County              in Tiburon
Age under 18 years with a disability                           2%                     46
Age 18-64, with a disability                                   6%                    290
Person age 65 and older with a disability                     26%                    502
Total persons with a disability                                9%                    769
Source: 2011 American Community Survey 3-year estimates; 2010 Census
Persons with Disabilities by Disability Type
                                                  Percent in    Estimated Number
                                              Marin County              in Tiburon
Population 18 to 64 years
With a hearing difficulty                                 6%                    290
With a vision difficulty                                  1%                     37
With a cognitive difficulty                               2%                    116
With an ambulatory difficulty                             3%                    135
With a self-care difficulty                               1%                     60
With an independent living difficulty                     2%                     84
Population 65 years and over
With a hearing difficulty                                11%                    204
With a vision difficulty                                  3%                     62
With a cognitive difficulty                               7%                    137
With an ambulatory difficulty                            15%                    283
With a self-care difficulty                               6%                    116
With an independent living difficulty                    11%                    218
Source: 2011 American Community Survey 3-year estimates; 2010 Census
        Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                 47
Persons Living with Developmental Disabilities
A person with a developmental disability has a substantial disability that originates during
childhood and can be expected to continue through adulthood. Developmental disabilities
include mental retardation, cerebral palsy, epilepsy, and autism.
Many developmentally disabled persons can live and work independently within a conventional
housing environment. More severely disabled individuals require a group living environment
where supervision is provided. The most severely affected individuals may require an institutional
environment where medical attention and physical therapy are provided. Because developmental
disabilities exist before adulthood, the first issue in supportive housing for the developmentally
disabled is the transition from the person’s living situation as a child to an appropriate level of
independence as an adult.
The State Department of Developmental Services currently provides community-based services
to approximately 243,000 persons with developmental disabilities through a statewide system of
facilities. The Golden Gate Regional Center (GGRC) provides point of entry to services for
people with developmental disabilities in Marin, San Francisco and San Mateo counties. The
center is a private, non-profit community agency that contracts with local businesses to offer a
wide range of services to individuals with developmental disabilities and their families. The
GGRC reports that there are 8 children aged 14 years and under, 2 persons aged 15 to 22
years, and 3 adults aged 23 years and over living in Tiburon.
There are a number of housing types appropriate for people living with a development disability:
rent subsidized homes, licensed and unlicensed single-family homes, inclusionary housing,
Section 8 vouchers, special programs for home purchase, HUD housing, and SB 962 homes.
The design of housing-accessibility modifications, the proximity to services and transit, and the
availability of group living opportunities represent some of the types of considerations that are
important in serving this need group. Incorporating ‘barrier-free’ design in all, new multifamily
housing (as required by California and Federal Fair Housing laws) is especially important to
provide the widest range of choices for disabled residents. Special consideration should also be
given to the affordability of housing, as people with disabilities may be living on a fixed income.
Large Families
Large families often have trouble finding housing that meets their needs. In particular, it is often
especially challenging for renters. In many markets, it is more profitable to build smaller units and
without government intervention, this is what happens. A lack of large units can lead to
overcrowding, as families take apartments that are too small for their needs.
About 7 percent of households in Tiburon have five or more members (2010 U.S. Census). The
incidence of large households is higher among owner-occupied households; 8 percent of owner-
occupied households were large families, while 5 percent of renter-occupied households were
         Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                    48

large families. It is estimated that there are four low-income, large family households paying
more than 50 percent of their income housing costs; all of these families own their homes
(CHAS, 2006-2010). Other incidences of overpaying among large family households are all
among households earning more than the median income. There are approximately 220 owner
and 40 renter large family households paying more than 30 percent of their income on housing
costs (CHAS, 2006-2010). Anecdotal evidence suggests some large families opt to pay more for
housing in order to have their children attend Tiburon schools.
 Household Size By Tenure
                         Owner Households           Renter Households        Total
                        Number        Percent       Number Percent    Number Percent
 1-4 Persons             2,331          92%          1,140      95%    3,471       93%
 5+ Person                199            8%           59        5%      258         7%
 TOTAL                   2,530         100%          1,199     100%    3,729       100%
 Source: 2010 Census (SF 1: QT-H2)
In Tiburon, there is an ample supply of houses with four or more bedrooms to accommodate
large families. Thirty-two percent of homes have four or more bedrooms, while only 7 percent of
Tiburon households have five or more persons.
Number of Bedrooms in Tiburon Housing Units
Number of
                         Number                 Percent
Bedrooms
0 BR                         49                    1%
1 BR                        414                    10%
2 BR                        798                    20%
3 BR                       1,482                   37%
4 BR                        742                    19%
5+ BR                       510                    13%
Total                      3,995                  100%
Source: 2011 American Community Survey 5-Year Estimates
        Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                 49
Female-Headed Households
Single parents with children are more likely to have lower incomes than two-parent households.
Since single parent households are predominantly female-headed households, their needs are a
particular concern of the Housing Element. In Tiburon, the 2010 Census identified 280 female-
headed households in which no husband was present. Around 57 percent of these households
included children 18 years and younger. Fourteen percent of female-headed family households
(no husband present) were below the poverty level, compared to just 2 percent of all family
households. Of these households, 51 percent included related children under 18 years
(American Community Survey 2011).
       Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                50
 C        Homeless Needs
Tiburon estimates that there is an average of 7 unsheltered homeless people in the community.
This estimate is drawn from the 2013 Marin Homeless Point-in-Time Count, which counted a
total of 184 unsheltered homeless people throughout Marin County on January 24, 2013. The
count does not include a breakdown of the homeless population by jurisdiction, so the estimated
number is based on Tiburon’s share of the total Marin population.
The chart below provides a breakdown of Marin’s homeless population into sub-populations,
which is drawn from the 2011 Marin Homeless Point in Time Count.
Homeless by Subpopulation
Subpopulation/Special Needs                Percent
Homeless for 1 year or more                  47%
Homeless for 10 years or more                10%
Mental Illness                               18%
Alcohol Use                                  19%
Drug Use                                     18%
Chronic Health Condition                     16%
Physical Disability                          18%
Developmental Disability                      3%
Veterans                                      8%
HIV/AIDS                                      1%
Multiple Disabilities                        11%
Domestic Violence                            14%
Children (under age 18)                      20%
Senior (62 or older)                          5%
Source: 2011 Marin County Point in Time Count
According to the Point in Time Count of Persons Experiencing Homelessness report, 56 percent
of adults counted reported having at least one type of disabling condition such as a physical or
developmental disability, chronic illness or substance abuse problem. The survey found that 47
percent of those counted were homeless for one year or more; 19 percent reported having
experienced homelessness four or more times. This data is consistent with national studies that
have found high levels of disability among homeless people and suggests that both health and
behavioral health services are needed to assist this population. Consistent with what has been
        Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                51

found nationally, Marin’s homeless people also includes a significant number of veterans (8
percent) and people with domestic violence issues (14 percent).
Emergency shelters are a permitted use in all commercial zones in Tiburon (Zoning Ordinance
adopted April 16, 2010) and thus are permitted without discretionary review consistent with SB 2.
These sites are highly suitable for emergency shelters in comparison with other areas of Tiburon,
which are largely hillside single-family residential zones. Unlike the vast majority of properties in
Tiburon, the commercially-zoned areas are level, have direct or easy access to the main
thoroughfare (Tiburon Boulevard), and are on or are close to bus lines, ferry service, health
services (medical and dental), drug stores and grocery stores.
In addition, there are sufficient available sites (see available land inventory) to demonstrate
sufficient capacity to accommodate the need for emergency shelters in commercial zones, either
in existing buildings or on vacant sites. Since 3.6 percent of the total population of the county
lives in Tiburon, it is estimated that 3.6 percent of the homeless population, or 7 unsheltered
homeless individuals, are located in Tiburon. It is estimated that a site of less than one-quarter
acre (about 8,000-10,000 square feet) could accommodate 7 beds (the parcel size may vary as it
does for facilities located in Marin County — Mill Street in San Rafael houses 49 beds on 0.33
acres, the Family Emergency Center in San Rafael houses 49 beds on 0.25 acres, and the Next
Key/New Beginnings Center in Novato houses 117 beds on 2.5 acres).
There are no data presently available documenting the increased level of demand for shelter in
Marin County during particular times of the year. Due to the relatively mild climate, the only time
of year when increased demand appears to be a factor is during the winter months (December to
March). The biannual homeless count always takes place in the last week of January, which is a
period when demand for shelter typically is at its highest. Since the year-round need described
above is based on that biannual count, we therefore believe that the seasonal need for
emergency shelter is no greater than the year-round need.
The Marin County Health and Human Service’s 2013 Continuum of Care inventory of emergency
shelters and transitional and supportive housing shows that there are 245 emergency shelter
beds, 362 transitional housing beds, and 501 supportive housing beds in Marin County. Eighty-
eight percent of these beds were occupied on the day of the 2013 Point in Time Count.
Currently, there are no permanent emergency, transitional or supportive shelters in Tiburon.
However, three local churches have participated in the St. Vincent De Paul Society’s rotating
emergency shelter program, which provides shelter for 40 homeless men for approximately 20
weeks during the winter months. Tiburon is committed to expanding the resources for homeless
individuals in the community, particularly the supply of permanent supportive housing. The table
below shows facilities located in Marin County.
        Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                   52

Further evidence of need is based on
the waiting list for Section 8 housing
vouchers. When the Marin Housing
Authority opened the waiting list for a
week in September 2008,
approximately 11,200 households
applied. Of those, 25 percent (2,831
applicants) were from Marin County
cities. This number shows that there is
demand for affordable housing from all
Marin jurisdictions.
        Housing Element Update 2015-2023 53
                                                                                                 Number of Beds
             Facility/Program Name                            Provider Name            Emergency  Transitional  Supportive
                                                                                        Shelter     Housing      Housing
Corte Madera
San Clemente Place                            EAH                                          0           0           13
Subtotal Corte Madera                                                                      0           0           13
Novato
Gilead House                                  Gilead House                                 0          18            0
Hamilton Meadows                              Hamilton Continuum Partners                  0          85            0
Meadow Park                                   Homeward Bound of Marin                      0          25            0
Transition to Wellness/Medical Respite        Homeward Bound of Marin                      6           0            0
New Beginnings Center                         Homeward Bound of Marin                     64           0            0
New Beginnings Center (beds for Vets)         Homeward Bound of Marin                      0          16            0
The Next Key                                  Homeward Bound of Marin                      0          37            0
Subtotal Novato                                                                           70          181           0
San Rafael
812 D Street                                  Center Point, Inc.                           0          12            0
Charlotte House                               Center Point, Inc.                           0          15            0
Homelink                                      Center Point, Inc.                           0           0            1
Emergency Housing                             Center Point, Inc.                           1           0            0
Family Emergency Center                       Homeward Bound of Marin                     49           0            0
Mill Street Center                            Homeward Bound of Marin                     49           0            0
Family Park                                   Homeward Bound of Marin                      0          39            0
Family Resource Center                        Homeward Bound of Marin                      0          25            0
Voyager                                       Homeward Bound of Marin                     10           0            0
4th Street                                    Homeward Bound of Marin                      0           0           20
Carmel                                        Homeward Bound of Marin                      0           0           26
Palm Court                                    Homeward Bound of Marin                      0           0           25
Apartments                                    St. Vincent DePaul Society                   0           0           11
Subtotal San Rafael                                                                       109         91           83
Scattered Site/Confidential Programs
Residential Support Services (RSS)            Buckelew Programs                            0           0           64
Supported Housing                             Buckelew Programs                            0           0           89
Assisted Independent Living (AIL)             Buckelew Programs                            0           0           54
THP Scattered Sites                           Center Point, Inc.                           0          30            0
Housing First                                 Ritter Center                                0           0           24
The Manor                                     Center Point, Inc.                           0           8            0
Second Step TH                                Center for Domestic Peace                    0          32            0
Short-Term TH                                 Center for Domestic Peace                    0          20            0
Formerly SHIA and Odyssey (Section 8)         Housing Authority of the County of Marin     0           0           17
Shelter Plus Care                             Housing Authority of the County of Marin     0           0           76
Shelter Plus Care 3                           Housing Authority of the County of Marin     0           0            3
VASH                                          Housing Authority of the County of Marin     0           0           35
Winter Shelter Program                        St. Vincent DePaul Society                  66           0            0
Subtotal Scattered Site/Confidential Programs                                             66          90           362
Unincorporated County
Fireside Affordable Hsg.                      Eden Housing Corp.                           0           0           43
Subtotal Unincorporated County                                                             0           0           43
TOTAL                                                                                     245         362          501
           Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                                              54
  D      Assisted Rental Housing “At Risk” of Conversion
                                            Government Code Section 65583 requires each Town
                                            and county to conduct an analysis and identify
                                            programs for preserving assisted housing
                                            developments. The analysis is required to identify any
                                            low income units which are at risk of losing subsidies
                                            over the next 10 years (2009-2019). The termination of
                                            Federal mortgage and or rent subsidies to housing
                                            developments built by the private sector is a potential
                                            threat to affordable housing throughout the country.
                                            Communities with low income housing supported by
Federally subsidized Housing Element to address the needs of residents who may become
displaced.
The Tiburon Housing Element Area has a total of 162 below market rate units within existing
housing developments. The table below lists these affordable housing developments and
indicates the timeframe for which the affordability of the units is protected.
This table includes all housing units in the Tiburon Housing Element Area that were financed with
state, federal, or local funding sources. One of the notable achievements of the Town’s housing
programs was the preservation of the 102-unit Hilarita Apartments as affordable housing. This
complex was a federal HUD “Section 236 project”, and was eligible for conversion to market rate
housing in 1994 based on the Section 236 framework. In the early 1990’s, the Tiburon
Ecumenical Association, a local non-profit whose primary purpose is to support affordable
housing, was able to secure a loan from HUD that was used to “buy out” the limited partnership
that owned a controlling interest in the project. The Town of Tiburon contributed financial
assistance that enabled the Hilarita facilities to be physically upgraded to a condition that met
federal standards for approving the loan.
As indicated by the table below, conservation of existing affordable units is not a problem for the
near future. The California Housing Partnership Corporation confirms that there are no
government-subsidized multi-family housing projects at risk for conversion to market rate units in
Tiburon. Housing Element policies address the need to preserve affordability of new affordable
units for at least 50 years.
       Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                    55

Affordable Housing in Tiburon
                                      No. Very Low            No. Low           No. Moderate         Conserved
 Project
                                       Income Units        Income Units         Income Units             Until
 Chandlers Gate                                4                   0                   0                 2057
                        a
 Hilarita Apartments                          84                   7                   0              Perpetuity
 Tiburon Hill Estates                          0                  16                   0              Perpetuity
                                                                                                               b
 Point Tiburon Marsh                           0                   0                  20               >2017
 Cecilia Place                                16                   0                   0                 2092
 Bradley House                                 0                  15                   0              Perpetuity
 Total No. Affordable Units                  104                  38                  20
 a
   The John Stewart Company, manager of the Hilarita Apartments, reported affordability levels for the 91
 income-restricted units as follows: 70 units occupied by extremely low income households earning up to 30% of
 the area median income, and 14 units occupied by very low households earning up to 50% of the area median
 income; and 3 affordable to low income households. Four units were vacant, which are conservatively counted
 here as low income units. In addition to the income-restricted units, there are 10 market rate units with the
 following rents as of January 2014: $1,450 for a 1 bedroom unit; $1,650 for a 2 bedroom unit, $2,350 for a 3
 bedroom unit; and $2,483 for a 4 bedroom unit. These are generally affordable to low income households, but
 since they are not deed-restricted, they are not recorded as below market rate units. An additional unit provides
 housing for a staff person.
 b
   Each owner is locked into a 30-year affordability period. This 30-year period starts over with each new owner.
 Unless a unit is held by the same owner for 30 years or more, the affordability will be in perpetuity. The initial
 30-year term was established in 1987.
Town Ownership and Management of Affordable Units
The Town of Tiburon owns 7 moderate-income units in the Point Tiburon Marsh condominium
project. These units are rented at affordable rates to a variety of local government employees,
including public safety personnel, elementary school teachers, and so forth. The Housing
Authority of the County of Marin manages the affordability component of these units, while the
Town physically maintains the interior of the units. The exterior of each unit is usually
maintained by the Homeowners Association.
Management of affordable units in the Tiburon Housing Element Area is performed by a variety
of entities. For example, Point Tiburon Marsh, Chandlers Gate, and Central Court affordable
units are managed by Marin Housing Authority. The Bradley House, Cecilia Place and Tiburon
Hill Estates affordable units are managed by the Ecumenical Association for Housing, and the
Hilarita is owned by the Tiburon Ecumenical Association for Housing and managed by the John
Stewart Company.
        Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                                      56
  E     Available Housing Programs and Funding
                                          The overview below focuses primarily on those
                                          programs implemented by the Marin Housing Authority,
                                          Marin County, Federal Programs, State Programs, and
                                          other local programs to address housing needs in
                                          Tiburon, especially the needs of extremely low, very
                                          low, and low income persons and families. In addition,
                                          there is an overview of the Town’s Housing set-aside
                                          fund.
                                          Tiburon In-Lieu Housing Fund
                                          The Town has established in “in-lieu” housing fund for
the provision of affordable housing in Tiburon. The Town’s inclusionary housing regulations
require residential projects of two or more new lots or dwelling units to pay an in-lieu housing fee
or develop a minimum of number of inclusionary units affordable to very low, low or moderate
income households. Developments of three to six units pay an in-lieu fee based on 15 percent of
the units being affordable. Larger developments may also pay in-lieu fees rather than build
required inclusionary units if the Town determines that there exist physical and/or governmental
constraints to the development of on-site inclusionary units that make the payment of fees more
effective in support of affordable housing projects being constructed in less constrained
locations. In 2013, the fund balance was $1,056,000.
Tiburon Redevelopment Agency Funding
As part of the 2011 Budget Act, the State Legislature approved the dissolution of the state’s 400
plus Redevelopment Agencies (RDAs). After a period of litigation, RDAs were officially dissolved
as of February 1, 2012. In 2011, the Tiburon Redevelopment Agency entered into a cooperation
agreement with the Marin Housing Authority (MHA) and transferred its housing set-aside funds to
that agency on the condition that the funds must be used to meet the Agency’s remaining
affordable housing obligations and, once those are met, to expend the funds solely for the
provision of affordable housing in Tiburon consistent with the Tiburon General Plan. In 2013, the
fund balance for this set-aside account was $862,000 in cash and $663,000 in assets in the form
of a note on the Cecilia Place senior housing project. The Town of Tiburon, as successor agency
to the Tiburon Redevelopment Agency, will therefore benefit from the additional staff, resources,
and expertise of the MHA and work in concert with that agency to create affordable housing
within Tiburon using the set-aside funds.
Community Development Block Grant Program (CDBG)
The Community Development Block Grant (CDBG) Program is a federal program of grants to
local governments, administered by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development
       Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                    57

(HUD). The Housing and Community Development Act of 1974 established CDBG as a
replacement for a variety of federal urban renewal, housing, and neighborhood development
programs. CDBG was the first of the federal block grant programs.
In Marin County, all eleven cities have signed cooperation agreements to participate with the
County government in a single joint CDBG program. This qualifies Marin County as an "urban
county," giving us an annual grant allocation established by formula. Marin County administers
the CDBG program for all eleven cities, as well as the unincorporated parts of the County. Both
government agencies and nonprofit organizations are eligible for funding.
Eligible housing activities include housing rehabilitation, acquisition of existing housing,
acquisition of sites for housing construction, off-site improvements needed for housing
development, fair housing services, and housing planning and predevelopment costs. While
CDBG funds can support housing development by paying for property acquisition, off-site
improvements, or pre-development expenses, CDBG funds cannot ordinarily be used directly for
new housing construction costs or predevelopment expenses. Types of housing projects
previously funded include low-cost rental and ownership housing, senior housing, group homes,
housing for people with physical and mental disabilities, homeless shelters, owner-built housing,
and shared housing.
Housing Stability Program (formerly Rebate for Marin Renters)
The Marin Housing Authority provides one year rental assistance to very low income seniors and
disabled persons.
HUD Section 8 Housing Choice Voucher Program
The Housing Choice Voucher Program (HCV) is HUD’s major program for assisting very low
income families, the elderly, and the disabled to locate decent, safe, sanitary, and affordable
rental housing throughout Marin County. As the public housing agency responsible for
administering the HCV program locally, the goal of MHA’s Supportive Housing Division is to
assist low and moderate-income residents of Marin County to secure and maintain high quality
affordable housing. Section 8 Housing Choice Voucher subsidies are an integral part of this
program. In 2013, there were 27 Section 8 vouchers in use in Tiburon, and 2,123 vouchers in
use in Marin County. The waiting list for vouchers was closed in 2008. As of 2013, there were
7,932 applicants on the waiting list, and the availability of tenant-based vouchers in the future is
unclear.
Housing Opportunities for People With AIDS Program (HOPWA)
HOPWA provides rental assistance to individuals and families where a family member is HIV+ or
has AIDS. HOPWA program participants lease privately owned apartments and receive a rental
subsidy based on their income level and family composition. MHA has designed this program to
       Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                      58

be flexible and highly client-friendly, with particular attention given to preserving the
confidentiality of the participants. Program participants are also directed to community case
management resources.
Shelter Plus Care Program
Shelter Plus Care provides rental assistance and supportive services on a long-term basis for
homeless individuals and families where the head of household has a serious mental illness (and
may also have other disabilities). Shelter Plus Care participants lease privately owned
apartments and pay 30percent of their income towards rent. MHA pays the remainder of the rent
up to the maximum allowed by federal guidelines. Participants also receive intensive support
from MHA caseworkers and from a coalition of community-based service providers to assist
them in remaining successfully housed. This program is made possible through close
collaboration with Marin County Community Mental Health Services.
Residential Rehabilitation Loan Program
Administered by MHA, the Residential Rehabilitation Loan program provides low-interest
property improvement loans and technical assistance to qualified very-low-income homeowners
to make basic repairs and improvements, correct substandard conditions, and eliminate health
and safety hazards. The maximum loan amount is $35,000. In cases of financial hardship, no
monthly payments are required and repayment of the loan is deferred, either for a specified
period, or until the property is sold or title to the property is transferred (interest accrues at 6%
per year, simple interest). To be eligible for the Residential Rehabilitation Loan Program, a
person must be the legal owner of the property in need of repair, reside in the property as their
principal residence, and be within the income limits for very low income.
Below Market Rate Home Ownership Program (BMR)
The BMR Home Ownership program offers low and moderate-income, first-time homebuyers the
opportunity to purchase specified condominium units in Marin County at less than market value.
MHA administers the sale of newly constructed units as well as previously owned units being
offered for resale. There are approximately 300 homes in the program located throughout Marin
County.
Marin Workforce Housing Trust
The Marin Workforce Housing Trust (the Housing Trust), is a unique public/private partnership
that has been created to meet the challenges of housing affordability for workers throughout
Marin County. The major partners include the County of Marin, the Marin Community
Foundation, and a group of major employers. Using revolving loan funds, the Trust provides low
interest rate loans to nonprofit and for-profit developers who are constructing, rehabilitating, and
preserving homes affordable to lower income families, as well as special needs populations. The
Housing Trust intends loans to fill critical gaps in existing affordable housing finance — as first-in
       Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                        59

money to purchase land, secure sites, and fund pre-development work, and as last-in money to
close the funding gap for developments that otherwise would not be able to be built. Once
construction is complete, the loans are repaid and reinvested in other workforce housing
developments. In this way, the Housing Trust provides a self-replenishing vehicle for affordable
housing investment. Every dollar that is contributed to the Housing Trust is matched by both the
Marin Community Foundation and the County of Marin, thereby tripling the value of each
donation.
Infill Infrastructure Grant Program (IIG)
The IIG program provides funds for infrastructure improvements necessary to facilitate new infill
housing development. To be eligible for funding, projects must be located in a locality which has
an adopted housing element that has been found by HCD to be in substantial compliance as of
the due date for applications, pursuant to the Notice of Funding Availability (NOFA) issued by
HCD.
Infrastructure State Revolving Fund Program (ISRF) — California Infrastructure and
Economic Development Bank (I-Bank)
The ISRF Program provides low-cost financing to public agencies for a wide variety of
infrastructure projects. Eligible project categories include city streets, county highways, state
highways, drainage, water supply and flood control, educational facilities, environmental
mitigation measures, parks and recreational facilities, port facilities, public transit, sewage
collection and treatment, solid waste collection and disposal, water treatment and distribution,
defense conversion, public safety facilities, and power and communications facilities. Points will
be granted for jurisdictions or applicants located within a jurisdiction with an HCD-approved
housing element.
Housing Enabled by Local Partnerships Program (HELP), California Housing Finance
Agency
The HELP Program and the Residential Development Loan Program (RDLP) offer reduced rate
loans to local government entities for locally determined affordable housing activities and
priorities (acquisition, construction, rehabilitation, single-family homeownership, or preservation
of multifamily and special needs units). Proposals must include documented housing plans that
demonstrate that the proposed housing activity described in the application has been identified
as a local housing priority. Eligible documented housing plans include the housing elements,
consolidated plans, redevelopment plans, or other general housing plans that the locality’s
governing board has ratified. Applications must also include evidence that a plan has been
approved.
        Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                     60

Local Housing Trust Fund Program (LHTF)
The LHTF program helps finance local housing trust funds dedicated to the creation or
preservation of affordable housing. The program provides matching grants (dollar-for-dollar) to
LHTFs that are funded on an ongoing basis from private contributions or public sources that are
not otherwise restricted in use for housing programs Approved activities include loans for
construction of rental housing projects with units restricted for at least 55 years to households
earning less than 60 percent of area median income, and for down payment assistance to
qualified first-time homebuyers. To be eligible for funding, cities and counties must have adopted
housing elements that HCD has found in compliance with state housing element law.
Housing Related Parks Program (HRP)
The HRP program creates incentives and rewards for cities and counties with documented
housing starts for newly constructed units affordable to very low or low-income households, in
the form of grant funds which can be used to create new parks, or rehabilitate or improve existing
parks. To be eligible for funding cities and counties must have an adopted housing element that
HCD has found to be in substantial compliance with state housing element law by the end of the
designated program year.
Home Investment Partnership Program (HOME)
The HOME program provides HUD grants to cities, counties, and state-certified non-profit
community housing development organizations for housing rehabilitation, new construction, and
acquisition and rehabilitation of both single family and multifamily housing projects serving lower
income renters and owners. Points are granted for jurisdictions with an adopted housing element
found in substantial compliance with state housing element law.
CalHome Program
The purpose of CalHome is to enable low- and very low-income households to become or
remain homeowners. The program provides grants and/or loans to local public agencies and
nonprofit organizations for costs associated with predevelopment, site development, and site
acquisition for development projects, rehabilitation, and acquisition and rehabilitation, of site-built
housing, and rehabilitation, repair, and replacement of manufactured homes.
Emergency Solutions Grant Program (ESG)
HCD distributes federal ESG funds to eligible nonprofit organizations or local public agencies
located in or serving eligible areas that do not receive ESG funds directly from HUD. The
purpose of this program is to fund projects that serve homeless individuals and families with
supportive services, emergency shelter/transitional housing, assisting persons at risk of
becoming homeless with homelessness prevention assistance, and providing permanent
housing to the homeless population. The Homeless Emergency Assistance and Rapid Transition
       Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                    61
to Housing (HEARTH) Act of 2009 places new emphasis on assisting people to quickly regain
stability in permanent housing after experiencing a housing crisis and/or homelessness.
Multifamily Housing Program (MHP)
The purpose of the MHP is to assist the new construction, rehabilitation and preservation, or
acquisition and rehabilitation of permanent and transitional rental housing, and the conversion of
nonresidential structures to rental housing, for lower income households. Projects are not eligible
if construction has commenced as of the application date, or if they are receiving 9 percent
federal low income housing tax credits. Eligible applicants (including local public agencies,
nonprofit organizations, and individuals) must have successfully developed at least one
affordable housing project.
Predevelopment Loan Program (PDLP)
The PDLP provides predevelopment capital to finance the start of low income housing projects,
including costs to construct, rehabilitate, convert or preserve assisted housing, including
manufactured housing and mobilehome parks. Eligible costs include site preparation and control,
site acquisition for future low-income housing development, engineering studies, architectural
plans, and permits. Priority is given to developments which are rural, located in the public transit
corridors, or which preserve and acquire existing government-assisted rental housing at risk of
conversion to market rents.
Transit Oriented Development Housing Program (TOD)
Under TOD, low-interest loans are available as gap-financing for rental housing developments
that include affordable units, and as mortgage assistance for homeownership developments. In
addition, grants are available to cities, counties, and transit agencies for infrastructure
improvements necessary for the development of specified housing developments, or to facilitate
connections between these developments and the transit station. Eligible projects include the
construction of housing development projects and the provision of infrastructure necessary for
the development of higher density uses, within one-quarter mile of a transit station.
        Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                    62
Section IV
Future Housing Needs and Opportunities
  A      Regional Housing Needs Allocation (RHNA)
The Association of Bay Area Governments (ABAG) develops a Regional Housing Need
Allocation (RHNA) to distribute the region’s share of the statewide need to the cities and counties
within the region. The RNHA is for the 2014-2022 time period, and is broken into overall need
and, within the overall need, housing needs for various income levels in the Town. The RHNA is
a state-mandated process which determines the quantity and affordability of housing for which a
community must plan. The California Department of Housing and Community Development
assigned the Bay Area a housing needs allocation of 187,990 units for the 2015-2023 planning
period. Of this figure, 2,298 units were allocated to Marin County for the planning period (roughly
290 a year) through a distribution formula developed by the Association of Bay Area
Governments. Approximately 43 percent of these units must be affordable to lower income
households.
In developing the method for distributing the latest regional housing needs, ABAG concentrated
new development in Priority Development Areas, sites that were identified voluntarily by cities or
counties as areas for future growth. The new method helps reduce development pressure on
open space, rural areas and small towns. Benefits of this approach include reduced vehicle miles
traveled and greenhouse gas emissions. This new approach has resulted in a lower “fair share”
housing need for Tiburon than the previous planning period, as shown below.
Tiburon Regional Housing Needs Allocation (2007-2014 and 2014-2022)
                                            2007-2014            2014-2022
Income Level                         Units         Percent  Units        Percent
Very Low                               36            31%     24             31%
Low                                   21             18%     16            21%
Moderate                               27            23%     19             24%
Above Moderate                         33            28%     19            24%
TOTAL                                 117           100%     78            100%
Source: Association of Bay Area Governments (ABAG)
        Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                 63

It is estimated that 50% of the Town’s Very Low Income housing need for the 2014-2022 time
period will be for households earning less than 30% of median income (considered “Extremely
Low Income”). Thus, the number of Extremely Low Income households needing housing for the
2015-2023 period is estimated at 12 units (one-half of the 24 Very Low Income units). Housing
types available and suitable for extremely low income households include Single Room
Occupancy units (SRO), smaller apartments, emergency shelters, housing with Section 8
vouchers, supportive housing and transitional housing. The Housing Element includes several
programs to address extremely low income housing needs — from rental assistance programs,
permanent supportive/transitional housing, and appropriate zoning for emergency shelters.
Below is the RHNA breakdown for all Marin jurisdictions.
   Tiburon's Regional Housing Needs Allocation Compared to Other Marin County Jurisdictions (2014-2022)
                          Extremely                                          Lower                       Above
                                Low      Very Low               Low        Income      Moderate      Moderate            Total Default Density
   Jurisdiction             Income*         Income         Income Subtotal**             Income        Income            Units    Required**
   Belvedere                       2                 4               3            7              4            5             16   20 units/acre
   Corte Madera                   11               22              13            35            13            24             72   20 units/acre
   Fairfax                         8               16              11            27            11            23             61   20 units/acre
   Larkspur                       20               40              20            60            21            51            132   20 units/acre
   Mill Valley                    21               41              24            65            26            38            129   20 units/acre
   Novato                         56             111               65           176            72           167            415   30 units/acre
   Ross                            3                 6               4           10              4            4             18   20 units/acre
   San Anselmo                    17               33              17            50            19            37            106   20 units/acre
   San Rafael                    120             240             148            388           181           438          1,007   30 units/acre
   Sausalito                      13               26              14            40            16            23             79   20 units/acre
   Tiburon                        12               24              16            40            19            19             78   20 units/acre
   Unincorporated                 28               55              32            87            37            61            185   30 units/acre
   Total                         309             618             367            985           423           890          2,298
   Percent                      13%             27%             16%            43%           18%           39%           100%
   *Extremely Low Income (ELI) need equals 50% of Very Low Income Need
   **Required per AB 2348 -- Default density on sites appropriate for Lower Inocme Unit Need (see Lower Inocme Subtotal above)
   Source: Association of Bay Area Governments
          Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                                                             64

 B       Available Land for Housing
Housing Element law requires that the Town inventory vacant and underdeveloped sites, as well
as sites with known potential for redevelopment that are available for housing development. The
Town has an obligation to identify adequate sites which will be made available through
appropriate zoning and development standards and with public services and facilities needed to
encourage the development of housing consistent with Town’s “fair share” regional need
numbers. The Housing Element’s approach for achieving adequate sites, as expressed in the
Housing Element, has a number of interrelated components:
(1)     Identify high potential sites, either ready for development and/or serving the
        strongly perceived community need for re-development.
(2)     Look to second units (new and existing) and small mixed use housing
        developments as potential sources of housing, and encourage second units when
        new homes are built.
(3)     Commit time and resources to identify opportunities for the development of
        affordable housing, especially in the downtown or on larger sites.
(4)     Require in-lieu fee payments for all new housing creating more than one new lot
        or dwelling unit.
(5)     Provide flexibility in how development standards, funding incentives, and other
        incentives are applied in certain instances.
(6)     Use of RDA set-aside funds and/or in-lieu funds to assist in development of key
        higher density housing sites.
Sites for housing can be vacant or underused (for example, a single family house on a multi-
family site or sites where second story residential is allowed). In reviewing remaining sites, the
                                                     available land supply remains adequate to meet
                                                     needs for Above Moderate Income and
                                                     Moderate Income households. To provide local
                                                     governments with greater certainty and clarity in
                                                     evaluating and determining what densities
                                                     facilitate the development of housing that is
                                                     affordable to lower-income households (Very
                                                     Low and Low Income together), the statute
                                                     provides two options. The Town can either: (1)
                                                     conduct an analysis of market demand and
                                                     trends, financial feasibility, and residential
       Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                        65

project experience to demonstrate the densities facilitate lower income housing development; or,
(2) apply Government Code Section 65583.2(c)(3)(B), which allows local governments to utilize
“default” density standards deemed adequate to meet the “appropriate zoning” test, which in
Tiburon’s case are sites designated at 20 units per acre or more. Using the second approach
and applying the default density standard of 20 units/acre, the Housing Element must identify
sites for at least 40 units at this density.
Town policies encourage housing sites to be located near transit, shopping and services where
people can have easy access to nearby amenities. The Town has long supported the approach
that increased activity in appropriate locations creates a vibrancy and vitality in these areas.
Generally, there is higher intensity of activities toward the center of Town and lower intensity of
land use in outlying neighborhoods and steeper sloping sites. Based on the review of sites (see
Appendix A), the Town has sufficient sites currently planned and zoned at adequate densities to
meet its RHNA for the 2015-2023 planning period. The Town has sites currently planned and
zoned at 20 units per acre to meet the Town’s lower income need of 40 units. The table on the
next page shows there are adequate sites at 20 units per acre with a realistic development
capacity of 61 units.
Based upon the Town’s recent development history of one second unit per year, the Town
expects to develop 8 second units during the planning period. The Town’s second unit survey,
conducted in 2013, found that affordability levels for second units are 13% very low income, 50%
low income, and 38% moderate income. Therefore, five of the projected eight new second units
are expected to be affordable to lower-income households.
       Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                     66

                                                        Summary of Site Inventory and Relationship to the Town’s RHNA
                                                                                                                       Range of     Realistic
                                                                                                                                                                        Infrastructure          On-site
Location                 Zoning                   General Plan Designation                    Acres         Density      Units      Capacity        Existing Uses
                                                                                                                                                                           Capacity          Constraints
                                                                                                                       Possible    (2014-2022)
                                    Neighborhood Commercial/Affordable Housing Overlay
1555 Tiburon Blvd.
                         NC/AHO     (up to 0.31 FAR and 15.3 untis/gross acre; 20.7               1        12.9-20.7    13 to 20         20        Vacant Parking Lot          Yes                None
058-171-96
                                    units/gross acre w ith density bonus)
Chase Bank                          Neighborhood Commercial/Affordable Housing Overlay                                                                                                          Existing
                                                                                                                                                      Existing Bank
1535 Tiburon Blvd.       NC/AHO     (up to 0.31 FAR and 15.3 untis/gross acre; 20.7             0.73      12.9-20.7      9 to 15          0                                    Yes            Building and
                                                                                                                                                     (not available)
058-171-43                          units/gross acre w ith density bonus)                                                                                                                          Use
Bank of America                     Neighborhood Commercial/Affordable Housing Overlay                                                                                                          Existing
                                                                                                                                                      Existing Bank
1601 Tiburon Blvd.       NC/AHO     (up to 0.31 FAR and 15.3 untis/gross acre; 20.7             0.57      12.9-20.7      7 to 11          0                                    Yes            Building and
                                                                                                                                                     (not available)
058-171-47                          units/gross acre w ith density bonus)                                                                                                                          Use
                                    Neighborhood Commercial/Affordable Housing Overlay
1601 Tiburon Blvd.
                         NC/AHO     (up to 0.31 FAR and 15.3 untis/gross acre; 20.7             1.06      12.9-20.7     14 to 21         21        Vacant Parking Lot          Yes                None
058-171-86
                                    units/gross acre w ith density bonus)
                                    Neighborhood Commercial/Affordable Housing Overlay
1600 Tiburon Blvd.
                         NC/AHO     (up to 0.31 FAR and 15.3 untis/gross acre; 20.7              0.4       12.9-20.7     5 to 8           8                Deli                Yes                None
059-101-01
                                    units/gross acre w ith density bonus)
Cove Shopping
                                    Neighborhood Commercial/Affordable Housing Overlay                                                                                                          Drainage
Center
                         NC/AHO     (up to 0.31 FAR and 15.3 untis/gross acre; 20.7              0.6       12.9-20.7     8 to 12         12        Vacant Parking Lot          Yes           Channel (can
1 Blackfield Drive
                                    units/gross acre w ith density bonus)                                                                                                                     be mitigated)
(portion)
                                    Very High Density Residential/Affordable Housing                                                                                                         Slope 1 – 1 ½
Reed School
                        RMP/AHO Overlay (up to 18.4 du/acre, 24.8 du/acre w ith density          1.8      12.4 - 24.8   12 to 37          0              Vacant                Yes             acres are
1199 Tiburon Blvd.
                                    bonus)                                                                                                                                                   developable.
SUBTOTAL FOR SITES OVER 20 UNITS PER ACRE                                                                              68 to 124         61
Second Units             Various    Residential                                               Varies         Varies      100+ *           8        Developed/ Vacant           Yes               Varies
Single Family            Various    Residential                                               Varies         Varies        85            40              Vacant                Yes               Varies
TOTAL CAPACITY                                                                                                        253 to 309        109
* This is a conservative estimate of the number of potential second units. There are approximatley 2,500 detached single family homes in Tiburon, many of w hich have potential to create a second unit,
either w ithin the existing structure or as a new attached or detached structure.

Feasibility of Identified Mixed Use Development Sites
As part of the site inventory, the Town staff visited the sites and reviewed information regarding
existing conditions, potential constraints, and other factors related to site feasibility. In general,
sites or areas that can be redeveloped were categorized as follows:
Immediately Available — Sites in this category are typically vacant, are occupied by obsolete
buildings (e.g. have buildings that are aged and thus are not able to command market rents), or
are substantially underutilized (occupied by a building that is well below the permitted
development intensity for the site), lack any significant development constraints, and have active
marketing efforts or redevelopment proposals underway.
Conditionally Available — Sites in this category are occupied by obsolete buildings or are
underutilized and lack any significant development constraints but require some development
decision by public or private owners to make them available during the current planning period.
Limited by Constraint Conditions — Sites in this category are typically underutilized and have
constraint conditions or existing use circumstances that require coordinated public and private
investment to overcome but that appear economically feasible in the current planning period.
Existing Use/Known Feasibility Constraints — Sites in this category are sized and well-located
for mixed use development but have economically viable existing uses or constraints that
establish site value and/or development costs above that affordable by the potential mixed use
development, or environmental constraints that make development extremely difficult in the near
term. These sites were excluded during the initial selection process and are not listed.
The availability of developable sites does not assure development; market conditions will in most
cases dictate when any particular development will commence. From a market feasibility
standpoint, in practice, housing is increasingly part of mixed use development in California
suburban settings such as Tiburon. The reason is that housing has tended to generate
considerably higher value per square foot of developed building than office or retail uses. Given
the relatively high cost of land and construction of mixed use buildings, the housing component is
often essential to achieve a financially feasible development. Even when not absolutely
necessary, rent-seeking investors will tend to maximize value and a housing component can help
achieve this objective.
Experience with financial analysis of mixed use buildings has repeatedly demonstrated this point.
A simple reference to the marketplace also underscores this point – a common prototypical
vertical mixed use building, with hundreds of examples having been built recently in California,
involves a retail/office ground-floor “podium” with two or more floors of residential flats located
above. Alternative “side-by-side” projects also exist. Of course there will always be
       Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                        68

circumstances that lead site owners to variations in the mixed use prototype including single-use
buildings and those involving no residential development, changing market dynamics, cost/risk
factors, and business objectives. However, most mixed use sites in the Town of Tiburon as a
part of the Housing Element were so selected because of their potential for housing development
in the context of prior infill planning and Town policies. Accordingly it is very likely that many of
the selected sites will incorporate a housing component, including affordable housing.
The Cove Shopping Center Housing Site
The entire 4.23-acre site is developed with an approximately 42,000 square foot neighborhood
shopping center containing a grocery store, bank, restaurant, and several smaller retail and
service establishments. Housing can be located on a vacant part of the shopping center site
(0.23 acres) that is space formerly occupied by a plant nursery. In addition, adjacent to the
former nursery there is a larger undeveloped section of land at the east end of the property that
could be used if a drainage channel is bridged or otherwise crossed or independent of the 0.23-
       Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                       69
acre portion. Together, this part of the property borders multi-family residential development on
Circle Drive and single-family residences that are part of the Bel Aire neighborhood and
comprises 1.1 acres. The 0.23-acre portion of the site is a candidate for improvement and
redevelopment. It is partially developed with a paved parking lot. It is adjacent to residential uses,
has good access through the shopping center, has no known physical development constraints,
and is compatible with the intensity of development in the shopping center. A total of 12 units
could be built on this portion of the property (0.23 acres at 20 units per acre). The Town would
also help facilitate a lot split if needed and provide other incentives to ensure the economic
feasibility of exclusively residential development on this portion of the parcel.
Address:                            1 Blackfield Drive
Site Size:                         1.1 Acres (0.23 acres on the west side of the drainage channel and
                                    0.25 acres on the east side of the drainage channel are considered
                                    developable for the purposes of the Housing Element)
General Plan
Designation:                        Neighborhood Commercial/Affordable Housing Overlay (up to 0.31
                                    FAR and 15.3 units/gross acre; 20.7 units/gross acre with density
                                    bonus)
Zoning Designation:                 NC/AHO Neighborhood Commercial/Affordable Housing Overlay
Potential Housing Units:            8 - 12 units
Infrastructure:                     No constraints; access through shopping center.
On-Site Constraints:                Drainage channel splits the area and steep slope on part of the
                                    eastern portion of the site (cost and design considerations for
                                    future development of the entire 1.1 acres). However, 12 units
                                    could be clustered on a 0.23-acre portion of the site that is flat and
                                    adjacent to the existing shopping center. In that case, crossing the
                                    drainage channel would not be needed. Alternatively, the 0.87-acre
                                    eastern side of the site could also be developed independently with
                                    6 units and parking, put would require more grading and retaining
                                    of the slope than the smaller, western portion of the site.
Existing Use:                      Parking lot adjacent to commercial area; remainder of the site is
                                    vacant.
Realistic Development
Capacity:                           12 units
Special Policy Considerations and Site Incentives:
(1)   Linkage with shopping center uses and shared parking opportunities (additional units could
      be added to the active shopping area of the center above the existing commercial uses).
(2)   Use gross acreage for determining total number of units and net acreage for determining
      density of development.
       Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                         70
(3)    Apply General Plan and Zoning requirements for 25% affordable units in the NC/AHO zone.
(4)    Allow incentives for smaller units in consideration of lesser impacts than an average size
       unit in Tiburon.
(1)    Town assistance in obtaining grants.
(2)    Encourage residential development through use of former RDA set-aside funds and/or in-
       lieu funds to assist in site development, fee reductions and permit streamlining.
(3)    Facilitate lot split from remainder of shopping center if needed.
Downtown Housing Sites
1. Chase Bank (1535 Tiburon Boulevard): This 0.73-acre site contains a 7,990 square foot
bank building with approximately 30 parking spaces and extensive walkways and landscaped
areas. The building, which is one-story with a partial mezzanine level, was constructed in the
1970’s, and has a very low intensity of use. This lot is flat and is located close to services and
transit with utilities, access, and other infrastructure in place. This is a possible site for a mixed-
use project or a senior housing facility. The site is owned by Metropolitan Life and is leased by
Chase Bank. The site is adjacent to 1555 Tiburon Boulevard. A change of use or possible
redevelopment of the site is possible, but the site should be considered as a longer-term housing
site.
2. Vacant Parking Lot (1555 Tiburon Boulevard): This site is a paved private parking lot
adjacent to a CVS Pharmacy. This flat site is approximately 1 acre in area and is located close to
services and transit with utilities, access, and other infrastructure available. A deed restriction for
non-development (held by the Town of Tiburon) dating from 1977 might need to be removed
from the rear half-acre by the Town, depending on the location of building.
3. Bank of America (1601 Tiburon Boulevard): This site contains an existing 6,900 square
foot, two-story bank building constructed in the early 1970’s on a roughly half-acre leasehold.
The building is currently occupied by Bank of America and is considered to be an antiquated
facility by modern banking standards, likely to see a change in use or possible redevelopment of
the site in the future. This is a flat site with few constraints and proximity to services and transit.
This site shares the same excellent redevelopment potential as the Chase Bank site but should
be considered as a longer-term housing site.
4. Vacant Parking Lot (2 Beach Road, APN 058-171-86): This site is a paved private parking
lot adjacent to Bank of America. The 1.06 acre site is flat and is located close to services and
         Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                      71

transit with utilities and infrastructure in place. The parcel is located within the Tiburon
Redevelopment Project Area. A deed restriction for non-development (held by the Town of
Tiburon) at the rear of the site might need to be removed by the Town, depending on the location
of building.
5. Shark’s Deli (1600 Tiburon Boulevard, APN 059-101-01): This site contains a small deli in
a building built in the 1940’s and originally utilized as a gas station. The site is underutilized with
the outdated, one-story structure occupying approximately 10 percent of the parcel. The 0.4 acre
site is flat and has access on both Tiburon Boulevard and Beach Road, with services and transit
close by and existing utilities and infrastructure.
Special Policy Considerations and Area Incentives:
    (1) Shared parking opportunities.
    (2) Use gross acreage for determining total number of units and net acreage for determining
          density of development.
    (3) Apply General Plan and Zoning requirements for 25 percent affordable units in the
          NC/AHO zone and 20 percent affordable units for smaller sites that have a capacity of 10
          or fewer units at minimum densities.
    (4) Allow incentives for smaller units in consideration of lesser impacts than an average size
          unit in Tiburon.
    (5) Town assistance in obtaining grants.
    (6) Use of former RDA set-aside funds and/or in-lieu funds to assist in site development.
        Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                     72

Downtown Housing Sites
Note: The Zoning Map has not yet been revised to reflect the inclusion of Sites 4 and 5 in the NC/AHO
zone.
       Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                         73
  C      Potential Non-Governmental Constraints to Housing
State law requires that the Housing Element include a discussion of the factors that present
barriers to the production of housing, including government actions and market forces (non-
governmental constraints). Identification of these constraints helps the Town to implement
measures that address these concerns and reduce their impacts on the production of housing.
Cost of Land
Many factors determine the price of land in the Town, including allowable density and type of
residential development, the availability of public services and utilities and the quality of nearby
existing development. Two major factors contribute to the high land costs in Marin County
specifically: (1) Marin County is considered a desirable place to live and, (2) available land is in
short supply, especially for larger sites. 1 These costs vary both between and within jurisdictions
based on factors such as the desirability of the location and the permitted density. The typical
land value for a single family home lot runs between $300,000 and $700,000 in a jurisdiction like
Novato, or $1.0 million and $5.0 million in a jurisdiction like Tiburon. Based on a typical
multifamily construction in Marin County, land costs add $50,000-$65,000 per unit, but can run
upwards of $75,000 in some locations.
For Marin County, land costs average around 15-20 percent of construction costs for multifamily
developments. Even though land costs for single family homes vary widely throughout the
county, the costs (as a percentage) are significantly higher than for multifamily developments.
Construction Costs
Multifamily Developments
According to local developers, hard construction costs for a typical two or three-story multi-family
development average $175 to $195 per square foot. Thus, a 30-unit development with a gross
building area of 25,200 square feet would have hard construction costs of approximately $4.9
million, or about $164,000 per unit. Soft costs typically add 45 to 50 percent to this base cost,
yielding a per unit total construction cost of approximately $240,000.
With all construction costs and land costs included, total multifamily unit development costs rise
to over $300,000 per unit. Luxury developments can cost substantially more.
1
  According to the Marin Economic Commission’s Marin Profile 1999: A Survey of Economic, Social and
Environmental Indicators, 84 percent of land area in Marin is designated for agriculture, park lands and open space
and watershed. Of the remaining land, 11 percent is developed and five percent is listed as potentially developable
development.
       Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                                    74

Single Family Homes
According to local contractors and realtors, construction costs vary between $200 and $250 per
square foot for average construction and can go up to $500 per square foot for a high-end,
custom-built single family house. Soft costs (including architectural and engineering fees,
property taxes during construction, city and utility fees, and construction loan interest and fees)
typically increase these costs by approximately 35 to 40 percent. Construction costs can be
higher if lots require substantial site work due to steep slopes, unstable soils, waterways, and
other environmental concerns.
Financing
Over the past year, mortgage rates for conventional 30-year fixed rate loans have ranged
between 3.25 and 3.75 percent. These loans are generally available to home buyers with good
credit histories and adequate down payments. Interest rates on jumbo loans for amounts over
$729,750 are about one-half percentage point higher and are more difficult to secure. Tighter
lending standards have made it harder to get a home loan, especially for people with poor credit
scores and/or undocumented income.
 Mortgage Payments for a 30-Year Fixed Rate
 Loan of $500,000
                           Monthly Payment
  Interest Rate
                    (excluding taxes and insurance)
       3%                        $2,108
       4%                        $2,387
       5%                        $2,684
       6%                        $2,998
       7%                        $3,327
Small changes in the interest rate for home purchases dramatically affect affordability. A 30-year
home loan for $400,000 at four percent interest has monthly payments of roughly $1,910. A
similar home loan at six percent interest has payments of roughly 20 percent more, or $2,340.
Construction loans for new housing are difficult to secure in the current market. In past years,
lenders would provide up to 80 percent of the cost of new construction (loan to value ratio). In
recent years, due to market conditions and government regulations, banks require larger
investments by the builder.
        Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                   75
Many builders are finding it nearly impossible to get construction loans for residential property at
the current time, with the exception of limited funding available through local banks, and must
rely on private funds or seller carry-back loans. Banks that are underwriting construction loans
are requiring 25 to 35 percent cash equity; interest rates range from 5 to 6 percent. Loans for
land acquisition are extremely difficult to secure, and lenders will typically provide financing for
only 50 to 65 percent of the land value, at an interest rate of approximately 7.5 percent, for
projects that are permit-ready.
Affordable housing developments face additional constraints in financing. Though public funding
is available, it is allocated on a highly competitive basis and developments must meet multiple
qualifying criteria, often including the requirement to pay prevailing wages. Smaller
developments with higher per unit costs are among the hardest to make financially feasible. This
is because the higher costs result in a sales price that is above the affordability levels set for
many programs. Additionally, smaller projects often require significant inputs of time by
developers, but because the overall budget is smaller and fees are based on a percentage of
total costs, the projects are often not feasible (Marin Environmental Housing Collaborative).
Rental developments tend to be easier to finance than for sale developments, as there are more
sources of funding available. However, cuts in public spending statewide have put pressure on
these sources. For example, though tax credits used to be a valuable source of revenue for low-
income housing developers, programs have been cut and the tax credit resale market has
softened (EAH).
Foreclosures
While the incidence of foreclosures was considered a constraint to housing during the last
housing element period, the number of foreclosures in California has decreased significantly due
to rising home values, a strengthening economy and government efforts to reduce foreclosures.
DataQuick, a real estate information service, reports that the number of California homeowners
entering the foreclosure process dropped to the lowest level in more than seven years during the
first quarter of 2013. In Marin County, 87 homeowners entered the foreclosure process during
the first quarter of 2013, a 58 percent year-over-year decline. The number of homes foreclosed
on experienced similar year-over-year declines; 52 Marin County homes were foreclosed on
during the first quarter of 2013, a 56 percent year-over-year decline.
        Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                    76
DataQuick reports that 303 single family houses and condos were foreclosed on in 2012. Five of
these homes were located in Tiburon (Marin Independent Journal home foreclosure database).
According to DataQuick, most of the California loans going into default are from the 2005-2007
period, indicating that weak underwriting standards peaked at that time. Tighter lending
standards have reduced the chance that the California housing market will experience another
wave of high foreclosure rates in the near future.
Community Resistance to New Housing
Another common constraint to housing production in Marin County is community resistance to
new developments. There are a number of concerns that are often expressed at meetings,
including: 1) new developments will cause increased traffic, 2) additional housing or density will
adversely affect the community character, 3) affordable housing will impact property values, and
4) valuable open space will be lost. Regardless of the factual basis of the concern, vociferous
opposition can slow or stop development.
Additionally, at times there is a tension between the desire to provide certain individuals (such as
nurses, teachers, law enforcement, etc.) preferential access to affordable housing and Fair
Housing Law. In many cases, it is not possible to target housing to select groups. These
concerns are often expressed during project review processes and can present significant
political barriers to development.
Potential opposition to affordable housing exists in many communities throughout the Bay Area.
It is important in this regard to identify sites for special needs and affordable housing that fit with
        Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                    77
community character and have minimum impacts. Design plays a critical role in creating new
developments that blend into the existing neighborhood, especially in higher density
developments that might otherwise seem out of place. Good design can help ensure that high
density developments are not bulky or out-of-scale. Through sensitive design, a building’s
perceived bulk can be significantly reduced to create a development that blends with the existing
character of the neighborhood. Design strategies that the Town has used to minimize the
perception of bulk and create a blending with the community do not necessarily increase costs.
These include:
(1)      Break-up the building “mass” in its architecture and detailing (e.g., create several smaller
         buildings instead of one large building).
(2)      Vary the roofline.
(3)      Create a three-dimensional facade (rather than a massive, flat facade).
(4)      Step-back the building height, with the lowest part of the building towards the street and
         adjacent properties, locating the highest part of the building towards the center of the
         property.
(5)      Site the building appropriately in relation to surrounding buildings.
(6)      Use architectural design, landscaping, materials and colors that fit with the area.
(7)      Use landscaping to blend the buildings with the natural setting.
(8)      Provide for open space and pathways throughout the development.
The Marin Consortium for Workforce Housing was established to build public understanding and
support for workforce housing. The Consortium focuses public concern on potential
environmental impacts, quality of design, and the quality of long-term management of the project.
The Housing Element includes a program to work with the Marin Consortium for Workforce
Housing to help address this potential constraint. In addition, the Town’s environmental and
design review procedures assist in achieving project acceptability and allow for neighborhood
participation.
Working with Non-Profit Housing Developers
The key to the success of non-profit developers lies in three areas: (1) their ability to draw upon a
diversity of funding sources and mechanisms to make their developments work financially; (2)
their commitment to working cooperatively and constructively with the local community; and (3),
their long-term commitment to ensuring excellence in design, construction and management of
their developments, creating assets that are valued by the people who live in the developments
as well as their neighbors and others. The Town can work with non-profit developers where there
are opportunities, either through public ownership of property or key larger sites (over 1 acre in
size) where special opportunities exist with minimal constraints, carrying costs, or costs of
processing or construction. Since multiple funding sources are usually used on an affordable
project, there are additional burdens placed on non-profit developers to track the information
        Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                    78

required and report on a timely basis.
There are a wide variety of resources provided through federal, state and local programs to
support affordable housing development and related programs and services. Specific programs
and sources of funding are summarized earlier in the Housing Element. Local government
resources, which have historically played a less important role in supporting housing
development, now play a fairly significant role by making local developments more competitive
for federal and state financing. There is considerable competition for the program funds that are
available, and any one development will need to draw upon multiple resources to be financially
feasible. When developments are able to demonstrate a financial commitment and contribution
from local sources — especially if coupled with regulatory support through policies such as fast-
track processing, fee waivers, and/or density bonuses — they are better able to leverage funding
from other ‘outside’ sources.
The Non-Profit Housing Association of Northern California (NPH) serves as a local networking
agency and advocacy group, as well as a resource organization for affordable housing
developers in the Bay Area and elsewhere in California. Greenbelt Alliance has also been
involved and supportive of affordable housing policies and projects. Some of the other affordable
housing developers and housing services providers that have been active in Marin County in
recent years include EAH Housing, North Bay Housing, Mercy Housing, Eden Housing, and
BRIDGE Housing Corporation.
       Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                 79

 D      Potential Governmental Constraints to Housing
As with other cities, Tiburon’s development standards and requirements are intended to protect
the long-term health, safety, and welfare of the community. The Town of Tiburon charges fees
and has a number of procedures and regulations it requires any developer to follow. There are
many locally imposed land use and building requirements that can affect the type, appearance,
and cost of housing built in Tiburon. These local requirements include zoning standards,
development fees, parking requirements, subdivision design standards, and design review.
Other building and design requirements imposed by Tiburon follow State laws, the California
Building Code (CBC), Subdivision Map Act, energy conservation requirements, and so forth.
The Town’s development standards contained in the Municipal Code (Zoning Ordinance and
Subdivision regulations) are the minimum necessary to ensure the protection and preservation of
the existing housing stock. By Marin County standards, they are not unduly restrictive and, in
general, Tiburon’s development standards and requirements are comparable to many other
communities in the Bay Area.
Tiburon Zoning Ordinance
The Tiburon Zoning Ordinance closely tracks the General Plan, but in addition provides detailed
development standards and processing procedures. The development review process for
discretionary permits required by the Zoning Ordinance can act as a constraint to the production
of affordable housing. Below is a description and analysis of the current residential development
review process in the Town of Tiburon. The analysis addresses properties that allow housing
development, both in residential zones and in commercial zones.
                                    Tiburon processes the typical small development in three to four
                                    months from application to building permit approval. This is due
                                    to the efficiency of a small town government, the lack of an
                                    application backlog, and the fact that most public facilities are
                                    already in place. Single-family housing development applications
                                    generally take less time to review than multi-family proposals.
                                    When proposed single family developments are in conformity with
                                    the General Plan and existing zoning, it is possible to process the
                                    required applications within several months. Some new single-
                                    family and all multi-family development proposals are subject to
                                    Design Review. Major projects may also require an EIR, multiple
                                    public hearings and extensive local review. The total review time
                                    for multi-family projects, from the initial developer contact with the
                                    Town to final approval, can take up to a year.
       Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                        80

In most of Tiburon’s residential zones (R-1, R-1-B, RO-1, RO-2, R-2 and R-3) zones, a single
discretionary permit (Design Review) is required to construct single family and/or multi-family
housing, with one exception as described later in this section. The Design Review Board
acts on Design Review applications at public hearings. The Design Review Board reviews
any variance applications associated with the site plan and design of the project
simultaneously; other variances are reviewed by the Planning Commission. No additional
discretionary review is required to approve housing projects in the above-listed zones. If the
decision of the Design Review Board or Planning Commission is appealed to the Town
Council, the Town Council will hold a hearing and make the final decision on the application.
The Design Review process typically has the following elements and timeline:
    Task                                                                      Time
    • Application filed                                                       1 day
        Project sponsor submits completed application forms, drawings,
        supporting documents and fees
    •   Completeness review                                                   < 30 days
        The application is routed to Town departments to determine whether
        additional information is required to process the application, and for
        recommended conditions of approval
    •   Completeness notice                                                   1 day
        Written notice is sent to the applicant informing them whether the project is complete
        or incomplete
    •   Follow-up submittal                                                   Varies
        If the application is incomplete, the applicant will submit follow-up
        information as requested. The time to complete this task is determined
        by the project sponsor, but generally does not exceed 30 days. If the
        application was complete, this step is skipped
    •   Environmental Review                                                  1 day-6 months
        The application is reviewed to determine whether the project is exempt
        from CEQA or if an Initial Study is required. Most projects are found to be exempt
        from CEQA. If a Negative Declaration is prepared, environmental review may take
        the full 6 months allowed by law
    •   Staff report                                                          30 days
        A detailed evaluation of the application is conducted by staff and a written report is
        prepared for public review
       Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                   81

    •   Public meeting                                                        10 days
        A hearing notice is sent at least 10 days before the meeting to property owners within
        300 feet of the property. The Design Review Board conducts a public meeting and
        takes action on the application
As noted above, there is one exception to the single discretionary permit rule in residential
zones. In the Planned Residential Zones (RPD and RMP), two discretionary permits (Precise
Development Plan and Design Review) are required.
In Tiburon’s commercial zones (Neighborhood Commercial and Village Commercial), current
zoning requires two discretionary permits for residential development. The Planning
Commission must approve a Conditional Use Permit for the residential use and the Design
Review Board must approve a Design Review permit. Each process is separate; processing
is sequential. This means that a very similar task/timeline to that shown above is first
performed by the Planning Commission and then by the Design Review Board, with only the
environmental review portion not being repeated by the Design Review Board.
The Town recognizes that the time required to process a development proposal can be a barrier
to housing production if it is lengthy. The Town has streamlined its development review process
and adopted a new Zoning Ordinance to make the process more efficient, while still providing
adequate opportunity for public review and input. In addition, much of the permit processing time
frame is dictated by state-mandated noticing and processing procedures that help assure
community review of projects. Processing times for projects in Tiburon are similar to, if not faster
than, other jurisdictions in Marin County.
The Town has a maximum of 30 days to conduct an initial review of the project and determine
whether it is “complete,” or whether additional information is needed to evaluate the project.
While this may seem like a long time, it includes time to refer the application to different
departments and outside agencies involved in development review; and to receive and
consolidate these comments. Staff tries to anticipate analyses that will be needed for
environmental review or during the public hearing process (such as any special studies). If the
project does not meet various Town standards, it may also need to be revised. In the past
several years, the Town has improved submittal checklists and handouts to identify what
information is required for an application to be deemed “complete.”
Within 30 days of receiving a complete application, the Town must determine whether the project
requires a Negative Declaration, Environmental Impact Report or can be categorically exempt. If
not categorically exempt, staff prepares an “Initial study”. If a Negative Declaration is prepared,
the state-required public review period is 20 to 30 days, depending on whether a state agency is
       Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                     82

involved in the review. If an Environmental Impact Report (EIR) is required it can add an
additional 6 to 8 months for preparation and review of the Draft EIR, responses to comments,
and preparation of the Final EIR. Town records indicate that over the past 20 years, more than
99 percent of design review applications are found to be categorically exempt from CEQA, and
the Design Review Board has considered no EIR’s over that period of time and only a handful of
Negative Declarations. All such projects have been approved by the Board.
The Town works closely with developers to expedite approval procedures so as not to put any
unnecessary timing constraints on development. For a project of scale or a likely controversial
project, an initial pre-consultation meeting with the planning department, public works, and the
fire district is recommended to discuss the development proposal. Then a description of the
project and application must be filed with a site plan, which is first reviewed by the planning
division and other agencies such as public works for consistency with Town ordinances and
General Plan guidelines. After the project is approved, the building division performs plan checks
and issues building permits. Throughout construction, the building division will perform building
checks to monitor the progress of the project. This process does not seem to put an undue time
constraint on most developments because of the close working relationship between Town staff,
developers, and the decision-making bodies (Design Review, Planning Commission, and Town
Council). Some projects may include a variance request and those requests are generally
considered at the same hearing as the design review permit to avoid delays in processing. A
vast majority of Design Review applications are approved at the first hearing. Additionally,
appeals of Design Review Board decisions are limited to a single step, directly to the Town
Council, to avoid unnecessary delays from intermediate hearing bodies such as the Planning
Commission.
The Tiburon zoning ordinance provides the criteria used by decision-makers when reviewing a
project for design review approval. The Town also provides illustrations and further details of
factors considered in the Town’s Hillside Design Guidelines and the Downtown Tiburon Design
Handbook. While design review can be subjective to some extent, these guidelines and Town
practices strive to make design review as speedy, objective and fair as possible.
The guiding principles are intended to decrease “uncertainty” for applicants, and as much as
possible, provide objective and clear standards, considerations and expectations for new
development. The Town also provides separate handbooks for design standards for
development in the downtown area and in the hillside areas, which comprise the vast majority of
Tiburon’s neighborhoods. These design guideline handbooks provide a series of easy-to-
understand examples, using illustrations with written explanations, of acceptable and
unacceptable design techniques and practices that are useful to architects, designers,
applicants, staff, the community and decision-makers. These objective tools are used in the
review of development applications and act to reduce uncertainty as to whether an application
        Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                   83

will be favorably received by the Town. Below are the guiding principles for site plan and
architectural review.
Guiding Principles for Design Review
(1)      Site plan adequacy. Proper relation of a project to its site, including that it promotes
         orderly development of the community, provides safe and reasonable access, and will not
         be detrimental to the public health, safety, and general welfare.
(2)      Site layout in relation to adjoining sites. The location of proposed improvements on
         the site in relation to the location of improvements on adjoining sites, with particular
         attention to view considerations, privacy, location of noise-generating exterior mechanical
         equipment, adequacy of light and air, and topographic or other constraints on
         development imposed by particular site conditions.
(3)      Neighborhood character. The height, size, and/or bulk of the proposed project bears a
         reasonable relationship to the character of existing buildings in the vicinity. A good
         relationship of a building to its surroundings is important. For example, in neighborhoods
         consisting primarily of one-story homes, second-story additions shall be discouraged, or
         permitted with increased setbacks or other design features to minimize the intrusion on
         the neighborhood.
(4)      Floor area ratio. The relationship between the size and scale of improvements and the
         size of the property on which the improvements are proposed. This concept is known as
         floor area ratio.
(5)      Grading and tree removal. The extent to which the site plan reasonably minimizes
         grading and/or removal of trees, significant vegetation, or other natural features of the site
         such as rock outcroppings or watercourses.
(6)      Compatibility of architectural style and exterior finish. The architectural style and
         exterior finish are harmonious with existing development in the vicinity and will not be in
         stark contrast with its surroundings.
(7)      Landscaping. Proposed landscaping, insofar as it is used appropriately to prevent
         erosion; to protect the privacy of adjoining sites; and to mitigate the visual and noise
         impacts of the proposed project. Applicants are encouraged to use native and drought-
         resistant landscaping. Proposed landscaping shall be used which will, at maturity,
         minimize primary view obstruction from other buildings. A cash deposit or other monetary
         security may be required to ensure the installation and/or maintenance for a one-year
         period of any and all landscaping. Projects that are subject to provisions of Title IV,
       Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                      84
        Chapter 13E (Water Efficient Landscape) of the Tiburon Municipal Code shall comply
        with the Marin Municipal Water District regulations regarding water-efficient landscaping
        adopted by reference therein.
(8)     Lighting. Proposed lighting, insofar as it should not invade the privacy of other
        properties, or produce glare or light pollution; yet provide adequate illumination for safety
        and security purposes. All proposed exterior lighting shall be shielded downlighting.
(9)     Overall property improvement. In order to allow the gradual upgrading of existing
        improvements, upgrades may be required to be made to existing buildings and the site as
        a whole. The review of applications for additions or modifications to existing development
        may include conditions requiring changes and/or modifications to existing buildings and
        site improvements for the entire property to the extent that there is a reasonable
        relationship between the requested project and the changes modifications required.
(10)    Appropriate use of building envelope. In planned residential (RPD and RMP) zones,
        building envelopes are generally intended to provide a larger-than-needed area for
        flexibility in the appropriate siting of a main structure and its accessory structures. The
        building envelope should not generally be interpreted as an area intended to be filled by a
        main structure and its accessory structures.
(11)    Green building. The project design includes features that foster renewable energy
        and/or resource conservation.
(12)    Conformance with zoning requirements. All modifications and site improvements
        shall conform with the setback, parking, and height requirements established for
        each zone by Article II (Zones and Allowable Land Uses), and with any special
        requirements including recycling (see Municipal Code Chapter 16C [Recyclables
        Collection Area]) and screening guidelines established for specific uses by this Zoning
        Ordinance.
Town Staff is able to advise and assist applicants in understanding how the guiding principles
apply to particular properties, and also regarding the Design Review Board’s expectations.
Evaluation: The vast majority of residential applications that have been received in recent
years have been for single-family detached dwellings on individual lots. All but one of these
applications has been deemed to be categorically exempt from CEQA. Approval times have
typically ranged from six weeks to three months, depending on the swiftness of application
completeness and the level of conformance with the Town’s guiding principles of design
review.
       Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                      85

The requirement for two discretionary permit reviews (in lieu of one) for residential projects in
commercial areas is an unnecessary regulatory constraint that can be removed if a
jurisdiction has concluded that certain commercial sites are appropriate for mixed-use and/or
residential development, and establishes affordable residential use by right.
Reduction of Constraints: The Town adopted changes, contained in Zoning Ordinance
Section 16-23.030 that establishes “Affordable Housing Overlay Zone” or “Mixed Use
Development Incentives,” which include elimination of the conditional use permit requirement
for the housing component of a project.
The constraints to affordable housing contained in the General Plan that will be addressed by
programs in this Housing Element will apply equally to the zoning ordinance. Specific Zoning
Ordinance amendments were made as a result of programs contained in the previous
Housing Element.
The following table provides the land use regulations for the residential zones in Tiburon.
Tiburon also has two residential zoning districts, the Residential Planned Development Zone
and Residential Multiple Planned Zone, for which development regulations are established by
Precise Development Plans (PDP) or other similar Zoning permits.
        Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                   86

                          Summary of Tiburon Zoning District Requirements
                                                                            Maximum
                          Minimum         Front       Side        Minimum             Lot
 Zone                                                                         Lot             FAR
                          Lot Area        Yard        Yard       Rear Yard           Width
                                                                            Coverage
 R-1 (Single Family)      10,000 sf         15’          8’      20% to 25’   30%     40’  (see below)
 R-1-B-A (Bel Aire
                          10,000 sf         20’          6’      20% to 25’   30%     40’  (see below)
 Single Family)
 R-1-B-2 (Modified
                          10,000 sf         25’         10’      20% to 25’   30%     40’  (see below)
 Single Family)
 RO-1 (Residential
                          40,000 sf         30’         20’      20% to 25’   15%     70’  (see below)
 Open)
 RO-2 (Residential
                          20,000 sf         30’         15’      20% to 25’   15%     50’  (see below)
 Open)
 R-2 (Two-family)          7,500 sf         15’          8’      20% to 25’   35%     40’  (see below)
                          10,000 sf
 R-3 (Multi-family)         (3,500          15’          8’           8’      30%     40’      0.6
                            sf/unit)
 NC (Neighborhood
                          10,000 sf         n/a         n/a          n/a      37%     n/a     0.37
 Commercial)
 Source: Town of Tiburon Municipal Code, effective April 16, 2010
Floor Area Ratio (FAR): Floor Area Guidelines have been established by the Town. Generally,
these are as follows:
• 35% of the property area for lots less than 7,500 square feet in area (up to 600 square feet of
    garage may be included without being counted)
• For properties between 7,500 and 60,000 square feet, the FAR guideline is 10 percent of the
    property plus 2,000 square feet (up to 600 square feet of garage may be included without
    being counted)
• For lots greater than 60,000 square feet, the FAR guideline is 8,000 square feet (up to 750
    square feet of garage may be included without being counted)
Building Height: The maximum building height is 30 feet for all residential zones. NC zone
allows 38 feet for downtown properties fronting Tiburon Boulevard.
        Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                         87

Parking: One-and-a half (1½) parking spaces are required for each dwelling unit in a residential
development, with a minimum of two required.
Open Space: In the R-2 zone, a minimum of 375 square feet of outdoor usable open space
with a minimum dimension of 12 feet is required per unit.
In the R-3 zone, the following schedule of outdoor usable open space is required:
     • 150 square feet per efficiency or studio apartment
     • 200 square feet per 1 bedroom apartment
     • 250 square feet per 2 bedroom apartment
     • 300 square feet per 3 or more bedroom apartment.
Affordable Housing Overlay Zones
In 2006, the Town adopted an ordinance creating an affordable housing overlay and
development incentives for affordable housing opportunity sites identified in the Tiburon Housing
Element in the Neighborhood Commercial and Residential Multiple Planned zones. The
ordinance was amended in 2012 in order to provide more flexible parking standards, higher
densities for smaller units, and increased financial feasibility. In order to qualify for the numerous
benefits of the overlay zone, a residential development project must include a minimum of 5
percent very low income, 10 percent low income, and 10 percent moderate income (defined in
the Zoning Code as below 90% of median income) housing units. This requirement was revised
in 2014 to reduce the number of required affordable units for smaller projects; on sites that would
yield 10 or fewer total units at the minimum allowable density, the affordable component is
reduced to 20 percent of total units, of which at least 50 percent must be affordable to lower
income households. A percentage of the housing units must also be designed for special needs
populations as per section 16-70.030 of the municipal code. Multifamily uses are permitted by
right, and maximum densities are 24.8 units per acre in the Residential Multiple
Planned/Affordable Housing Overlay (RMP/AHO) zone and 20.7 units per acre, additive to a 0.31
FAR for commercial uses in the Neighborhood Commercial/Affordable Housing Overlay
(NC/AHO) zone. Higher densities are permitted when units are significantly smaller and have
few impacts than the market norm. Studio dwelling units are counted at a 1.5:1 ratio provided
that each unit does not exceed 600 square feet in floor area; one bedroom units are counted at a
1.25:1 ratio provided that each unit does not exceed 800 square feet in floor area. The building
height limit is 3 stories or 38 feet, whichever is less. Setbacks and lot coverage standards are
intentionally flexible and left to be determined through site plan and architectural review process.
A number of development incentives are available for projects developed in these zones,
including higher densities, relaxation and/or flexibility in development standards, reduced parking
standards, reduced interior amenity levels, priority processing, fee reductions and waivers, and
utility hookup subsidies.
         Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                      88

Second Units
A second dwelling unit is a small unit in addition to the main house on a single lot. Second units
have the following benefits:
(1)     They provide flexibility for the owner of the main home (they can be used as a home
        office, an apartment for elderly parents, or a source of income);
(2)     When rented they help make home-ownership affordable for the owner of the home;
(3)     They can provide flexibility for seniors or other homeowners who rent their primary
        dwelling because they still want to live in the same neighborhood;
(4)     They provide lower cost housing because the units tend to be small and there are no
        extra land costs;
(5)     They typically provide lower cost housing for younger households (under 34) and seniors
        (65 years plus), and these are the demographic groups that have been identified as
        having the most significant low income housing need in Tiburon;
(6)     They are easier to fit into existing neighborhoods since they are small and are often part
        of the main house.
The Town of Tiburon’s second unit ordinance (Chapter 16-52.100) was amended in 2003 to
permit second units by right in all single family residential zoning districts on lots of not less than
10,000 square feet. In 2005, the standards were revised in order to permit greater flexibility in
approving second units. Size limitations for newly constructed units were increased from 400 to
500 square feet, and a requirement limiting grading to 30 cubic yards was increased to 100 cubic
yards. In addition, a regulation prohibiting second unit development on slopes exceeding 30%
was deleted.
The Director of Community Development has ministerial review and approval of second units
based on the following standards:
(1)     Newly constructed second units not proposed as part of a project which requires a zoning
        permit may not exceed 500 square feet.
(2)     Second units located within an existing primary unit, or proposed as part of a project
        which requires a zoning permit, may not exceed 1/3 of the maximum floor area ratio or
        1,000 square feet, whichever is less.
(3)     Units must meet all setback, height, lot coverage, and floor area requirements of the
        underlying zoning district as determined in the Town’s zoning ordinance. However, if the
        second unit is newly constructed, the unit is limited to a single story with a maximum
        building height of fifteen feet.
       Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                       89

(4)       One parking space must be provided for each bedroom of the residential second unit.
          Parking spaces must be accessed from the same driveway as the primary unit. Tandem
          parking is not permitted.
(5)       The primary unit or the second unit must be owner-occupied.
(6)       The exterior of the second unit must closely resemble the architectural style, building
          materials, and building colors of the primary unit.
(7)       Adequate sanitary service must be available to serve the second unit.
Six second units were approved or developed between January 1999 and July 2007, and five
second units were approved or developed since then. The rate of second unit development has
not increased since the second unit standards were revised in 2005. In order to encourage
greater production of second units, the Town could relax standards further as follows:
(1)       Reduce the minimum lot size requirement.
(2)       Increase the unit size limitation to 700 square feet for newly constructed units.
(3)       Reduce the parking requirement to one space per unit, regardless of number of
          bedrooms, and allow tandem parking.
Community Care Facilities
The Lanterman Developmental Disabilities Services Act (Lanterman Act) sets out the rights and
responsibilities of persons with developmental disabilities. The Lanterman Act impacts local
zoning ordinances by requiring the use of property for the care of six or fewer disabled persons
to be classified as a residential use under zoning. More specifically, a State-authorized, certified
or licensed family care home, foster home, or a group home serving six or fewer disabled
persons or dependent and neglected children on a 24-hour-a-day basis is considered a
residential use that is to be permitted in all residential zones. No local agency can impose stricter
zoning or building and safety standards on these homes.
The Town of Tiburon presently permits transitional housing and group homes by right in all
single-family residential zones. The Zoning Code identifies “intermediate or community care
facilities (as defined by state law) or any other residential care facility for the handicapped (as
defined by the Fair Housing Act)” as allowed in any single-family dwelling.
The Town does not restrict the siting of group homes nor require a minimum distance between
them. Group homes with under seven occupants are permitted by right in single family
residences and the Town does not have any occupancy standards in the zoning code that apply
specifically to unrelated adults. New or significantly remodeled group homes are required to go
through the design review process, as is any residential development, and obtain Design Review
approval.
         Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                    90

Supportive and Transitional Housing
Chapter 633 of Statute 2007 (SB 2) requires all cities and towns to treat transitional and
supportive housing as a residential use, subject only to those restrictions that apply to other
residential uses of the same type in the same zone. Transitional housing is defined in Section
50675.2 of the California Health & Safety Code as rental housing for stays of at least six months
but where units are re-circulated to another program recipient after a set period. Transitional
housing may be designated for a homeless individual or family transitioning to permanent
housing. Supportive housing as defined in Section 50675.14 of the Health & Safety Code has no
limit on the length of stay, is linked to onsite or offsite services, and is occupied by a target
population, including low income persons with mental disabilities, AIDS, substance abuse or
chronic health conditions or persons whose disabilities originated before the person turned 18.
Services typically include assistance designed to meet the needs of the target population in
retaining housing, living and working in the community, and/or improving health and may include
case management, mental health treatment and life skills. According to state law, jurisdictions
must explicitly permit transitional and supportive housing as a residential use in their zoning
codes. The Tiburon Zoning Ordinance treats transitional and supportive housing as permitted
residential uses, and they are subject to the same restrictions as other residential uses in any of
the Town’s residential zones. Dwelling units are conditionally permitted in the neighborhood
commercial (NC) and village commercial (VC) zones, but transitional and supportive housing is
not specifically identified as a conditionally permitted use in these zones. Residential uses are
not permitted in any other non-residential zone. As a result, the housing element contains
Program H-s to revise the Zoning Ordinance to specifically identify transitional and supportive
housing as conditionally permitted uses in the NC and VC zones.
Emergency Shelters
Emergency shelters are permitted by right in the neighborhood commercial (NC) and village
commercial (VC) zones. Below are performance standards, consistent with State law,
established in the Tiburon Zoning Ordinance, for emergency shelters:
An Emergency Shelter shall meet the following development and performance standards:
(1)     On-site management and on-site security shall be provided during hours when the
        emergency shelter is in operation.
(2)     Adequate external lighting shall be provided for security purposes. The lighting shall be
        stationary, directed away from adjacent properties and public rights-of-way, and of
        intensity compatible with the surrounding area.
(3)     The development may provide one or more of the following specific common facilities for
        the exclusive use of the residents and staff:
        a. Central cooking and dining room(s).
        b. Recreation room.
        c. Counseling center.
       Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                       91

        d. Child care facilities.
        e. Other support services.
(4)     Parking and outdoor facilities shall be designed to provide security for residents, visitors,
        employees and the surrounding area.
(5)     A refuse storage area shall be provided that is completely enclosed with masonry walls
        not less than five feet high with a solid-gated opening and that is large enough to
        accommodate a standard-sized trash bin adequate for use on the parcel, or other
        enclosures as approved by the Review Authority. The refuse enclosure shall be
        accessible to refuse collection vehicles.
(6)     The agency or organization operating the shelter shall comply with the following
        requirements:
        a. Temporary shelter shall be available to residents for no more than six months. No
            individual or household may be denied emergency shelter because of an inability to
            pay.
        b. Staff and services shall be provided to assist residents to obtain permanent shelter
            and income.
        c. The provider shall have a written management plan including, as applicable,
            provisions for staff training, neighborhood outreach, security, screening of residents to
            insure compatibility with services provided at the facility, and for training, counseling,
            and treatment programs for residents.
(7)     No emergency shelter shall be located within three hundred feet of another emergency
        homeless shelter site.
(8)     The facility shall be in, and shall maintain at all times, good standing with Town and/or
        State licenses, if required by these agencies for the owner(s), operator(s), and/or staff on
        the proposed facility.
(9)     The maximum number of beds or clients permitted to be served (eating, showering and/or
        spending the night) nightly shall not exceed ten persons.
Manufactured Housing and Employee Housing
Pursuant to Government Code Section 65852.3, Tiburon allows the installation of manufactured
homes on a foundation on lots zoned for conventional single-family dwellings, subject to the
same development standards as other new single-family dwellings.
In accordance with Health and Safety Code Section 17021.5, housing providing
accommodations for six or fewer employees is considered a residential use of a single family
structure. The Town does not require a conditional use permit, variance, or other zoning
clearance for employee housing for six or fewer employees that is not required of a family
dwelling of the same type in the same zone.
       Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                      92
Single Room Occupancy (SRO)
The Town permits hotels and motels, including single room occupancy hotels, in the
neighborhood commercial (NC) and village commercial (VC) zones with a conditional use permit.
Cecilia Place was approved and constructed to be similar to an SRO, although the units are
called “studios.” SRO’s are a permitted use in the affordable housing overlay zone. The zoning
code allows higher densities for SRO’s. Studio dwelling units are counted at a 1.5:1 ratio
provided that each unit does not exceed 600 square feet in floor area.
Housing for Persons with Disabilities
Chapter 671, Statutes of 2001 (Senate Bill 520) requires localities to analyze potential and actual
constraints upon the development, maintenance and improvement of housing for persons with
disabilities and to demonstrate local efforts to remove governmental constraints that hinder the
locality from meeting the need for housing for persons with disabilities. In addition, as part of the
required constraints program, the element must include programs that remove constraints or
provide reasonable accommodations for housing designed for persons with disabilities.
The Town adopted a reasonable accommodation ordinance in 2012 (Municipal Code Chapter
16, Article IX) to provide a procedure to request reasonable accommodation for persons with
disabilities seeking equal housing under the Federal Fair Housing Act and the California Fair
Employment and Housing Act in the application of zoning laws and other land use regulations,
policies and procedures. The Director of Community Development reviews and approves a
request for reasonable accommodation as long as no other discretionary permit approval is
required.
Most publicly-owned facilities in the Town have been retrofitted so that they are fully accessible
to disabled residents. Where accessibility may impede a disabled person’s ability to participate in
a public meeting, the Town provides reasonable accommodation with 48 hour notice.
Housing Element programs related to the provision of affordable housing for special needs
households will ensure that new affordable housing units for people with disabilities will be
created as part of future affordable housing development.
As a small community, the Planning and Building Divisions of the Town are able to provide
personalized service to each resident. Requests to modify homes to meet the needs of the
disabled are handled on a case-by-case basis, with staff working closely with applicants to
accommodate their needs. The Zoning Ordinance facilitates exterior improvements for physically
handicapped residents (e.g., an access ramp) by establishing them as minor permits, approvable
by Town staff, and waiving the requirement for a Design Review public hearing. The Town
administratively approves building permits for wheelchair lifts and elevators. Wheelchair ramps
are not considered to be structures under the Tiburon Zoning Code and are not required to meet
        Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                   93

setbacks. The Town has the authority to modify parking standards to accommodate the needs of
the disabled and has demonstrated its willingness to do so in the past.
The Building Division administers Title 24 provisions consistently for all disabilities-related
construction and responds to complaints regarding any violations. The Town has not adopted
any amendments to the 2013 California Building Code that conflict with the ADA. There are no
restrictions on lowered countertops, widened doorways, adjustable showerheads, or other
adaptations that meet the needs of the disabled.
The Housing Element contains policies and implementing programs to ensure reasonable
accommodation and equal access to housing for people with disabilities in the Town’s zoning,
permit processing and building codes. In implementation of this policy, the Town has designated
an ADA Coordinator to ensure compliance with the Town’s Reasonable Accommodation
Ordinance and the provisions of the ADA, and to serve as the primary contact for disabled
residents with questions, concerns, and requests regarding reasonable accommodation
procedures and practices.
Local Permit Fees
Fees associated with the permit process may often act as a constraint to the development of
affordable housing. Fees are related to processing, inspection, installation and plan storage.
These fees are limited by California law to the cost to the various agencies to perform these
services.
Tiburon charges building permit fees based on the valuation of the project, in accordance with
the California Building Code. In addition to the basic permit fee, each permit includes fees for
business license, encroachment, street impact, General Plan maintenance and storm water
runoff impact. Building permit and impact fees are collected at the time the building permit is
issued.
As the Town of Tiburon is not a full-service municipality, numerous agencies and special districts
levy fees on new development for the provision of basic urban services. These agencies and
special districts include the following:
(1)      Reed Union School District
(2)      Marin Municipal Water District
(3)      Sanitary District Number 5 of Marin County
(4)      Richardson Bay Sanitary District
(5)      Sanitary District Number 2 of Marin County
(6)      Tiburon Fire Protection District
(7)      Southern Marin Fire Protection District
        Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                     94

The table below shows typical planning fees in Tiburon in 2013. Planning fees are collected at
the time the application is submitted.
       Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                               95
Town of Tiburon Fees (2013)
                                        Single Family Residence                  10-Unit Condo Project
     FEE TYPE / DESCRIPTION
                                       AMOUNT           HIGH AMOUNT           AMOUNT          HIGH AMOUNT
 PLAN CHECK                          $           3,067   $        3,067     $         9,788     $        9,788
 BUILDING PERMIT                     $           4,718   $        4,718     $        15,059     $       15,059
 BUSINESS LICENSE                    $             975   $          975     $         4,800     $        4,800
 PLAN STORAGE                        $             250   $          250     $           250     $          250
 CA SEISMIC TAX                      $              81   $           81     $           400     $          400
 PLUMBING                            $             472   $          472     $         1,506     $        1,506
 ELECTRICAL                          $             944   $          944     $         3,012     $        3,012
 MECHANICAL                          $             425   $          425     $         1,355     $        1,355
 GRADING                             $              75   $           75     $           125     $          125
 ENCROACHMENT                        $             235   $          235     $           235     $          235
 STREET IMPACT                       $           8,125   $        8,125     $        40,000     $       40,000
 TRAFFIC MITIGATION                  $           6,000   $        6,000     $        42,600     $       42,600
 D/R COMPLIANCE                      $             150   $          150     $           250     $          250
 GENERAL PLAN MAINTENANCE            $             663   $          663     $         2,106     $        2,106
  S.WATER RUN OFF IMPV. FEE          $           4,875   $        4,875     $        24,000     $       24,000
  TECHNOLOGY FEE                     $           1,597   $        1,597     $         6,425     $        6,425
  CA BLDG. STD. AD. FUND             $              33   $           33     $           160     $          160
                         SUB TOTAL   $          32,685   $       32,685     $       152,071     $      152,071
 DESIGN REVIEW                       $           2,825   $        2,825     $         2,825     $        2,825
 GRADING, FILLING, OR
 EARTHWORK REQUIRING DESIGN          $             805   $          805     $           805     $          805
 REVIEW APPROVAL
 ENVIRONMENTAL REVIEW                $              50   $        1,600     $            50     $        1,600
   TOWN OF TIBURON SUB TOTAL         $          36,365   $       37,915     $       155,751     $      157,301
 SCHOOL DISTRICT FEE                 $           4,557   $        4,557     $        22,400     $       22,400
 WATER INSTALLATION FEES             $           4,420   $        5,290     $        44,200     $       44,200
 WATER CONNECTION FEES (BUY
                                     $           7,022   $       24,578 $            58,520 $           58,520
 INTO SYSTEM)
 SEWER HOOKUP SANITARY
                                     $           5,000   $       17,000     $        35,000     $       41,000
 DISTRICT NO 5
 FIRE PROTECTION DISTRICT
                                     $             188   $          423     $           188     $          423
 REVIEW FEE
    SPECIAL DISTRICT SUB TOTAL       $          21,187   $       51,848     $       160,308     $      166,543
                      GRAND TOTAL    $          57,552   $       89,763     $       316,059     $      323,844
 ASSUMED DEVELOPMENT IN SQ FT                     3,255           3,255               16,000            16,000
 ASSUMED CONSTRUCTION COST
                                     $             250   $          250     $           270     $          270
 PER SQ FT
 ASSUMED IMPERVIOUS AREA           3,250 X 1.5 = 4,875                  16,000 X 1.5 = 24,000
 ESTIMATED CONSTRUCTION COST         $        813,750    $      813,750     $     4,320,000     $    4,320,000
 ASSUMED LAND VALUE 0.5 ACRE
                                     $      1,100,000    $    1,100,000     $     5,000,000     $    5,000,000
 FOR SFR, 0.75 FOR MF PROJECT
 TOTAL DEVELOPMENT COST              $      1,971,302    $    2,003,513     $     9,636,059     $    9,643,844
 PROPORTION OF FEES/
 EXACTIONS VERSUS TOTAL                  2.92%              4.48%              3.28%               3.36%
 DEVELOPMENT COST
Source: Town of Tibuon, 2013
          Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                                     96
Town fees are based primarily on the valuation of the construction. The fees charged by other
agencies are based upon square feet of construction (school district), on average annual usage
in the neighborhood (water district), or the cost of the infrastructure for the site. Therefore, larger
projects would have proportionally higher permit fees for each agency. As an example, the Town
collected over $150,000 in permit fees for the 25-unit Chandlers Gate project, which was valued
at $5.5 million at the time of construction, although numerous fees were waived for the below
market units within the project.
The following charts show the total development fees that would be charged for the two
hypothetical developments in Marin County jurisdictions. The figures include planning and
building fess and impact fees. The charts illustrate the division between jurisdiction fees and non-
jurisdiction fees. In 2011, the sum of development fees for a single family home ranged from
$37,987 to $76,617, with an average of $46,633 and a median of $41,542. The sum of
development fees for a ten-unit condo ranged from $258,968 to $433,528, with an average of
$321,071 and a median of $300,754.
        Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                    97
The following charts illustrate the contribution of planning and building fees and impact fees to
the total charged by each jurisdiction. It is evident that impact fees are the greater source of
variation in development costs between jurisdictions. In Mill Valley and Corte Madera alone,
sewer fees are controlled by the jursidiction rather than by an independent sanitary district. To
enable a clearer cross-jursidiction comparision, these jurisdiction-controlled sewer fees have
been excluded from the totals below.
       Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                    98
For a single family home, the median sum of planning and building fees is $11,511, with a range
of $7,743 to $14,129. By contrast, the median sum of impact fees is $9,183, but the range is
much wider at $3,750 to $28,463. For a ten-unit condo, the median sum of planning and building
fees is $56,702, with a range of $19,993 to $76,553. The median impact fee is $83,648, with a
very broad range of $30,000 to $207,300.
School impact fees are set by the school district, water connection and impact fees are set by the
water district and sewer connection and impact fees are set by the sanitary district. Water and
sewer fees are fairly consistent across the surveyed jurisdictions.
       Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                  99
Housing Element Update 2015-2023 10
Parking Standards
Tiburon requires off street parking for all new residential development. For mixed use projects
the parking requirement must be satisfied for all uses unless a parking variance is granted.
Generally, if a mixed use project cannot provide off-street parking, the Town supports shared
parking arrangements. Variances are also granted to reduce the overall parking requirement or
to allow tandem parking. Modifications to allow flexible parking through an exception process
rather than a variance would make this process easier, yet still provide sufficient Town review.
Below is a comparison of the Town’s parking standards to other communities in Marin County.
In 2012, pursuant to Housing Element Program H-y, the Town implemented reduced and flexible
parking standards in the affordable housing overlay zone. Depending on project characteristics
and availability of on street parking, flexible parking standards may include shared parking, joint
use parking, off-site parking, allowances for reduced standards depending on location (such as
near transit), and modified parking stall dimensions and tandem parking. The updated
standards recognize that smaller, more affordable housing near transit and services will generate
fewer trips, lesser area-wide impacts and will require less parking.
The Town charges a street impact fee equal to 1% of the project valuation. The street impact fee
nexus study was originally completed in April 1999 and updated in October 2004.
The Town also charge a Stormwater Impact Fee based on $1 per square foot of new impervious
project created by the project. The nexus study for the Stormwater Impact Fee was completed in
March 2004. The fee has not changed since that time.
       Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                 101

The Town’s Traffic Mitigation Fee is an exaction applied to new development that generates new
additional traffic in Tiburon. The fee applies to residential and commercial projects, and requires
that the project pay its pro rata share per each new PM peak trip contributing to each intersection
where improvements are needed per the General Plan. The Town’s traffic engineering
consultant completed a comprehensive update of the traffic model and fee structure in 2006.
The impact of this exaction on high density housing is limited for two reasons. First, the peak
hour trip generation rate for multi-family housing in Tiburon is less than half of that for single
family homes (0.5 trips per unit versus 1.15 trips per unit), so that the fee for high density
housing units is only 43% of a single family home. Second, the only multi-family or high density
housing projects constructed in Tiburon in recent years are “affordable” projects. The Town has,
and will continue to, waive traffic mitigation fees for these units, pursuant to its zoning regulations
and its Traffic Mitigation Fee resolution.
The Town has had inclusionary zoning regulations and an affordable housing in-lieu fee since
1988. Updated in May 2006 in accordance with Program H-22 of the previous Housing Element,
the Town’s inclusionary zoning regulations apply to residential development creating two or more
new dwelling units, with two exceptions for 1) construction of a two-family dwelling on an existing
lot in the R-2 zone and 2) the subdivision of a lot or parcel into two lots, wherein no more than a
combined total of two dwelling units total could be constructed under applicable zoning
regulations on the resulting lots. Regulations are as follows:
(1)      Developments of two to six lots or dwelling units must pay an in-lieu fee based on a
         requirement of fifteen percent of the units being affordable. In-lieu housing fees are
         calculated on the basis of the difference between the affordable purchase price of a
         dwelling unit for which a moderate income four-person family earning eighty percent of
         median income can qualify, and the estimated cost of constructing a market rate unit of
         appropriate size.
(2)      Developments with seven to twelve units are required to provide fifteen percent of the
         total number of units as affordable by very low, low, or moderate income households, with
         a minimum of five percent affordable to very low or low income households. In
         developments for which only one affordable unit is required, it may be for moderate
         income households.
(3)      Developments of more than twelve new lots or units must provide twenty percent of the
         total number as units affordable by very low, low, or moderate income households; a
         minimum of five percent must be affordable to very low or low income households.
(4)      Inclusionary units must have the same exterior appearance, interior amenities, and
         square footage of non-inclusionary units. Exceptions may be permitted as a concession
         or incentive under density bonus laws.
        Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                    102

(5)     Developments of seven or more units may pay in-lieu fees if the Town determines that
        physical or non-governmental constraints preclude the development of on-site
        inclusionary units.
(6)     In calculating inclusionary units needed, any decimal fraction less than one-half is
        disregarded and any decimal fraction equal to or greater than one-half is construed as
        requiring one affordable unit. For payment of in-lieu fees, the fee is calculated using exact
        decimal fractions.
(7)     The in-lieu housing fee calculation is based on the actual cost to produce a modest-sized
        dwelling affordable to a 4-person household with 80% of the median income. Variables
        used in the calculation are updated at the time of application, in consultation with the
        Marin Housing Authority. These variables include: dwelling size, construction costs, land
        and site development costs, current income limits, and mortgage terms and interest rate.
        Assuming a 1,500 square foot house, land and site development costs of $350,000,
        construction costs of $225 per square foot, a household income of $80,950, an interest
        rate of 4.5%, and a 5% down payment, the in-lieu fee would be $405,000 per unit.
Recognizing that water connection fees may serve as an constraint to affordable housing
development, the Marin Municipal Water District (MMWD) offers a 50% fee reduction for qualified
affordable housing projects (affordable to low and moderate income households for at least 30
years, with at least 50% of the project affordable to low income households) and second units
deed-restricted to rents affordable to lower-income households for a minimum of 10 years.
These fees, some of which are substantial, could act as a constraint to the development of
affordable housing. The Town of Tiburon already offers fee waivers or reductions for affordable
housing units, but is recommending the additional steps outlined in Program H-d to actively
promote fee reductions or waivers by other agencies and Program H-v to waive or subsidize fees
for the acquisition of affordable rental housing.
Codes and Enforcement
The Town has adopted the 2013 California Building Code, the 2013 California Plumbing Code,
the 2013 California Mechanical Code, the 2013 California Electrical Code, the 2013 Fire Code,
the 2013 California Energy Code, the 2013 Residential Code, the 2013 CALGreen Code, and the
1997 Uniform Housing Code. State law allows local governing bodies to amend the building
standards in the new codes as long as they are more restrictive than the state standards and are
based on findings that the amendments are necessary due to local climatic, topographic or
geological conditions.
The Town has amended the Building Code to require an existing structure with a substandard
roof to replace the entire roof with a Class A roof or noncombustible roof when alterations or
repairs to the existing roof involves more than fifty percent of the total existing roof area. Other
       Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                     103
amendments relate to required address markings, a requirement for guards at waterfront
bulkheads, fixed piers and gangways, and construction time limits. The Town has adopted
certain voluntary measures of the 2013 CALGreen code as mandatory measures for new
residential and non-residential construction (not including additions). These are Tier 1 measures
related to planning and design, water efficiency and conservation, material conservation and
resource efficiency, and environmental quality. In addition, the Town has adopted enhanced
energy efficiency standards for large homes (over 3,500 square feet in size) None of the building
code amendments pose a special constraint to the production of housing.
The Tiburon Building Division requires a Residential Building Report (RBR) upon the sale of
dwelling units to ensure that basic life-safety code violations are identified and corrected before a
new owner occupies the building. If these correcting deficiencies pose a hardship to the property
owner, residential rehabilitation loans are available for very low income homeowners through the
Marin Housing Authority. If illegal units or uses are discovered during the inspection associated
with the RBR, the Building Division requires these units to be brought into compliance with the
code (legalized) or abated. The impact of this on the number of housing units has been
negligible, as few illegal units are discovered. Nevertheless, Program H-y calls for the distribution
of a handout explaining the “best practices” and procedures for legalizing an unauthorized
secondary dwelling unit.
On- and Off-Site Improvements
On-/off-site improvements (not including basic infrastructure and installation of public utilities)
typically include parking, drainage improvements, and streets. These improvements can
constitute constraints to the development of affordable housing, although not market-rate
housing of the type constructed in Tiburon. Chapter 13-8 of the Tiburon Municipal Code requires
new construction on lots fronting unimproved streets to install curbs and gutter as determined by
the Town Engineer. With respect to streets, the Town allows narrow streets (18-20 feet) with
occasional “parking bays” as opposed to wider streets with parallel parking on one or both sides.
This reduces construction costs considerably. Drainage improvements must be adequate to
meet standard engineering criteria to prevent damage and flooding. With respect to on-site
parking requirements for affordable housing projects, the Zoning Code makes provisions for
flexible parking standards and “shared parking” to reduce this constraint. Tiburon also allows off-
site parking with long-term leases. This is a common occurrence in Downtown Tiburon.
Infrastructure Availability and Constraints
Water. Marin Municipal Water District (MMWD), a public utility governed by an elected Board,
provides water service to Tiburon as well as most of the eastern Marin cities south of Novato.
The District serves a population of approximately 186,000. District facilities include seven area
reservoirs, three water treatment plants, storage tanks, pump stations and lines.
        Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                  104

The primary source of water for the District is rainfall stored in area reservoirs. The District also
maintains a line inter-tie with the North Marin Water District for Russian River water. Area rainfall
water sources are limited by water reservoir storage capacity. The total maximum capacity of the
MMWD is 79,556 acre-feet. The operational yield of the facilities is 28,500 acre-feet/per year.
An additional 7,400 acre-feet is imported from the Russian River annually on average. Average
annual water use is 28,009 acre-feet.
The District estimates that the population it serves will grow to 206,500 in the year 2035 (ABAG
Projections). This population has a projected annual water demand of 24,486 acre-feet. In
2035, total water use is projected to be 28,381 acre-feet. MMWD has a contract for water from
the Russian River, in force until June 30, 2040, which provides up to 14,300 acre-feet of water
per year. To respond to possible supply deficits, MMWD is continuing its efforts to increase water
conservation through demand management measures identified in the 2010 Urban Water
Management Plan. The District has concluded that it has sufficient supplies to meet water
demands during normal and dry water years.
Tiburon has adequate water supplies for the additional housing anticipated in this Housing
Element. In the event of a water shortage resulting in limited supplies for available for new
development, MMWD policy is to give preference and priority to any project containing an
affordable housing component.
Water systems are in place within existing developed areas, and new residences typically need
only to supply lateral connections to the water mains maintained by MMWD. Water extensions
are subject to the regulations and permit procedures of the service provider. To be eligible for a
new water service connection, a property must front an existing water main capable of providing
the degree of service requested while maintaining its ability to adequately serve the area.
Should MMWD determine that the property does not have frontage, as defined in the district's
code, or that the structure to be served is more than 125 feet from a water main, or that the
existing facilities are inadequate to provide the service requested, MMWD will require a pipeline
extension or upgrade.
There is also a severe lack of water pressure in portions of the southern unincorporated Paradise
Drive area. The Marin Municipal Water District has no current plans or funding source to upgrade
the capacity of the substandard water lines serving this area. Due to the inadequate water
pressure, the Tiburon Fire Protection District requires new development to fit the available fire
flow in the area, which can limit the square footage of new homes and residential additions in this
area. Expanding the capacity of the water pipes serving this area would be very expensive due
to the unusually lengthy and winding nature of Paradise Drive within which the existing water
pipes are located. The lack of sufficient water pressure and the high cost of an upgrade
       Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                    105
constitute severe infrastructure constraints to development of housing in the southern
unincorporated Paradise Drive area.
Sewer. The southern end of Tiburon is serviced by Sanitary District No. 5 of Marin County. The
District currently maintains a main treatment facility just east of downtown Tiburon, a smaller
facility on the east side of the Tiburon peninsula, 24 pumping stations and miles of sewer lines.
The District has a ten-year capital improvement plan to rehabilitate or replace aging components
of its wastewater treatment infrastructure. In 2008-2009, the District installed two new package
wastewater treatment plants at a cost of $1.2 million at its smaller facility on the eastern
peninsula, increasing the District’s permitted dry weather treatment capacity from 12,000 to
40,000 gallons per day. A new sewer line serving 63 existing homes along Paradise Drive was
also completed, and additional service lines can be added to the expanded system. The
treatment plant’s current capacity could accommodate approximately 16 new single family units
in the Paradise Cove area.
In 2012, the District began construction to rehabilitate the main wastewater treatment plant. The
improvements involved replacing aging equipment that had me their useful life, replacing
inefficient equipment with energy-efficient equipment, and installing some additional piping to the
plant in order to use the plants’ off-line tanks to increase wet weather capacity to minimize
blending events during the winter period. The treatment plant’s permitted capacity of .98 million
gallons per day (MGC) remains unchanged. The main treatment plant has capacity to accept
future development of the 68 sites located within the service area and identified in the Available
Land Inventory.
The northern end of Tiburon is serviced by the Richardson Bay Sanitary District and by Sanitary
District No. 2 of Marin County. The permitted treatment capacity allocation for the Richardson
Bay Sanitary District is 6,346.9 Equivalent Dwelling Units (EDU's). Approximately 23% of the
system capacity is available for 1,472.5 additional dwelling units. Sanitary District No. 2 also has
adequate capacity to serve the limited remaining residential development potential in its service
area.
Other Utilities. Electric, gas and telephone service are available to new housing development.
Such service must be extended in the case of large undeveloped parcels, while it generally
exists on reuse or redevelopment sites.
Environmental. Tiburon is located in the seismically active San Francisco Bay region of
California. Due to its proximity to the San Andreas fault system, the planning area has been
historically subjected to periodic strong damaging earthquakes. Although no active faults are
mapped within the Tiburon Planning Area, there are several dormant faults under Richardson
Bay and San Francisco Bay. Tiburon also has many areas of steep slopes which are subject to
        Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                   106

ground failure that includes landslides and mudslides, as well as areas containing bay mud,
which is subject to liquefaction.
In order to mitigate these environmental impacts, the Town has adopted several policies in its
Safety Element. Policy SE-7 discourages development on slopes exceeding 40%, and Policy
SE-8 discourages development below or in the path of gullies which are susceptible to debris
flow mudslides. The Town requires detailed geotechnical investigations for development
proposals and requires development in areas subject to landsliding to comply with the Town’s
Landslide Mitigation Policy, which requires adequate repair and improvements to landslides and
to potential landslide areas. Section 13-7 of the Tiburon Municipal Code also requires new
construction to implement slope stabilization and drainage improvements when, in the judgment
of the building official, site development may result in unstable slopes or water flows that imperil
structures, slopes or adjoining properties.
Flooding. In the Tiburon planning area, lands that flood are not common. The areas that flood
are found primarily near the shorelines of San Francisco Bay and Richardson Bay. The Federal
Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) has mapped special flood hazard areas in the Tiburon
Planning Area. Properties in the special flood hazard zones are subject to inundation by the 1%
annual chance flood.
Areas of special flood hazards, as identified by FEMA in Flood Insurance Rate Maps, are subject
to the flood damage prevention provisions of Chapter 13D of the Tiburon Municipal Code.
Generally, new construction and substantial improvements must be designed to elevate the
lowest floor, including the basement, at least two feet above the base flood elevation. Structures
must also be anchored to prevent floatation, collapse or lateral movement, and be constructed
with flood-resistant materials and with construction methods that minimize flood damage.
Noise. The noise element of the Town of Tiburon General Plan 2020 identifies U.S. Highway 101
and Tiburon Boulevard as the primary sources of noise in the planning area. Residential
development in areas where exterior noise levels exceed 65 dB may require noise insulation
features included in the design. In the Tiburon Housing Element area, only sites fronting Tiburon
Boulevard may be subject to this noise level. Where appropriate, the Town requires an
acoustical analysis so that noise mitigation measure can be incorporated into the project design.
Conclusion. All identified environmental constraints may be mitigated to a level allowing
development on all sites in the inventory to occur within the current planning period.
Other Agencies
State agencies such as the Bay Conservation and Development Commission (BCDC) and
federal agencies such as the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers are often a factor in the delay of
        Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                  107

development in Tiburon due to its bayside location, as both agencies have jurisdiction over areas
along the shoreline. The U.S. Army Corps and the State Department of Fish and Game have
jurisdiction over wetlands and riparian corridors, among other sensitive resources. Processing of
permits from these agencies can take a minimum of 60 to 90 days and typically may not be
initiated until local approvals are final. A program of early consultation with such agencies is
proposed.
Evaluation of Inclusionary Zoning as a Constraint
In 1994, the California Coalition for Rural Housing (CCRH) conducted the first statewide survey
on inclusionary housing and found that 12% of statewide jurisdictions had an inclusionary
program. In 2003, CCRH and Non-Profit Housing Association of Northern California (NPH)
collaboratively conducted a follow-up survey, which revealed that the number of jurisdictions with
inclusionary housing had jumped to 20%. The 2003 survey generated interest in obtaining more
precise production data on the types of housing built and the income levels served. In 2006, a
new study was launched to determine the growth in inclusionary programs statewide, and
provide a detailed snapshot of the housing that is being produced by these programs. Affordable
Housing by Choice — Trends in California Inclusionary Programs (NPH, 2007) is the most recent
survey of inclusionary ordinances statewide. The study looked at housing produced through
inclusionary programs from January 1999 through June 2006 and found that:
(1)      Nearly one-third of California jurisdictions now have Inclusionary Programs.
(2)      More than 80,000 Californians have housing through Inclusionary Programs.
(3)      Most Inclusionary housing is integrated within market-rate developments.
(4)      Inclusionary housing provides shelter for those most in need — Nearly three-quarters of
         the housing produced through Inclusionary Programs is affordable to people with some of
         the lowest incomes. These findings shed new light on the popular perception that
         inclusionary policies create ownership units mostly for moderate-income families.
(5)      Lower-Income Households are best served through partnerships — When market-rate
         developers work with affordable housing developers to meet their inclusionary
         requirement, the units are more likely to serve lower-income households. Joint ventures
         play a particularly important role in developing units for households most in need. One-
         third of all the housing built through Inclusionary Programs resulted from such
         partnerships.
The Town’s inclusionary housing regulations require residential projects of two or more new lots
or dwelling units to pay an in-lieu housing fee or develop a minimum of number of inclusionary
        Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                  108

units affordable to very low, low or moderate income households. Developments of 3 to 6 units
pay an in-lieu fee based on 15 percent of the units being affordable. Developments of 7 to 12
units must include a minimum of 15 percent inclusionary units affordable to very low, low and
moderate income households, and development of more than 12 units must provide 20 percent
inclusionary units. Five percent of the total units must be affordable to very low or low income
households. The in-lieu fee is $405,000 for each affordable unit that is required but not built.
Inclusionary units must be comparable in size, interior amenity level and exterior design to
market rate units. However, the Town may provide an exception to this requirement as an
incentive or concession under density bonus law.
The inclusionary requirements were adopted in 1998 and updated in 2006 and 2012.
Developers typically choose to pay in-lieu fees, which the Town has used to help construct
affordable units. In general, the inclusionary ordinance has not constrained the development of
housing in Tiburon. The inclusionary program has been in effect for 25 years and is well known
by members of the real estate and development community. As a result, the cost of producing
the inclusionary units, or paying the in-lieu fees, is factored into the cost of land.
The Town of Tiburon’s inclusionary requirements are similar to those of other jurisdictions in
Marin County, as shown below, and do not pose a constraint to residential development. Many
communities offer a variety of concessions or incentives for construction of affordable units,
including but not limited to, density bonuses or incentives of equal financial value, waiver or
modification of development standards, provision of direct financial assistance, and deferral or
reduction of payment of fees.
       Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                   109

             Comparison of Inclusionary Housing Requirements in Marin County
                                                                 Length of
                  Minim um Project
Jurisdiction                         Percent Required            Affordability        Incentives
                  Size
                                                                 Controls
                                                                                      None unless significant
Corte Madera      1 unit             10+ units: 25%              55 years
                                                                                      affordability
                                     5-14 units: 15%; 15+ units:                      Density bonus, priority
Larkspur          5 units                                        Permanent
                                     20%                                              processing
                                                                                      Permit fees w aived, density
Marin County      2 units            20%                         Permanent
                                                                                      bonus
                                     15%, but typically require  Permanent, unless
Mill Valley       2 units            at least 20% through        ow ner occupies unit None
                                     review                      55+ years
                                     Dependent on number of
Novato            3 units                                        Permanent            None
                                     units. Max: 20+ units: 20%
                                                                                      None unless significant
San Anselmo       10 units           15%                         Permanent
                                                                                      affordability
                                     2-10 units: 10%; 11-20
San Rafael        2 units                                        55 years             Density bonus
                                     units: 15%; 21+ units: 20%
                  Condo conversion   15% of units, and not less                       Density bonus, expedited
Sausalito                                                        No response
                  affecting 5+units  than one.                                        processing
                                     Less than 12 units: 15%;                         None unless significant
Tiburon           2 lots/units                                   Permanent
                                     More than 12 units: 20%                          affordability
Source: 2008 Marin County Housing Workbook
       Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                                     110
  E       Sustainability, Climate Change and Energy
Sustainability generally means living in a way that
does not compromise the ability of future
generations to enjoy the same quality of life.
Housing – and the way people choose to live in
their homes -- affects sustainability in many ways.
Building and maintaining homes uses resources
and can negatively impact water and air quality.
Homes are also a significant source of greenhouse
gas emissions, which contribute to climate change.
Energy used to heat, cool and power homes
releases carbon dioxide and other greenhouse
gases into the atmosphere. Moreover, housing                                  Source: Marin Countywide Plan
patterns affect how often and how far people have to
drive.
Providing walk-able, transit-oriented neighborhoods is one way a community can promote
sustainability and reduce the community’s greenhouse gas emissions. In recent decades, local,
state and national attention has been focused on promoting smart growth and transit-oriented
development. According to the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), "Smart growth
development practices support national environmental goals by preserving open spaces and
parkland and protecting critical habitat; improving transportation choices, including walking,
bicycling, and transit, which reduces emissions from automobiles; promoting brown field
redevelopment; and reducing impervious cover, which improves water quality.”
Transportation and land use development are strongly interrelated. The more suburban the
development (i.e., low density housing that causes residents to live further from urban centers),
the less viable are mass transit systems and other alternative modes of transportation, such as
walking or biking, and the more dependent residents become on the automobile. Studies have
shown that people who live near transit drive up to 30% less than suburban residents and that
low-density suburban development generates twice as much greenhouse gas emissions per
capita than a more dense urban development pattern. 2 Since vehicles contribute over 40 percent
of greenhouse gases in Tiburon, and over 50 percent in the Bay Area, finding ways to encourage
people to drive fewer miles is important.
2
  California Air Pollution Control Officers Association, “Quantifying Greenhouse Gas Mitigation Measures,” August
2010.
         Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                                111

Local governments can promote the concept of “whole livable neighborhoods” by prioritizing
pedestrian and bicycle access, and by encouraging — or seeking to retain or expand —
recreation areas, parks, trails, gathering places, and neighborhood services near residences.
Examples of programs include: (1) build “complete streets” that provide safe mobility for all
users, including motorists, bicyclists, pedestrians and transit riders; (2) allow minor zoning
variations to promote sustainable energy or other environmental goals; (3) prioritize review and
permitting for projects that meet certain green building standards; and (4) compensate for the
increased cost of green building by offering a density bonus for outstanding projects or other
incentives.
The two fundamental means for reducing greenhouse gas emissions from electricity and
natural gas use in homes are decreasing consumption through efficiency and behavioral
change, and switching from fossil fuels to renewable sources. Because the current housing
stock will last many decades, it is important to find ways to promote sustainability in existing
housing. Examples of programs include: (1) provide free or low-cost energy audits and
weatherization for homes; (2) participate in or form a property assessment clean energy program
to allow property owners to finance energy efficiency and renewable energy projects for their
homes; (3) adopt green building and energy efficiency standards that exceed existing statewide
requirements; (4) require energy audits and retrofits before resale of homes; and (5) support
programs to rehabilitate substandard residential units for lower income households, including
loan programs and code enforcement activity.
                                        Energy Conservation
                                        Housing Elements are required to identify opportunities for
                                        energy conservation. Energy costs have increased
                                        significantly over the past several decades, and climate
                                        change concerns have increased the need and desire for
                                        further energy conservation and related “green building”
                                        programs. Buildings use significant energy in their design,
                                        construction and operation. The use of “green building”
                                        techniques and materials can reduce the resources that go
                                        into new construction and make buildings operate much
                                        more efficiently. One common definition of “green building”
                                        is “design and construction practices that significantly
reduce or eliminate the negative impacts of buildings on the environment through energy
efficiency and renewable energy, conservation of materials and resources, water efficiency, site
planning and indoor environmental quality.”
       Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                     112

Title 24 of the California Administrative Code sets forth mandatory energy standards for new
development, and requires adoption of an “energy budget.” In turn, the home building industry
must comply with these standards while localities are responsible for enforcing the energy
conservation regulations. In addition, the State has adopted a Green Building Standards Code
(CALGreen) that initially went in to effect in 2011. Revised in 2013, the new CALGreen code
regulates new, remodeled and expanded residential and non-residential buildings. In addition,
the energy requirements of Title 24 have been made significantly more stringent, with an
approximately 25 percent reduced energy budget for new homes, 30 percent reduction for
commercial buildings, and 14 percent reduction for multi-family structures. The State’s goal is to
increase energy code requirements to achieve net zero energy homes by 2020 and commercial
structures by 2030. The Town has adopted certain voluntary measures of the 2013 CALGreen
code as mandatory measures for new residential and non-residential construction (not including
additions). These are Tier 1 measures related to planning and design, water efficiency and
conservation, material conservation and resource efficiency, and environmental quality.
Utility-related costs can directly impact the affordability of housing in Northern California.
Constructing new homes with energy-conserving features, in addition to retrofitting existing
structures, will result in a reduction in monthly utility costs. There are many ways to determine
how energy efficient an existing building is and, if needed, what improvements can be made.
Examples of energy conservation opportunities include installation of insulation and/or storm
windows and doors, use of natural gas instead of electricity, installation or retrofitting of more
efficient appliances and mechanical or solar energy systems, and building design and orientation
which incorporates energy conservation considerations.
The following are among the alternative ways to meet California energy standards: (1) the use of
passive solar construction techniques that require proper solar orientation, appropriate levels of
thermal mass, south facing windows, and moderate insulation levels; (2) the use of higher
insulation levels in place of thermal mass or energy conserving window orientation; and (3) the
use of active solar water heating in exchange for less insulation and/or energy conserving
window treatments.
Site planning techniques, the use of landscaping, and the layout of new developments can also
reduce energy consumption associated with residential development through reductions in
heating and cooling needs, opportunities to use non-motorized vehicles for transportation, and
reductions in energy inputs to the development of housing. Many modern building design
methods are used to reduce residential energy consumption and are based on proven
techniques. These methods can be categorized in three ways: (1) Building design that keeps
natural heat in during the winter and keeps natural heat out during the summer, reducing air
conditioning and heating demands; (2) Building orientation that uses natural forces to maintain a
        Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                    113

comfortable interior temperature; and (3) Use of landscaping features to moderate interior
temperatures.
Pacific Gas & Electric (PG&E) provides a variety of energy conservation services for residents.
PG&E also participates in several energy assistance programs for lower income households,
which help qualified homeowners and renters, conserve energy and control electricity costs.
These programs include the California Alternate Rates for Energy (CARE) Program and the
Relief for Energy Assistance through Community Help (REACH) Program. The CARE provides
a 15 percent monthly discount on gas and electric rates to income-qualified households, certain
non-profit organizations, agricultural employee housing, homeless shelters, hospices, and other
qualified non-profit group living facilities.
The REACH Program provides one-time energy assistance to customers who are in jeopardy of
losing their energy services due to experiencing an unforeseen or uncontrollable hardship. The
intent of REACH is to assist low-income customers, particularly the elderly, disabled, sick,
working poor, and the unemployed, who are unable to pay for their necessary energy needs.
The Marin Energy Authority is a public, not-for-profit local electricity provider that also promotes
energy conservation and sustainability. The Authority purchases power from clean, renewable
sources, including solar, wind, geothermal, and bioenergy, known as Marin Clean Energy, and
PG&E delivers it to a person’s home or business through the PG&E distribution system and
wires. PG&E does the billing and provides repair and maintenance service to customers. The
Authority provides an option for its customers to purchase electricity that comes from 100
percent renewable energy sources.
The Town of Tiburon encourages energy conservation in new and existing housing through
appropriate land use policies and development standards that reduce energy consumption such
as: promoting redevelopment in the downtown area that is close to transit jobs, community
facilities and shopping; encouraging infill development; planning and zoning for mixed-use and
higher development densities; permitting common wall and cluster development; and promoting
passive and active solar design elements and systems in new and rehabilitated housing.
The Town’s General Plan 2020 contains the following green building policies and programs:
OSC-61: The Town shall continue to pursue opportunities to improve energy efficiency and
reduce resource consumption in Town-owned facilities and operations.
OSC-62: The Town shall apply green building principles to the design, construction, and
operation of new Town and Town-sponsored facilities to provide long-term cost savings and to
serve as an example for the community.
         Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                   114

OSC-63: The Town shall integrate energy efficiency, conservation, and other green building
incentives into the zoning permit and building permit processes.
OSC-p: The Town shall develop an ordinance or guidelines for outlining green building
principles.
The Town requires all new construction and remodeling projects to comply with Title 24 energy
conservation requirements. Building regulations require single family homes over 3,500 square
feet to reduce annual and peak energy consumption using adjustment factors described in
Chapter 13 of the Tiburon Municipal Code. The Town also encourages new development to
incorporate energy saving and renewable energy features through implementation of its design
review guidelines.
In 2007, Tiburon joined the County of Marin and the other ten Marin municipalities, the
Transportation Authority of Marin and the Marin Municipal Water District to form the Marin
Climate and Energy Partnership (MCEP). The agencies work together to reduce greenhouse
gas emissions in government operations and throughout the local communities. MCEP has
developed greenhouse gas inventories and climate action plans for its member cities and has
implemented a wide range of greenhouse gas reduction programs, such as green building
regulations, electric vehicle charging stations, LED streetlights, zero waste initiatives, and green
purchasing policies.
In April 2011 the Tiburon Town Council approved a Climate Action Plan that lays out a path to
achieve greenhouse gas reductions in local government operations and throughout the
community. The Tiburon Climate Action Plan utilizes a greenhouse gas reduction target of 15%
below 2005 levels by the year 2020, a target that is comparable to the state goal. In 2012, the
Town re-inventoried its greenhouse gas emissions and found that community emissions declined
nearly 6% between 2005 and 2010. Emissions from government operations fell by nearly 3%
during the same time period.
Conservation Rebates
PG&E offers a wide range of rebates for energy efficient equipment and appliances, including
furnaces, duct sealing, whole house fans, air handler systems, swimming pool pumps and
motors, water heaters, cool roofs, insulation, room air conditioners, clothes washers,
dishwashers, computer monitors, energy-efficient lighting, and recycling of refrigerators, freezers
and room air conditioners. The Marin Municipal Water District (MMWD) also provides a variety
of rebates for high-efficiency toilets, clothes washers, and water-conserving landscape practices.
Both organizations do a good job of promoting their rebate programs through customer mailings,
company websites, and point-of-sale information.
       Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                    115
Rehabilitation Loans
The Marin Housing Authority provides low-
interest residential rehabilitation loans to very-
low income homeowners to make basic repairs
and improvements, correct substandard
conditions, and eliminate health and safety
hazards. Funds can also be used to include
energy efficiency improvements.
Marin County Energy Watch (MCEW)
Partnership
The MCEW brings together four elements to
provide energy efficiency services and
resources to single and multifamily residential; small, medium and large commercial; and public
agencies and schools in Marin County as described:
(1)     Marin Energy Management Team (MEMT) acts as “energy manager” for public sector
        agencies including local governments, school districts and special districts, and
        specifically addresses the difficulty of reaching smaller public sector institutions. Services
        include audits, technical assistance, engineering, assistance in financing and obtaining
        incentives, specifying and managing projects, energy accounting and reporting,
        procurement, peer meetings and training workshops. MEMT also integrates other state,
        utility, and private energy efficiency programs, filling resource gaps, and addressing
        specific barriers as needed to provide as comprehensive and seamless a delivery of
        services as possible.
(2)     Smart Lights is designed to help small businesses become more energy-efficient. The
        program offers free start-to-finish technical assistance and instant rebates to help defray
        the cost of upgrading and/or repairing existing equipment. Smart Lights can help with
        comprehensive lighting retrofits, refrigeration tune-ups, controls, and seals replacement,
        replacing domestic hot water heaters, and referrals to appropriate HVAC programs.
(3)     California Youth Energy Services (CYES) provides no-cost green house calls to
        homeowners and renters, regardless of income level. The professionally-trained staff
        provides energy assessments and installs free energy and water-saving equipment.
        CYES serves single-family dwellings, 2-4 duplexes, and multifamily units.
        Energy Upgrade California is an energy efficiency program that provides rebates and
        resources to upgrade single family and 2-4 unit multi-family dwellings to save energy and
        water.
       Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                     116

Section V
Housing Goals, Policies and Programs
 A     Housing Goals
Tiburon’s housing goals provide for a variety of
housing opportunities for all economic segments of
the community through new construction and
maintenance of existing housing for an
economically and socially diverse population, while
preserving the character of the community.
Tiburon’s housing goals are:
H-A    Establish a Town leadership role in
       providing a mix of housing types that
       matches the needs of people of all ages and income levels.
H-B    Provide housing for special needs populations that is coordinated with support services.
H-C    Protect and conserve the existing housing stock and mix of unit types.
H-D    Facilitate the development of new infill housing in Downtown Tiburon and on identified
       underutilized sites throughout the Town that have existing infrastructure and few physical
       constraints. Focus development of lower density housing on vacant legal lots incapable of
       further subdivision and on undeveloped parcels where infrastructure constraints, physical
       constraints, and other non-governmental constraints prevent their development with more
       affordable housing. Continue to encourage and legalize secondary dwelling units in
       appropriate locations and use affordable housing in-lieu fees or impact fees on less
       constrained sites.
      Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                 117

  B     Housing Policies and Implementation Programs
Policy statements and implementing programs help define how the Town’s housing goals will be
interpreted and implemented. A policy is a specific statement that guides decision making and
indicates a commitment of the local legislative body to a particular course of action. Programs
define exactly what is to be done to put the policies into practice while working towards the
Town’s housing goals.
Goal H-A
Establish a Town leadership role in providing a mix of housing types that matches
the needs of people of all ages and income levels.
Policies
H-A1 Local Government Leadership and Commitment of Resources. Establish affordable
        housing as an important priority, with local government taking a proactive leadership role
        in working with community groups, property owners, affordable housing providers,
        developers, and other jurisdictions, agencies and stakeholders in implementing the
        Housing Element. Marshal and commit the Town’s political leadership, staff, funding
        sources, and available land resources toward the implementation of the Housing
        Element’s goals, policies and programs.
H-A2 Redevelopment Agency (Town of Tiburon as Successor Agency). Maximize the use
        of housing set-aside monies in support of affordable housing. Tiburon’s solitary
        Redevelopment Project Area includes a portion of the Downtown area where several of
        the sites listed in the Housing Element are located. The Town will seek projects where it
        can expend its Housing Set Aside funds in conjunction with the Marin Housing Authority.
        Those funds will be used toward affordable housing projects in the Tiburon Housing
        Element area and preferably within the Redevelopment Project Area boundary.
H-A3 Affordable Housing In-lieu Fee Fund and Other Funding Sources. The Town will
        seek ways to reduce housing costs for lower income workers and people with special
        needs by using ongoing local funding resources (Housing In-Lieu Fund) and continuing to
        utilize other local, state and federal assistance to the fullest extent. The Town will
        continue to collect and expend affordable housing in-lieu fees for meritorious affordable
        housing projects.
       Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                   118

H-A4 Collaborate with Housing Providers. Work with private non-profit housing groups,
      such as the Tiburon Ecumenical Association and EAH, to identify opportunities for, and
      provide and maintain, affordable housing in Tiburon.
H-A5 Collaborate with Other Marin County Planners. The Town will coordinate housing
      strategies with other jurisdictions in Marin County as appropriate to meet the Town’s
      housing need. Small municipalities rarely have the staff expertise to maximize assistance
      to affordable housing developers, especially in the early stages of project formulation and
      financing. Therefore, the Town supports collaboration of local planners within Marin
      County to implement Housing Element programs for each jurisdiction.
H-A6 Equal Housing Opportunity. Ensure equal housing opportunities for individuals and
      families seeking housing in Tiburon. Ensure that housing seekers are not discriminated
      against, consistent with the Fair Housing Act.
Implementing Programs
      H-a      Focus Town Resources on Housing Opportunity Sites. Focus Town resources
               toward the design, approval, financing, and construction of housing, especially
               affordable housing, on multi-family housing opportunity sites identified in the
               Tiburon Housing Element.
               Responsibility: Town Council, Community Development Department
               Financing: General Fund, Redevelopment Funds, other funding (see funding programs).
               Objectives: Construction of housing on one or more of the housing opportunity sites
               Timeframe: Encourage development of one or more housing opportunity sites by 2022.
      H-b      Improve Community Awareness of Housing Needs, Issues, and Programs.
               The Town will promote the availability of Marin County programs for housing
               construction, homebuyer assistance, rental assistance, Marin Housing Authority
               information, code enforcement, information about affordable housing, fair housing
               and housing rehabilitation through the following means:
               (a)     Maintain a link on the Town’s website that describes housing programs
                       and provides direct links to County agencies that administer the programs.
               (b)     Include contact information on County programs in Town newsletters and
                       other general communications that are sent to residents.
               (c)     Maintain information and handouts at the Town’s public counter.
               (d)     Train selected Town staff to provide referrals.
               (e)     Distribute information on programs at public locations (library, schools).
               (f)     Collaborate with other agencies (County of Marin, Tiburon Ecumenical
                       Association, Marin Housing Authority, Rotary, Chamber of Commerce,
     Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                       119

                   EAH, Housing Council) to prepare presentations and distribute
                   informational materials to improve awareness of housing needs, issues
                   and available housing programs.
          (g)      Distribute materials to neighborhood groups, homeowner associations,
                   religious institutions, businesses, and other interested groups (Rotary,
                   Chamber of Commerce, etc.) in the Tiburon area.
          Responsibility: Community Development Department
          Financing: General Fund.
          Objectives: Obtain and distribute materials; coordinate with other organizations.
          Timeframe: Ongoing
 H-c      Community Outreach When Implementing Housing Element Programs.
          Coordinate with local businesses, housing advocacy groups, neighborhood
          groups, and the Chamber of Commerce and participate in the Marin Consortium
          for Workforce Housing in building public understanding and support for workforce,
          special needs housing and other issues related to housing, including the
          community benefits of affordable housing, mixed use and pedestrian-oriented
          development. The Town will notify a broad representation of the community when
          housing programs are discussed by the Planning Commission or Town Council.
          Specific actions should be linked to the preparation and distribution of materials
          as identified in Program H-b. Specific outreach activities include:
          (a)      Maintain the Housing Element mailing list and send public hearing notices
                   to all interested public, non-profit agencies and affected property owners.
          (b)      Post notices at Town Hall, the library, and the post office.
          (c)      Publish notices in the local newspaper.
          (d)      Post information on the Town’s website.
          (e)      Conduct outreach (workshops, neighborhood meetings) to the community
                   as Housing Element programs are implemented.
          (f)      Provide an informational guide to homeowners explaining the benefits,
                   “best practices” and procedures for adding or legalizing a secondary
                   dwelling unit.
          Responsibility: Community Development Department.
          Financing: General Fund.
          Objectives: Undertake outreach for each Housing Element program per the Housing
          Element implementation schedule
          Timeframe: Ongoing
 H-d      Foster Meaningful Assistance from Other Agencies. Town staff will meet and
          work with other public agencies and special districts (water, fire, schools, sanitary
          districts, etc.) to promote affordable housing through the provision of fee waivers,
Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                          120

          fee reductions, development of property, or other assistance for affordable
          housing projects. In addition, participate in ongoing regional planning activities
          related to housing and the Sustainable Communities initiative.
          Responsibility: Town Manager, Community Development Department.
          Financing: General Fund, Redevelopment Funds, other funding (see funding programs).
          Objectives: Assistance and incentives for affordable housing.
          Timeframe: Ongoing
 H-e      Conduct Outreach for Developmentally Disabled Housing and Services.
          Work with the Golden Gate Regional Center to implement an outreach program
          that informs families within Tiburon on housing and services available for persons
          with developmental disabilities. Provide information on services on the Town’s
          website and distribute brochures supplied by the service providers.
          Responsibility: Community Development Department.
          Financing: General Fund.
          Objectives: Support programs to address needs of the developmentally disabled.
          Timeframe: Initiate a cooperative outreach program with the Golden Gate Regional Center
          in 2015.
 H-f      Coordinate with Water and Sewer Providers. As required by State law, the
          Town will provide a copy of the adopted housing element update to water and
          sewer providers, including the Marin Municipal Water District, Sanitary District
          Number 5 of Marin County, Richardson Bay Sanitary District, and Sanitary District
          Number 2 of Marin County. The Town will also provide a summary and
          quantification of Tiburon’s regional housing need allocation.
          Responsibility: Community Development Department.
          Financing: General Fund.
          Objectives: Provide copy of Housing Element Update to water and sewer providers.
          Timeframe: Within one month of housing element adoption.
 H-g      Review the Housing Element Annually. As required by State law, the Town will
          review the status of Housing Element programs and submit a progress report to
          the State Department of Housing and Community Development and the
          Governor’s Office of Planning and Research by April 1st.
          Responsibility: Town Council, Planning Commission, Community Development
          Department.
          Financing: General Fund.
          Objectives: Annual review of Housing Element implementation progress.
          Timeframe: Annually by April 1st.
Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                      121

 H-h      Update the Housing Element. Update the Tiburon Housing Element consistent
          with State law requirements.
          Responsibility: Town Council, Planning Commission, Community Development
          Department.
          Financing: General Fund.
          Objectives: Update and adopt housing element in compliance with State-mandated due
          date.
          Timeframe: 2023
 H-i      Redevelopment Funding (Town of Tiburon as Successor Agency). In
          conjunction with the Marin Housing Authority, use remaining housing set-aside
          funds to meet existing affordable housing obligations and, once those are met,
          expend the funds solely for the provision of affordable housing in Tiburon
          consistent with the Tiburon General Plan.
          Responsibility: Town Council, Planning Commission, Town Manager, Community
          Development Department.
          Financing: Housing set-aside funds
          Objectives: Meet existing affordable housing obligations and facilitate the development of
          additional affordable housing.
          Timeframe: Ongoing.
 H-j      Apply for State Funds for Affordable Housing. Apply for State affordable
          housing funds including, but not limited to, the Multifamily Housing Program, the
          Cal-Home Program, and the Homebuyer’s Down-payment Assistance Program.
          Commit these funds to one or more projects located on designated housing sites
          as shown in the Town’s Housing Element, to projects targeted for persons with
          disabilities, including persons with developmental disabilities, and to projects
          targeted to extremely-low income households.
          Responsibility: Town Council, Community Development Department, Town Manager.
          Financing: Staff time.
          Objectives: Develop funding sources for affordable housing.
          Timeframe: Apply for funding at least three times during the planning period.
 H-k      Apply for and Utilize Local Funds for Affordable Housing. Potential sources of
          funds could include, but would not be limited to:
          (a)      Marin Workforce Housing Trust
          (b)      Marin Community Foundation
          (c)      Federal Grants
          (d)      Voluntary donations (such as bequeaths, trusts, donations of land and
                   buildings, etc.).
Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                          122

          (e)     Affordable Housing Impact Fee on larger single-family homes. (Size to be
                  determined — for example, Marin County has a sliding scale housing
                  impact fee on homes over 2,000 square feet in size).
          (g)     Inter-Jurisdictional Housing Trust Fund (with Belvedere and Marin County)
                  that could include housing impact fees, in-lieu fees, co-funding one nexus
                  study for a housing impact, and the accumulation of any other housing-
                  related monies for use in a mutually beneficial way to meet each
                  jurisdiction's RHNA through a combination of contributions to the Fund and
                  units created.
          Responsibility: Community Development Department, Town Manager, Town Council.
          Financing: Staff time.
          Objectives: Accumulation of funds for affordable housing.
          Timeframe: Apply for funding at least three times during the planning period.
 H-l      Work with Non-Profits on Housing. The Town will work with non-profits to
          assist in achieving the Town’s housing goals and implementing programs.
          Coordination should occur on an ongoing basis, and as special opportunities arise
          related to specific housing sites and as the Housing Element is implemented. The
          Town will reach out to developers of supportive housing to encourage
          development of projects targeted for persons with disabilities, including
          developmental disabilities. The Town will also reach out to developers of
          affordable housing for extremely-low income households.
          Responsibility: Community Development Department.
          Financing: Staff time.
          Objectives: Ongoing working relationship with non-profit housing sponsors.
          Timeframe: Outreach to non-profits biennially.
 H-m      Work with the Marin Housing Authority. Continue to implement the agreement
          with the Marin Housing Authority (MHA) for management of the affordable housing
          stock in order to ensure permanent affordability. Implement resale and rental
          regulations for very low, low and moderate income units, and assure that these
          units remain at an affordable price level.
          Responsibility: Community Development Department, Town Manager.
          Financing: Staff time, General Fund.
          Objectives: Implement agreements to maintain affordability.
          Timeframe: Ongoing.
 H-n      Staff Training. Conduct training sessions as needed for Town employees
          regarding the receipt, documentation, and proper referral of housing
          discrimination complaints and other information related to housing programs.
Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                        123

                Responsibility: Community Development Department, Town Manager.
                Financing: General Fund.
                Objectives: Conduct training staff sessions.
                Timeframe: As needed.
       H-o      Housing Discrimination Complaints. Refer discrimination complaints to the
                appropriate legal service, county, or state agency or Fair Housing of Marin. The
                Community Development Director is the designated person in Tiburon with
                responsibility to investigate and deal appropriately with complaints. Discrimination
                complaints will be referred to Fair Housing of Marin, the Marin Housing Authority,
                Legal Aid, HUD, or the California Department of Fair Employment and Housing,
                as appropriate. Information regarding the housing discrimination complaint referral
                process will be posted on the Town’s website.
                Responsibility: Community Development Department, Town Manager.
                Financing: Staff time, General Fund.
                Objectives: Implementation of Fair Housing laws.
                Timeframe: Ongoing.
Goal H-B
Provide housing for special needs populations that is coordinated with support
services.
Policies
H-B1 Provision of Affordable Housing for Special Needs Households. Provide
       opportunities through affordable housing programs for a variety of housing types and
       affordability levels to be constructed or acquired for special needs groups, including
       assisted housing and licensed board and care facilities.
H-B2 Health and Human Services Programs Linkages. Support housing that incorporates
       facilities and services to meet the health care, transit or social service needs of extremely
       low income households and persons, and persons living with disabilities. As appropriate
       to its role, the Town will assist service providers to link together services serving special
       needs populations to provide the most effective response to homelessness or persons at
       risk of homelessness, youth needs, seniors, persons with mental or physical disabilities,
       substance abuse problems, HIV/AIDS, physical and developmental disabilities, multiple
       diagnoses, veterans, victims of domestic violence, and other economically challenged or
       underemployed workers.
      Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                     124

H-B3 Density Bonuses for Special Needs Housing. The Town will use density bonuses to
          assist in meeting special housing needs, housing for lower income elderly and disabled,
          consistent with roadway capacity and considering parking needs and neighborhood
          scale.
H-B4 Countywide Efforts to Address Housing for the Homeless. In recognition that there is
          a lack of resources to set up completely separate systems of care for different groups of
          people, including homeless-specific services for the homeless or people “at risk” of
          becoming homeless, local governments in Marin must coordinate efforts to develop a fully
          integrated approach for the broader low-income population. The Town will support
          countywide programs Marin County Continuum of Care 3 actions for the homeless
          including emergency shelter, transitional housing, supportive housing and permanent
          housing.
H-B5 Emergency Shelter Facilities Located in Tiburon. The Town of Tiburon recognizes the
          need for and desirability of emergency shelter housing for the homeless and will allow a
          year-round emergency shelter as a permitted use in commercial zones as established in
          the Zoning Ordinance. 4 In addition, the following would apply:
          a. The Town will encourage positive relations between neighborhoods and providers of
                permanent or temporary emergency shelters. Providers or sponsors of emergency
                shelters, transitional housing programs and community care facilities shall be
                encouraged to establish outreach programs within their neighborhoods and, when
                necessary, work with the Town or a designated agency to resolve disputes.
          b. It is recommended that a staff person from the provider agency be designated as a
                contact person with the community to review questions or comments from the
                neighborhood.
H-B6 Adaptable/Accessible Units for the Disabled. The Town will ensure that new multi-
          family housing includes units that are accessible and adaptable for use by disabled
          persons in conformance with the California Building Code. This will include ways to
          promote housing design strategies to allow seniors to “age in place.”
H-B7 Transitional and Supportive Housing. The Town of Tiburon recognizes the need for
3
  The Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) allocates HUD homeless assistance grants to
organizations that participate in local homeless assistance program planning networks. Each of these networks is
called a Continuum of Care. HUD introduced the concept to encourage and support local organizations in coordinating
their efforts to address housing and homeless issues. The Marin County Continuum of Care is operated through the
County’s Health and Human Services Agency.
4
  Standards for Emergency Shelters consistent with SB2 are contained in Municipal Code Section 16-40.060 -
Emergency Shelters.
         Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                               125

      and desirability of transitional and supportive housing and will treat transitional and
      supportive housing as a residential use that will be subject only to the same restrictions
      that apply to other residential uses of the same type in the same zone.
H-B8 Emergency Housing Assistance. Participate and allocate funds, as appropriate, for
      County and non-profit programs providing disaster preparedness and emergency shelter
      and related counseling services.
Implementing Programs
      H-p      Provision of Affordable Housing for Special Needs Households. Continue to
               facilitate programs and projects which meet federal, state and local requirements
               to provide accessibility for seniors, persons with disabilities, including
               developmental disabilities, large families, and single-person and single parent
               households. Apply current inclusionary housing provisions that require 10% of
               new units to be designed for special needs households. Specific types of housing
               include:
               (a)      Smaller, affordable residential units, especially for lower income single-
                       person and single parent households.
               (b)      Affordable senior housing to meet the burgeoning needs of an aging
                        population, including assisted housing and board and care (licensed
                        facilities).
               (c)      Affordable units with three or more bedrooms for large family households.
               (d)      Affordable housing that is built for, or can easily and inexpensively be
                        adapted for, use by people with disabilities (specific standards are
                        established in California Title 24 Accessibility Regulations for new and
                        rehabilitation projects, augmented by Americans with Disabilities Act
                        guidelines) and people with developmental disabilities.
               Responsibility: Town Council, Community Development Department.
               Financing: Staff time.
               Objectives: Construction of at least three housing units for people with special needs.
               Timeframe: Ongoing
      H-q      Emergency Housing Assistance. Participate and allocate funds, as appropriate,
               for County and non-profit programs providing emergency shelter and related
               counseling services.
               Responsibility: Community Development Department, Town Manager, Town Council.
               Financing: Affordable Housing Fund.
               Objectives: Respond to requests for assistance.
     Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                           126
                Timeframe: Ongoing.
       H-r      Provide Town Employee Housing Assistance. Identify opportunities for local
                government employees (especially public safety personnel) to find housing locally
                through such efforts as construction of workforce housing at public facilities or
                parking lots or subsidizing mortgages or rents.
                Responsibility: Town Manager, Town Council.
                Financing: Staff time.
                Objectives: Provide housing assistance to 5 percent of Town employees.
                Timeframe: Ongoing.
       H-s      Allow Transitional and Supportive Housing in Commercial Zones. Revise the
                Zoning Ordinance to specifically identify transitional and supportive housing as
                conditionally permitted uses in the neighborhood commercial (NC) and village
                commercial (VC) zones. Transitional and supportive housing will be treated as a
                residential use subject only to the same restrictions that apply to other residential
                uses in the NC and VC zones.
                Responsibility: Community Development Department, Planning Commission, Town
                Council.
                Financing: General Fund.
                Objectives: Adopt ordinance.
                Timeframe: Adopt ordinance within 180 days of housing element adoption.
Goal H-C
Protect and conserve the existing housing stock and mix of unit types.
Policies
H-C1 Support Housing Conservation and Affordability. Pursue funding for conservation and
       rehabilitation of existing housing to preserve neighborhood character and retain the
       supply of affordable housing units.
H-C2 Condominium Conversions. Except for limited equity cooperatives and other innovative
       housing proposals which are affordable to lower income households, the Town will
       prohibit conversion of existing multi-family rental dwellings to market rate condominium
       units unless the Town’s rental vacancy rate is above 4.5 percent.
      Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                     127

H-C3 Protection of Existing Affordable Housing. Ensure that affordable housing provided
         through governmental subsidy programs, incentives and deed restrictions remains
         affordable, and intervene when necessary to help preserve such housing.
H-C4 Preserve “Old Tiburon” Housing. Limit the loss of housing units in “Old Tiburon”
         through conversion of existing two-family or multi-family dwellings into single-family
         dwellings or buildings containing fewer units. 5
H-C5 Rental Assistance Programs. Continue to publicize and create opportunities for using
         available rental assistance programs for extremely low, very low and low income
         households, such as project-based Section 8, the Section 8 housing choice voucher
         programs, and the Housing Stability Program, in coordination with the Marin Housing
         Authority (MHA). Continue to support the use of Marin Community Foundation funds for
         affordable housing.
H-C6 Reconstruction at Existing Densities. Protect and preserve housing units by granting
         density bonuses that allow the re-establishment of housing developments containing
         affordable housing units (regardless of the current General Plan density limit for the site)
         at the pre-existing density, in the event that such developments are damaged or
         destroyed by fire, earthquake or similar disaster.
H-C7 Preserve the Housing Stock. In order to protect and conserve the housing stock, the
         Town will, to the extent permitted by law, prohibit the conversion of residential units to
         other uses and regulate the conversion of rental developments to non-residential uses
         unless there is a clear public benefit or equivalent housing can be provided.
H-C8 Maintenance and Management of Quality Housing. Support good management
         practices and the long-term maintenance and improvement of existing housing through
         housing and building code enforcement, rehabilitation programs for viable older housing,
         and long-term maintenance and improvement of neighborhoods.
H-C9 Energy and Resource Conservation. Promote development and construction
         standards that conserve resources and encourage housing types and designs that use
         cost-effective energy and resource conservation measures (water, electricity, etc.) and
         therefore cost less to operate over time, supporting long-term housing affordability for
         occupants.
5
  This modification is contained in the Zoning Ordinance, which requires a conditional use permit for conversion to
fewer units.
        Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                                  128

H-C10 Resale Controls to Maintain Affordability. Continue to impose resale controls and rent
         and income restrictions to the maximum extent possible (at least 55 years) to ensure that
         affordable housing, provided through zoning and other government incentives and/or as a
         condition of development approval, remains affordable over time to the income group for
         which it is intended. The Town will implement long-term or in-perpetuity agreements
         and/or deed restrictions with owners and/or developers to govern the affordability of such
         units. This assurance will be provided through recorded agreements and by monitoring
         their continuing affordability, or other equally effective means. 6
H-C11 Housing Design. Review proposed new housing in order to achieve excellence in
         development design and encourage innovative design that creates housing opportunities
         complementary to the location of the development. It is the Town’s intent to enhance
         neighborhood identity and sense of community by ensuring that all new housing will have
         a sensitive transition with the surrounding area.
Implementing Programs
         H-t     Rehabilitation Loan Programs. In cooperation with the Marin Housing Authority
                 (MHA), improve citizen awareness of rehabilitation loan programs.
                 Responsibility: Community Development Department, MHA.
                 Financing: MHA.
                 Objectives: Facilitate rehabilitation loans for 3 low income units.
                 Timeframe: Ongoing.
         H-u     Conduct Residential Building Report Inspections. The Town will continue to
                 inspect and report on all residential units prior to resale, with the intent to maintain
                 and upgrade the safety of housing within the town consistent with adopted
                 Building Codes. In addition to health and safety concerns, the residential building
                 report discloses the authorized use, occupancy and zoning of the property and an
                 itemization of deficiencies in the dwelling unit.
                 Responsibility: Building Division
                 Financing: General Fund through fee charged for residential building report inspections
                 Objectives: Complete Residential Building Reports for all housing units prior to resale
                 Timeframe: Ongoing
         H-v     Acquisition of Rental Housing. Contact potential non-profits (such as Tiburon
                 Ecumenical Association, EAH, Citizens Housing, BRIDGE Housing, etc.) who may
                 be seeking to acquire and rehabilitate rental housing units in order to maintain
6
  The Marin Housing Authority is the agency designated to administer inclusionary housing programs on behalf of the
Town, although the Town has flexibility to designate another agency or entity.
       Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                                129

                  ongoing affordability of the units. Provide assistance that will include, but not be
                  limited to: (1) support necessary to obtain funding commitments from
                  governmental programs and non-governmental grants; (2) assistance in permit
                  processing; (3) waiver or subsidy of fees; and (4) use of local funds if available.
                  Responsibility: Community Development Department, Town Manager, Town Council
                  Financing: General Fund and other funding as available
                  Objectives: Acquisition and rehabilitation of existing affordable rental housing subject to
                  expiration of subsidies
                  Timeframe: Annually
        H-w       Use of Rental Assistance Programs. Continue to publicize and participate in
                  rental assistance programs such as Section 8 Housing Choice Vouchers, the
                  Housing Stability Program, and other available rental programs.
                  Responsibility: Community Development Department, Marin Housing Authority.
                  Financing: Staff time.
                  Objectives: Publicity and increased use of Section 8 vouchers.
                  Timeframe: Ongoing
        H-x       Condominium Conversions. Preserve rental housing by enforcement through
                  the Town's condominium conversion ordinance and Housing Element policy. 7
                  Responsibility: Community Development Department.
                  Financing: General Fund
                  Objectives: Protection of the Town’s rental housing stock.
                  Timeframe: Ongoing
        H-y       Link Code Enforcement with Public Information Programs on Town
                  Standards, Rehabilitation and Energy Loan Programs. Implement housing,
                  building and fire code enforcement to ensure compliance with basic health and
                  safety building standards and provide information about rehabilitation loan
                  programs for use by qualifying property owners who are cited. Specific actions
                  include:
                  (a)      Coordinate with the Marin Housing Authority and utility providers to make
                           available loan programs to eligible owner and renter-occupied housing.
                  (b)      Provide public information on alternative energy technologies for
                           residential developers, contractors and property owners.
                  (c)      Publicize tenant assistance and energy conservation programs that are
                           available to provide subsidized or at-cost inspection and corrective action.
                  (d)      Contact owners of structures that appear to be in declining or substandard
                           condition, offer inspection services, and advertise and promote programs
7
  See 16-52.050 - Condominium Use Permit
       Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                             130

                        that will assist in funding needed work.
                (e)     Provide an informational guide to homeowners explaining the benefits,
                        “best practices” and procedures for adding or legalizing a secondary
                        dwelling unit.
                Responsibility: Community Development Department, Marin Housing Authority, PG&E
                Financing: General Fund
                Objectives: Upgrades to the Town’s housing stock and compliance with codes.
                Timeframe: Ongoing
Goal H-D
Facilitate the development of new infill housing in Downtown Tiburon and on
identified underutilized sites throughout the Town that have existing infrastructure
and few physical constraints. Focus development of lower density housing on
vacant legal lots incapable of further subdivision and on undeveloped parcels
where infrastructure constraints, physical constraints, and other non-
governmental constraints prevent their development with more affordable
housing. Continue to encourage and legalize secondary dwelling units in
appropriate locations and use affordable housing in-lieu fees or impact fees on
less constrained sites.
Policies
H-D1 Variety of Housing Choices. In response to the broad range of housing needs in
       Tiburon, the Town will strive to achieve a mix of housing types, densities, affordability
       levels and designs. This will include an adequate supply and variety of housing
       opportunities to meet the needs of Tiburon’s workforce and their families, striving to
       match housing types and affordability with household income. The Town will work with
       developers of non-traditional and innovative housing approaches in financing, design,
       construction and types of housing that meet local housing needs. Housing opportunities
       for families with children should not be limited because necessary facilities are not
       provided on site.
H-D2 Approach to Affordable Housing Requirements and Incentives. Establish a two-
       tiered structure for addressing affordable housing needs in Tiburon, as follows:
       Tier 1:      Contributions and incentives for smaller market rate housing developments
                    and commercial development through inclusionary housing in-lieu fees,
                    construction of affordable units, second units, housing impact fees, etc.
       Tier 2:      Incentives and requirements for development on key housing opportunity sites
                    (see implementing programs and Affordable Housing Overlay zoning).
      Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                     131

H-D3 New Affordable Housing. Facilitate the design, approval, and construction of affordable
          housing projects using a variety of mechanisms, including mixed-use development
          incentives, density bonus programs, affordable housing overlay zones, General Plan
          amendments, pre-zoning and annexation actions, avoidance of Article 34 referenda, and
          creation of secondary dwelling units.
H-D4 Key Housing Opportunity Sites. Given the diminishing availability of developable land,
          the Town will identify housing opportunity areas and sites where a special effort will be
          made to provide workforce and special needs affordable housing. The Town will take
          specific actions to promote the development of affordable housing units on these sites
          (identified in the Implementing Programs). 8
H-D5 Mixed Use Infill Housing. The Town will encourage well-designed mixed use
          developments (residential mixed with other uses) where residential use is appropriate to
          the setting and development impacts can be mitigated. The Town will develop incentives
          to encourage mixed use development in appropriate locations, such as in and near to the
          downtown that are in proximity to transit and services, and would support downtown
          businesses.
H-D6 Redevelopment of Commercial Shopping Areas and Sites. The Town will encourage
          the development of housing in conjunction with the redevelopment of commercial
          shopping areas and sites when it occurs.
H-D7 Density Bonuses and Other Incentives for Affordable Housing Developments. The
          Town will use density bonuses and other incentives to help achieve housing goals while
          ensuring that potential impacts are considered and mitigated. This will include provisions
          consistent with State Density Bonus Law. 9
8
  The Town undertook General Plan Amendments, rezoning, and other implementing actions to reduce governmental
constraints on key housing opportunity sites identified in the 2005 Housing Element. The Zoning Ordinance also
reflects these changes, including “Affordable Housing Overlay Zone” incentives. Current zoning allows (1) an
increased maximum height limit so that second and third stories can be permitted on buildings; (2) flexible
development standards (e.g., FAR, lot coverage) based on the location, type, and size of the units and the design of
the development; (3) an additive residential component of a mixed use development with a density range of 12.5 to
15.3 units per acre (a yield of 16.9 to 20.7 units per acre after the award of a density bonus), with FAR limits applying
only to the commercial portion of the mixed use project; (4) flexible parking standards based on the development’s
location and the type and size of the housing units, such as efficiency apartments and senior housing units; (5) waived
or reduced fees; and (6) fast-track processing. Adopted standards also allow shared parking for commercial and
residential uses, resulting in a lower overall parking requirement, subsidization of hook-up fees or other fees charged
by special districts, and elimination of a conditional use permit requirement for the proposed residential component of
a mixed use development.
9
  State density bonus law, Government Code Section 65915, was first enacted in 1979. The law requires local
governments to provide density bonuses and other incentives to developers of affordable housing who commit to
providing a certain percentage of dwelling units to persons whose incomes do not exceed specific thresholds. Cities
         Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                                    132

H-D8 Retention and Expansion of Multi-Family Sites at Medium and Higher Density. The
           Town will strive to protect and expand the supply and availability of multi-family and
           mixed use infill housing sites for housing. The Town will not re-designate or rezone
           residential land for other uses or to lower densities without re-designating equivalent land
           for higher density multi-family development.
H-D9 Secondary Dwelling Units. Encourage the construction of well-designed new second
           units and the legalization of existing second units as an important way to provide
           affordable rental housing opportunities, especially for senior households, single persons,
           single parents, and young households.
H-D10 Market Rate Development. Focus development of market rate units on vacant legal lots
           incapable of further subdivision and on undeveloped parcels that are too physically
           and/or non-governmentally constrained to support multi-family, mixed use and affordable
           housing development.
H-D11 Inclusionary Housing Requirements. Implement the Town’s inclusionary housing
           provisions to generate affordable housing units, in-lieu fees or impact fees that can be
           effectively used to support affordable housing projects on less constrained housing
           opportunity sites.
H-D12 Contributions Towards Employee Housing. Require new non-residential development
           to contribute towards affordable housing created by such development, such as provision
           of housing on-or off-site, impact fee, or other alternatives.
Implementation Programs
           H-z      Work with Non-Profits and Property Owners on Housing Opportunity Sites.
                    Encourage cooperative and joint ventures between owners, developers and non-
                    profit groups in the provision of below market rate housing. Work with non-profits
                    and property owners to seek opportunities for an affordable housing development
also must provide bonuses to certain developers of senior housing developments, and in response to certain
donations of land and the inclusion of child care centers in some developments. Essentially, state density bonus law
establishes that a residential project of five or more units that provides affordable or senior housing at specific
affordability levels may be eligible for a “density bonus” to allow more dwelling units than otherwise allowed on the site
by the applicable General Plan Land Use Map and Zoning. The density bonus may be approved only in conjunction
with a development permit (i.e., tentative map, parcel map, use permit or design review). Under State law, a
jurisdiction must provide a density bonus, and concessions and incentives granted at the applicant’s request based on
specific criteria.
         Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                                     133

          on one of the key housing opportunity sites. Undertake the following actions to
          encourage development of multi-family, affordable housing:
          (a)     Meet with non-profit housing developers (EAH, MHA, others) and property
                  owners to identify housing development opportunities, issues and needs
                  during 2015.
          (b)     Select the most viable site during 2015.
          (c)     Undertake community outreach in coordination with the potential developer
                  and property owner during 2015.
          (d)     Complete site planning studies, continued community outreach, and
                  regulatory approvals in coordination with the development application.
          (e)     Facilitate development through regulatory incentives, reducing or waiving
                  fees, fast track processing, and assistance in development review.
          (f)     Develop ongoing and annual outreach and coordination with non-profit
                  housing developers and affordable housing advocates to assist in the
                  development of housing for extremely low-income households.
          (g)     Facilitate development of housing for extremely low-income households by
                  allowing housing as a use by-right as part of the “Affordable Housing
                  Overlay Zone.”
          (h)     Review funding options as part of the annual Housing Element review and
                  apply for funding or support funding applications as opportunities are
                  available, and will undertake other actions (such as modifications to
                  parking requirements and granting concessions and incentives) to assist in
                  the development of housing for extremely low income households.
          Responsibility: Community Development Department, Town Manager, Planning
          Commission, Town Council
          Financing: General Fund, Redevelopment Set-Aside, other funding
          Objectives: Encourage development of one or more housing opportunity sites.
          Timeframe: Specific actions by 2015 and development of housing sties by 2022.
 H-aa     Implement “Affordable Housing Overlay Zone” Zoning for Affordable
          Projects. Annually monitor the effectiveness of the “Affordable Housing Overlay
          Zone” as part of the annual Housing Element review (see Program H-g), and
          implement the affordable housing overlay zone where residential densities will be
          increased up to 100% if a specified level of affordability is achieved. As part of the
          annual review there will be a review as to whether the program has been effective
          in encouraging very low and low income housing. The program will be revised if it
          is found to be ineffective.
          Responsibility: Community Development Department, Town Manager, Planning
          Commission, Town Council
          Financing: General Fund, Redevelopment Set-Aside, Housing Fund, other funding.
Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                      134

                   Objectives: Development of one or more key housing sites by 2022.
                   Timeframe: Ongoing.
           H-bb Bonuses for Affordable Housing Projects Consistent with State Density
                   Bonus Law. Offer density bonuses consistent with the State Density Bonus Law.
                   Responsibility: Community Development Department
                   Financing: General Fund
                   Objectives: Application of State Density Bonus law.
                   Timeframe: Ongoing
           H-cc    Design of Multi-Family Housing. Conduct design review to assure excellence of
                   design in new multi-family housing development that is compatible with the
                   surrounding area.
                   Responsibility: Community Development Department
                   Financing: General Fund.
                   Objectives: Development of well-designed multi-family housing
                   Timeframe: Ongoing
           H-dd Housing Impact Fee for Larger Homes. Consider an affordable housing impact
                   fee on larger single-family homes. 10
                   Responsibility: Community Development Department, Town Council.
                   Financing: General Fund
                   Objectives: Additional funding for affordable housing based on impacts of larger homes
                   Timeframe: 2016
           H-ee    Implement Second Dwelling Unit Development Standards and Permit
                   Process. Continue to allow second dwelling units.
                   Responsibility: Community Development Department, Planning Commission and Town
                   Council
                   Financing: General Fund
                   Objectives: 8 new second units by 2022
                   Timeframe: Ongoing
           H-ff    Adopt Standards for Junior Second Units. Review and consider adopting
                   standards to allow the creation of junior second units. Standards to consider
                   should include, but not be limited to, the following:
                   (a) Conversion of existing bedroom required – no building expansion;
10
   For example, consider Marin County’s sliding scale housing impact fee required for larger homes over 2,000 square
feet in size.
         Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                               135

          (b) Maximum 500 square-foot size;
          (c) Wet-bar type kitchen only with limitations on size of sink, waste line and
              counter area;
          (d) Cooking facility limited by electrical service (110v maximum) and prohibition of
              gas appliances;
          (e) Separate bathroom permitted, but not required;
          (f) Require external access and internal access to the remainder of the home;
          (g) No additional parking required if dwelling complies with current parking
              standards and there is adequate on-street parking to accommodate the
              additional use;
          (h) Owner occupancy required; and
          (i) Ministerial approval process.
          The Town will work with utility districts to reduce or waive fees for junior second
          units.
          Responsibility: Community Development Department, Planning Commission and Town
          Council
          Financing: General Fund
          Objectives: 8 new second units, including junior second units by 2022
          Timeframe: Consider adoption of standards in 2015
 H-gg      Jobs/Housing Fee. Adopt a Jobs/Housing Linkage Fee Ordinance that includes
           the following or similar requirements:
          (a)      Exaction requirements for dwelling units and/or in-lieu fees should be set
                   according to empirically based evidence and must comply with all other
                   legal tests.
          (b)      The inclusion of affordable housing units within developments of hotels,
                   offices, or other commercial buildings if feasible (options may include
                   housing on-site, off-site, subsidizing mortgages or rents, or paying an in-
                   lieu fee for housing production).
          (c)      Payment into the Housing Fund of in-lieu fees based on a dollar amount
                   per square foot of office, commercial, and industrial building development.
          (d)      In-lieu fees would be waived for projects containing significant affordable
                   housing components.
          Responsibility: Town Attorney, Community Development Department, Planning
          Commission and Town Council
          Financing: General Fund
          Objectives: Adopt Jobs/Housing Linkage Fee Ordinance
          Timeframe: 2017
Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                      136
 H-hh      Encourage Residential Development on Mixed Use Sites. Encourage
           residential development on key housing sites that are designated for mixed use.
           Incentives are identified in the Affordable Housing Overlay zone
          Responsibility: Community Development Department, Planning Commission and Town
          Council
          Financing: General Fund
          Objectives: Residential development on mixed use sites.
          Timeframe: Ongoing
Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                 137
Section VI
Implementation Timeframe
 A      Overview
The Tiburon Housing Element is built around preserving and enhancing residential
neighborhoods, sustaining the community's character and environmental resources, and fulfilling
unmet housing needs. The implementing programs in the Housing Element, as described in the
previous section, are intended to address these concerns. In reviewing the list of programs it is
important to recognize two other concerns: (1) there are limited staffing and budget resources to
undertake all of the programs listed immediately; and (2) some programs require other funding or
actions to occur first.
This section covers all of the implementing programs described in the Housing Element, and
represents the Town’s commitment to take an active leadership role in assuring the
implementation of the programs described. It is also the Town’s intent to: (1) encourage public
review and effective participation in all aspects of the planning process; and (2) assure annual
review of the Housing Element in order to periodically revise and update this Action Plan as
necessary to keep it effective.
      Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                   138

B      Implementation Summary Table
                                                                                     Responsible     Source
 Tiburon Housing Element Programs          Time Frame               Objective        Department      of
                                                                                     or Authority    Funding
H-a    Focus Town Resources on                Ongoing      Construction of housing       TC; CD         GF
       Housing Opportunity Sites                           on one or more of the
                                                           housing opportunity sites
H-b    Improve Community Awareness            Ongoing      Obtain and distribute         CD             GF
       of Housing Needs, Issues, and                       materials; coordinate
       Programs                                            with other organizations
H-c    Community Outreach When                Ongoing      Undertake outreach for        CD             GF
       Implementing Housing Element                        each Housing Element
       Programs                                            program per the
                                                           implementation schedule
H-d    Foster Meaningful Assistance           Ongoing      Assistance and                TM; CD         GF
       from Other Agencies                                 incentives for affordable
                                                           housing
H-e    Conduct Outreach for                     2015       Support programs for          CD             GF
       Developmentally Disabled                            developmentally
       Housing and Services                                disabled.
H-f    Coordinate with Water and         Within one month  Provide copy of adopted       CD             GF
       Sewer Providers                       of housing    Housing Element
                                         element adoption
H-g    Review the Housing Element        Annually by April Annual review of              TC; PC; CD     GF
       Annually                                  1st       Housing Element
                                                           implementation progress
H-h    Update the Housing Element               2023       Update and adopt              TC; PC; CD     GF
                                                           housing element in
                                                           compliance with State-
                                                           mandated due date.
H-i    Redevelopment Funding (Town            Ongoing      Meet existing affordable      TC; PC; TM;    S
       of Tiburon as Successor Agency)                     housing obligations and       CD
                                                           facilitate the
                                                           development of
                                                           additional affordable
                                                           housing.
H-j    Apply for State Funds for         Apply for funding Develop funding sources       TC; TM; CD     GF
       Affordable Housing                 at least 3 times for affordable housing
H-k    Apply for and Utilize Local Funds Apply for funding Accumulation of funds for     TC; TM; CD     GF
       for Affordable Housing             at least 3 times affordable housing
      Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                          139
                                                                                        Responsible
                                                                                                     Source of
Tiburon Housing Element Programs        Time Frame      Objective                       Department
                                                                                                     Funding
                                                                                        or Authority
H-l    Work with Non-Profits on           Biennially     Ongoing working                CD           GF
       Housing                                           relationship with non-
                                                         profit housing sponsors
H-m    Work with the Marin Housing         Ongoing       Implement agreements           TM; CD       GF
       Authority                                         to maintain affordability
H-n    Staff Training                     As needed      Conduct staff training         TM; CD       GF
                                                         sessions
H-o    Housing Discrimination              Ongoing       Implementation of Fair         TM; CD       GF
       Complaints                                        Housing laws
H-p    Provision of Affordable Housing     Ongoing       Construction of at least 3     TC; CD       GF
       for Special Needs Households                      housing units for people
                                                         with special needs
H-q    Emergency Housing Assistance        Ongoing       Respond to requests for        TC; TM; CD   GF
                                                         assistance
H-r    Provide Town Employee Housing       Ongoing       Provide housing assistance    TC; TM        GF
       Assistance                                        to 5% of Town employees
H-s    Allow Transitional and          Within 180 days   Adopt ordinance               CD: PC; TC    GF
       Supportive Housing in              of housing
       Commercial Zones                element adoption
H-t    Rehabilitation Loan Programs        Ongoing       Facilitate loans for 3 low    CD; MHA       GF/MHA
                                                         income units
H-u    Conduct Residential Building        Ongoing       Complete Residential          BD            GF
       Report Inspections                                Building Reports for all
                                                         housing units prior to resale
H-v    Acquisition of Rental Housing       Annually      Acquisition and               TC; TM; CD    GF / Other
                                                         rehabilitation of existing
                                                         affordable rental housing
                                                         subject to expiration of
                                                         subsidies
H-w    Use of Rental Assistance            Ongoing       Publicity and increased use   CD; MHA       GF / MHA
       Programs                                          of Section 8 vouchers
H-x    Condominium Conversions             Ongoing       Protection of the Town’s      CD            GF
                                                         rental housing stock
H-y    Link Code Enforcement with          Ongoing       Upgrades to the Town’s        CD; MHA; OA   GF
       Public Information Programs on                    housing stock and
       Town Standards, Rehabilitation                    compliance with codes
       and Energy Loan Programs
H-z    Work with Non-Profits and          2015 -2023     Development of one or         CD; TM; PC;   GF
       Property Owners on Housing                        more housing opportunity      TC
       Opportunity Sites                                 sites
H-aa   Implement “Affordable Housing       Ongoing       Development of one or         CD; PC; TC    GF
       Overlay Zone” Zoning for                          more housing opportunity
       Affordable Projects                               sites
      Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                         140

                                                                                 Responsible
                                               Time                                             Source of
     Tiburon Housing Element Programs                        Objective           Department
                                              Frame                                             Funding
                                                                                 or Authority
H-bb        Bonuses for Affordable Housing    Ongoing Application of State          CD; PC;     GF
            Projects Consistent with State            Density Bonus law             TC
            Density Bonus Law
H-cc        Design of Multi-Family Housing    Ongoing Development of well-          CD; PC;     GF
                                                      designed multi-family         TC
                                                      housing.
H-dd        Housing Impact Fee for Larger      2016   Additional funding for        CD; TA;     GF
            Homes                                     affordable housing based      PC; TC
                                                      on impacts of larger homes
H-ee        Implement Second Dwelling Unit    Ongoing 8 new second units by         CD; PC;     GF
            Development Standards and Permit          2022                          TC
            Process
H-ff        Standards for Junior Second Units  2015   8 new second units by         CD; PC;     GF
                                                      2022                          TC
H-gg        Jobs/Housing Fee                   2017   Adopt Jobs/Housing            TA; PC;     GF
                                                      Linkage Fee Ordinance         TC; CD
H-hh        Encourage Residential on Mixed    Ongoing Residential development       PC; TC;     GF
            Use Sites                                 on mixed use sites            CD
Legend for the Implementation Summary Table
BD          Building Department                                   PC     Planning
                                                                         Commission
CD          Community Development Department                      S      Housing Set-Aside Funds
GF          General Fund                                          TA     Town
                                                                         Attorney
MHA         Marin Housing Authority                               TC     Town Council
OA          Outside Agency or Organization                        TM     Town
                                                                         Manager
       Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                       141
Section VII
Quantified Housing Objectives
 A       Overview
                                                       State law requires the Housing Element to
                                                       include quantified objectives for the
                                                       maximum number of units that can be
                                                       constructed, rehabilitated or conserved.
                                                       Policies and programs establish the
                                                       strategies to achieve these objectives. The
                                                       Town’s quantified objectives are described
                                                       under each program, and represent the
                                                       Town’s best effort in implementing each of
                                                       the programs. Assumptions are based on
                                                       past program performance and funding
                                                       availability, construction trends, land
availability, and future programs that will enhance program effectiveness and achieve full
implementation of the Town’s housing goals.
The new construction objectives shown in the table are based on ABAG Projections, the Town’s
RHNA for the 2015-2023 planning period for very low, low and moderate income housing,
historic trends, and expectations for new second units. Rehabilitation targets are based on
specific program targets, including programs such residential rehabilitation loans and code
enforcement activities. Conservation targets are based on units at risk for conversion to market
rate units due to expiring subsidies or deed restrictions.
       Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                     142

  B     Quantified Objectives Summary Table
The table below summarizes the Town’s quantified objectives for housing during the 2015-2023
planning period.
Tiburon Quantified Objectives Summary
                                                       Conservation
                              New
   Income Category                      Rehabilitation     and
                         Construction
                                                       Preservation
 Extremely Low
 Income                        4             0              0
 Very Low Income               12            0              0
 Low Income                    12            3              0
 Moderate Income               12            2              10
 Above Moderate
 Income                        19            2              0
 Total                         59            7              20
       Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                             143

Appendi
                              Parcel Listing of Potential Housing Sites
                                                                                EXISTING POTENTIAL EXISTING
PARCEL                          Lot                                             HOUSING HOUSING COMM SQ
NUMBER        Zoning GP Des.   size     #   ADDRESS (OWNER)                TYPE UNITS      UNITS        FT
Multifamily Sites
058-171-96 NCAHO NCAHO        1.0 ac  1555  TIBURON (1555 Tib. Blvd. Site) BLVD     0       20           0
058-171-43 NCAHO NCAHO        .72 ac  1535  TIBURON (Chase Bank Site)      BLVD     0       0          7,500
058-171-47 NCAHO NCAHO        .57 ac  1601  TIBURON (Bank of America Site) BLVD     0       0          6,900
058-171-86 NCAHO NCAHO       1.06 ac    2   BEACH (Parking lot)             RD      0       21           0
034-212-18 NCAHO NCAHO         1 ac    1    BLACKFIELD (Cove Center Site)   DR      0       12        42,000
059-101-01 NCAHO NCAHO         .4 ac  1600  TIBURON (Shark's Deli Stie)    BLVD     0       8          1,800
058-151-33 RMPAHO VHAHO       1.8 ac  1199  TIBURON (Reed School Site)     BLVD     0       0            0
Single and Two-Family Sites
038-151-09 RO-1         ML     .2 ac  4476  PARADISE                        DR      1       1            0
038-171-44 RO-2          M     .3 ac  4200  PARADISE                        DR      0       1            0
038-162-44 RO-1         ML    2.5 ac        OLD LANDING                     RD      0        2           0
039-161-37      RDP      M    1.3 ac  197   GILMARTIN                       DR      0       1            0
039-171-08 RO-1          M    .38 ac   2    GILMARTIN                       CT      0       1            0
039-171-23      RPD      M    2.4 ac  210   GILMARTIN                       DR      0       1            0
039-290-06      RDP     ML    .82 ac   9    VIA PARAISO WEST                        0       1            0
039-290-46      RPD     ML    1.1 ac   12   VIA PARAISO EAST                        0       1            0
055-252-09      RPD      M    .64 ac  835   STONY HILL                      RD      0       1            0
055-252-12      RPD      M     .8 ac  805   STONY HILL                      RD      0       1            0
055-253-30      RPD      M    .63 ac   25   GILMARTIN                       DR      0       1            0
055-253-32      RPD      M    .38 ac   21   GILMARTIN                       DR      0       1            0
055-253-17      R-1     MH    .39 ac   11   GILMARTIN                       DR      0       1            0
055-261-10      RPD    PDR    5.6 ac        STONY HILL (Ling)               RD      0       3            0
039-151-49 RO-1         ML    2.5 ac        ROCK HILL (St. Hilary Site)     RD      0       2            0
039-202-04 RO-2          M    .44 ac  255   ROUND HILL                      RD      0       1            0
058-111-24 RO-2          M     1 ac    8    ROLLING HILLS                   RD      0       1            0
058-261-19 RO-1         ML     1 ac    96   MT TIBURON                      CT      0       1            0
058-261-36 RO-1         ML     1 ac   100   MT TIBURON                      CT      0       1            0
058-272-01 RO-2          M    .35 ac  130   LYFORD                          DR      0       1            0
058-281-08 RO-2          M    .37 ac   3    HEATHCLIFF                      DR      0       1            0
058-301-47 RO-2          M     .5 ac   77   ROUND HILL                      RD      0       1            0
058-321-08 RO-2          M     .6 ac   26   VENADO                          DR      0       1            0
058-351-05 RO-2          M     .4 ac   7    PLACE MOULIN                            0       1            0
058-351-23 RO-1         ML    1.3 ac  107   MT TIBURON                      RD      0       1            0
039-021-07      RPD      L     1 ac   3805  PARADISE                        DR      0       1            0
039-021-13      RPD    PDR    31 ac   3825  PARADISE (Rabin)                DR      1       6            0
039-301-01      RPD    PDR    21 ac   3875  PARADISE (SODA)                 DR      0       7            0
039-241-01      RPD    PDR    26 ac         PARADISE (Tiburon Glen)         DR      0       3            0
059-013-07 RO-2          M     .5 ac  619   RIDGE                           RD      0       1            0
059-071-51 RO-2          M     .5 ac  275   DIVISO                          ST      0       1            0
059-091-55 RO-2          M     1 ac   2225  VISTAZO EAST                    ST      0       1            0
059-091-56 RO-2          M     1 ac   2235  VISTAZO EAST                    ST      0       1            0
059-121-07      R-2      H    .14 ac  1894  CENTRO WEST                     ST      0       1            0
059-122-34      R-2      H    .14 ac  1911  MAR WEST                        ST      0       1            0
059-122-47      R-2      H     .3 ac   2    RESERVA                         LN      0       1            0
059-141-07      R-1     MH    .18 ac  2224  VISTAZO EAST                    ST      0       1            0
059-142-02      R-1     MH     .5 ac  2220  CENTRO EAST                     ST      0       1            0
059-172-47      R-2      H     .2 ac  2010  PARADISE                        DR      0       1            0
        Housing Element Update 2015-2023 Appendix                                                 A-1
                                  Parcel Listing of Potential Housing Sites (cont.)
                                                                                                                 EXISTING POTENTIAL EXISTING
PARCEL                                     Lot                                                                   HOUSING HOUSING COMM SQ
NUMBER           Zoning GP Des.            size        #       ADDRESS (OWNER)                          TYPE UNITS               UNITS           FT
059-181-85         R-2          H                   2070       PARADISE                                  DR          0             1              0
059-195-24         R-2          H          1 ac     2360       MAR EAST                                   ST         0             2              0
059-201-52         R-2          H         .2 ac     2359       PARADISE                                  DR          0             1              0
038-041-38        RO-2          M         .5 ac     4944       RANCH                                     RD          0             1              0
038-053-01        RO-2          M         .6 ac     4850       PARADISE                                  DR          0             1              0
038-081-06        RO-1         ML        1.7 ac      111       TAYLOR                                    RD          0             1              0
038-091-29        RO-1         ML         .5 ac     4755       PARADISE                                  DR          0             1              0
038-091-30        RO-1         ML         .5 ac     4747       PARADISE                                  DR          0             1              0
038-091-39        RO-1         ML        1.7 ac       70       PARENTE                                   RD          0             1              0
038-111-04        RPD         PDR        2.1 ac                PARADISE (Pourian)                        DR          0             1              0
038-111-05        RPD         PDR        3.5 ac                PARADISE (Pourian)                        DR          0             2              0
038-111-16        RPD         PDR        10 ac       150       ANTONETTE (Achuck/Parente)                DR          0             2              0
038-121-03        RO-1         ML        1.2 ac       3        ANTONETTE                                 DR          0             1              0
038-121-04        RO-1         ML         1 ac      4725       PARADISE                                  DR          0             1              0
038-141-17        RO-1         ML         1 ac      4565       PARADISE                                  DR          0             1              0
034-330-01        RPD           M         .5 ac       47       VIA LOS ALTOS                                         0             1              0
038-311-05        RO-2          M         .4 ac       3        VIA CAPISTRANO                                        0             1              0
038-410-09        RPD           M         .5 ac       8        VIA ELVERANO                                          0             1              0
039-012-23        RO-1         ML         1 ac        31       HACIENDA                                  DR          0             1              0
039-061-80        RPD         PDR        13 ac                 TRESTLE GLEN (Tiburon Court) BLVD                     0             3              0
039-061-91        RPD         PDR        14 ac                 TRESTLE GLEN (Tr Glen Circle) BLVD                    0             3              0
039-121-15        RO-1         ML         1 ac        5        ACACIA                                    DR          0             1              0
various                                                        SECOND UNITS                                          0           100+ *           0
                Single and Two-Family:                                                                                            85
                Multifamily/Affordable Housing Overlay:                                                                           61
                Second Units:                                                                                                    100+ *
* This is a conservative estimate of the number of potential second units. There are approximatley 2,500 detached single family homes in Tiburon, many of
w hich have potential to create a second unit, either w ithin the existing structure or as a new attached or detached structure.
           Housing Element Update 2015-2023 Appendix                                                                                      A-2

































































































