Compiled By:
M


Acknowledgments
City Council
Sam Area, Mayor Herb Sanchez, Mayor Pro-Tem Javier Saucedo, Council Member Joe Talaugon, Council Member Ken Westall, Council member
Planning Commission
Patrick Estorga, Chair Earleen Raguz, Commissioner Manuel Estorga, Commissioner Rafael Torres, Commissioner Carlos Aguilera, Commissioner
Prepared By:
Frank Usher, City Administrator Jeremy Krout, City Planner Manuel Rede, City Administrator (former staff)
Andrew D. Radler, City Planner, Project Coordinator (former staff) Mary Chang, Assistant Planner (Former Staff)
QUAD - Consultant to the City Crawford Multari & Clark - Consultants to the City
Adopted: December, 1986 Reformatted: April, 2001
Revised: February, 2002
Table of Contents
Chapter	Page
Chapter I: Introduction................................................... 1
Chapter II: Environmental and Regulatory Setting......................... 12
A.	Introduction..................................................... 12
B.	Local and Regional Setting....................................... 12
C.	Community History................................................ 13
D.	Environmental Setting ........................................... 14
E.	Population and Demographics...................................... 17
Chapter III: Issues Addressed by the General Plan........................ 25
Chapter IV: Community Development........................................ 38
Land Use Element......................................................... 39
A.	Introduction..................................................... 39
C.	Industrial (Light Industrial and General Industrial)............. 39
D.	Commercial....................................................... 40
E.	Residential ..................................................... 42
Housing Element ......................................................... 60
A.	Background and Analysis ......................................... 60
Economic Development/ Redevelopment Element.............................. 63
A.	Background and Analysis ......................................... 63
Community Design and Historic Preservation .............................. 67
A.	Background ...................................................... 67
B.	Community Design................................................. 67
C.	Historic Preservation............................................ 68
D.	Archaeology...................................................... 69
Circulation Element ..................................................... 71
B.	Highways ........................................................ 71
C.	Arterials........................................................ 72
D.	Collectors....................................................... 72
E.	Local Streets.................................................... 72
Public Facilities Element................................................ 76
A.	Background....................................................... 76
B.	Water ........................................................... 76
C.	Wastewater Collection and Treatment.............................. 78
D.	Solid Waste ..................................................... 79
Chapter	Page
Chapter V. Natural Resources .......................................... 83
Conservation and Open Space Element..................................... 84
A.	Background ....................................................  84
B.	Agriculture..................................................... 84
C.	Open Space ..................................................... 85
C. Parks and Recreational Facilities................................ 86
Chapter VI. Hazards..................................................... 94
Safety Element.......................................................... 95
A.	Background ..................................................... 95
B.	Seismic Activity................................................ 95
C.	Flooding........................................................ 96
D.	Fire Safety Measures............................................ 96
Noise Element.......................................................... 101
A.	Background and Analysis ....................................... 101
B.	Sources of Noise .............................................. 104
Chapter VII: Implementation............................................ Ill
Appendices ............................................................ 114
A.	City Council Resolution of Adoption............................ 114
B.	Planning Commission Resolution	of Adoption..................... 114
C.	General Plan Land Use Map ..................................... 114
Figures
Figure Number	Page
Figure 1-2: Planning Area................................................. 8
Figure 1-3: Aerial View of General Plan Area and City Limits, 1994 ....... 9
Figure 2-1: Acreage in Production, 1995-2000 in Santa Barbara County...... 14
Figure 2-2: Total Value of Crops Produced in Santa Barbara County, 1995-2000 . 15
Figure 3-1: Population 1990-2020 ......................................... 31
Figure 3-2: Comparison of Historic Population for Selected Santa Barbara County
Cities, 1990-2000 ..................................................... 32
Figure 4-1: Land Use Diagram............................................... 54
Figure 8-1: Circulation Diagram............................................ 74
Figure 10-1: Public Facilities and Parks ................................. 93
Figure 11-1: Areas Subject to Flooding During a 100-Year Storm...,........ 99
Figure 11-2: Seismic Hazard Areas of Santa Barbara County................. 100
Figure 12-1: Magnitude of Common Sounds................................... 108
Figure 12-2: Land Use Compatibility Standards for Noise................... 109
Chapter I: Introduction
A.	The City of Guadalupe
Guadalupe is a city of 5,659 residents located in northern Santa Barbara County, about 10 miles west of the City of Santa Maria. The City is situated in the heart of the fertile Santa Maria Valley, an agricultural region of Statewide and even national importance. To the west is the Guadalupe Dunes, one of the last remaining coastal dunes complexes in California. To the south is the City of Lompoc and Vandenberg Air Force Base. To the north is the Nipomo Mesa and the communities of Arroyo Grande and Nipomo in San Luis Obispo County.
Figure 1-1: Regional Location
The City incorporated in 1946, but its importance both locally and regionally is much older. In the early 1800's much of the land around the City was used for grazing and cattle ranching by families who were probably descendants of the original Spanish Land Grantees. With the extension of the railroad in the late 1800's, Guadalupe became the focal point of a prosperous agricultural economy, and a melting pot for farming and ranching families of many diverse nationalities Guadalupe remained the most important community in the Santa Maria Valley until the late 1920’s when the construction of US Highway 101 enabled trucks to replace the railroad as the primary mode for transporting crops to surrounding markets. Although still the center of agricultural activity, the town has lost much of its original prominence to the expanding City of Santa Maria.
Page 1
Chapter I: introduction
C.	Scope and Purpose of the General Plan
A General Plan is required by State Law and serves as a community’s blueprint for the use and development of land within its planning area. To provide a consistent framework to address these issues, State law requires that the general plan contain seven interrelated sections, or elements'.
Land Use. The Land Use Element describes the various uses to which land within the City may be committed, and designates areas where these uses may take place. In this sense, the Land Use Element is the most basic of the elements. It must be closely coordinated with the other elements to provide consistent policy guidance that results in orderly and logical development.
Housing. The Housing Element describes how safe, affordable housing will be provided to present and future City residents anticipated through the time frame of the General Plan. The Housing Element also provides incentives for the production and rehabilitation of affordable housing within the City.
Circulation (transportation). The Circulation Element describes how the transportation needs of the city will be met during the time frame of the General Plan. The Circulation Element identifies where new roadways will be constructed to support the land uses contained in the Land Use Element, and also contains provisions for the use of alternate modes of transportation, including bicycle and pedestrian circulation plans.
Conservation and Open Space. The Conservation and Open Space Elements are two separate elements required by state law but are often combined as one General Plan element. These elements describe the diverse natural and human-made resources in and around Guadalupe, and how these resources will be preserved and protected during the time frame of the General Plan.
Safety. The Safety Element inventories seismic, geologic, flood, and fire hazards in Guadalupe, and discusses how the effect of these hazards can be minimized.
Noise. The Noise Element describes the existing and projected noise environments for the City and establishes land use compatibility guidelines for various noise levels. On the basis of expected population and traffic growth, the Noise Element establishes policies and standards to protect residents from exposure to excessive noise.
Other elements may be added as needed to address specific issues. The Guadalupe General Plan contains three such elements: Parks and Recreation, Public Services and Facilities, and Economic Development.
Community Design and Historic Preservation. The Community Design and Historic Preservation element provides policies and programs
Page 2
Chapter I; Introduction
aimed at preserving Guadalupe’s architectural character and its numerous historic buildings.
Public Services and Facilities. This element summarizes the infrastructure and public facilities needs of the City at buildout of the General Plan.
Economic Development. This Element includes a generalized discussion of expected costs of operating the future city, and potential revenue sources likely to be available to cover those costs. Among other purposes, this element will assist the City in determining whether new development should be subject to different fees or exactions than are currently in place to better cover the costs of growth to the community.
Each element of the General Plan contains goals, policies and programs to provide guidance to decision-makers and the public when questions arise about the appropriate use of individual parcels of land and other resources. A goal is a desirable future condition or state towards which the community will work to achieve. Policies are statements of the community's position regarding a particular issue that provide guidance for decision-making. A program is an action or series of actions, procedures or techniques that the City will employ or undertake to implement the policies contained in the General Plan. Where possible, the implementation programs specify the agency, department or other party responsible for carrying out and monitoring the actions described, the funding source (when one can be identified) and a time frame for its accomplishment.
Quantified objectives are measurable milestones that can be used to judge the effectiveness of the implementation of the Plan. For example, the Housing Element (published separately) provides quantified objectives for the number of dwelling units the City expects to be constructed over the next five years.
The General Plan must be a comprehensive, long-term document. The Guadalupe General Plan provides a framework for the orderly growth and development of the City for the next twenty or more years from our vantage of today. The General Plan, however, will certainly be amended from time to time to keep pace with the changing needs of the community.
D.	Organization of the General Plan
The Guadalupe General Plan is composed of seven chapters:
Chapter I: Introduction. Chapter I provides an introduction to the General Plan, its scope and purpose, and the process through which it was prepared. The introductory chapter also discusses prior planning efforts in the area, and the relationship between the Guadalupe General Plan and other relevant plans and regulations.
Chapter II: Environmental and Regulatory Setting. This chapter provides a summary of demographic, environmental and regulatory data that defines the context for land use planning in Guadalupe.
Page 3
Chapter J: Introduction
Chapter III: Issues Addressed by the General Plan. This chapter provides an overview of the issues addressed by the 1989 General Plan and those addressed by the amendments adopted in 2002.
Chapter IV: Community Development. The third chapter is entitled Community Development. This chapter consists of the Land Use, Housing, Economic Development, Community Design and Historical Preservation, Circulation and Public Services and Facilities elements.
Chapter V: Natural Resources. The Conservation and Open Space Elements are combined in this chapter.
Chapter VI: Hazards. This chapter contains the Noise and Safety Elements.
Chapter VII: Implementation. The Implementation chapter outlines the steps necessary to implement the goals, policies and programs of the General Plan. A timeline is established through which these various steps should be implemented. The Implementation chapter also contains a list of 5-year and 10-year objectives which are measurable outcomes by which the success of the General Plan can be assessed.
Appendices. For the policies and programs of the General Plan to provide effective guidance for future land use decisions in Guadalupe, they must be founded on a thorough understanding of the town's setting and historical development pattern, and of the factors which have shaped the present land use and population of the town. These issues are discussed in greater detail in the General Plan Database which has been prepared separately as an appendix to the General Plan (Appendix A). Other information contained in the appendix include standards for specific plan preparation, recommended street sections
E.	City of Guadalupe Planning Area and Sphere of Influence
The area covered by the general plan is often referred to as the City’s planning area which includes the incorporated limits as well as “...iwy land outside its boundaries which in the planning agency’s judgement bears a relation to its planning* (Government Code Section 65300) The City’s planning area is shown on Figure 1 -2 and extends outward from the City in a loosely defined circle that extends north across the Santa Maria River and east toward the City of Santa Maria. The City reserves the right to review and comment on new development, changes in land use or other regulatory or environmental activities that may affect the City’s long term interests. The General Plan area is the portion of the planning area governed by the policies, programs and land uses of the Guadalupe General Plan. The general plan area is generally the shape of a rectangle defined by the Santa Maria River to the north, Simas Road to the east, and the property lines of agricultural lands to the south and west.
Page 4
Chapter I: Introduction
Figure 1-2 also shows the City’s sphere of influence. The Cortese-Knox Act defines a sphere of influence as a “...plan for the probable ultimate physical boundaries and service area of a local agency...” (Government Code Section 56076). In practice “ultimate” is often defined as twenty years. Under Section 56080, a sphere of influence may include an urban service area which identifies portions of a city’s sphere of influence where urban services are provided, or where services are expected to be provided during the first five years of an adopted capital improvement program.
Spheres of influence and other changes to the organization of local governments are decided by the Local Agency Formation Commission (LAFCo), which consists of representatives from member jurisdictions within the County. In addition to establishing and amending spheres of influence, LAFCo exercises jurisdiction over annexations (adding land to a city or special district), detachment from a city or district, and the incorporation of new cities, among others. Accordingly, LAFCo policies are key to identifying areas for future City expansion.
F.	The Process of Preparing the General Plan
A general plan reflects a community's shared vision for the future. Therefore, before the Guadalupe General Plan could be written, it was essential to understand the public's ideas about what they would like Guadalupe to be. To gain these insights, a number of opportunities were provided throughout the plan preparation and adoption process to allow citizens to voice their concerns. These opportunities included public workshops at which relevant issues were discussed and the public was asked to provide direction, and culminated in public hearings before the Planning Commission and City Council.
General Plan Database
The General Plan must be based on a thorough and accurate understanding of the existing conditions in Guadalupe if the goals of the Plan are ever to be achieved. To provide this basic information, a General Plan Database was prepared which covers such diverse topics as the physical characteristics of the City, relating to both the natural and built environments, social and economic characteristics, the type and responsibilities of other government agencies and districts, and the nature of existing government policies, such as those in the previous general plan. The General Plan Database provides critical information about the issues to be addressed by the General Plan, and also provided environmental baseline information for preparation of the General Plan Environmental Impact Report (EIR) in accordance with the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA).
G.	Previous and Ongoing Planning Efforts
1989 General Plan
The last comprehensive update of the City’s general plan occurred in 1989 in response to direction from the County Local Agency Formation Commission to a request by the City to significantly expand its planning area and sphere of influence. The 1989 General Plan contains policies and programs covering nine sections (elements) that include community size and form; land use;
Page 5
Chapter 1: Introduction
circulation; housing; conservation and open space; safety; noise; community design and historic preservation; public facilities; and economic development and redevelopment. The Plan identifies a planning area and expanded sphere of influence covering about 1,579 acres that extends to the east and south of the existing developed city.
The main goal of the 1989 update was to document the City’s ability to provide services to a proposed planning area and sphere of influence that included lands deemed necessary by the City to accommodate future growth. LAFCo eventually approved an amended sphere of influence for the City which was smaller than the planning area shown on the 1989 general plan. However, the 1989 plan identified areas for future city expansion to the south (DJ Farms) and to the east on lands encumbered by Land Conservation Act contracts.
A more complete discussion of issues addressed by the 1989 general plan is provided in Chapter II: Issues Addressed by the General Plan.
Specific Plans
The City has adopted three specific plans in accordance with Government Code Section 65450 to help implement the goals and policies of the general plan and to provide a more comprehensive, site-specific guidance for land use planning. The three adopted specific plans are the DJ Farms Specific Plan, adopted in 1993, the Point Sal Dunes Specific Plan and the Riverview Specific Plan (see Figure 4-1). Each of these plans and their role in the growth and development of the City is described in greater detail in the Land Use Element (part one of Chapter IV).
Guadalupe Redevelopment Plan
The Guadalupe Redevelopment Agency was established in 1985 as a means of eliminating blighting conditions within portions of the city. The Redevelopment Project Area consists of about 581 acres, or roughly 90% of the land within the city limits of Guadalupe (see Figure 4-1).
The primary focus of the Agency’s activities during the past fifteen years has been to provide infrastructure improvements to enable the full and beneficial development of properties within the Project Area. In 1987, the Agency sold $1.7 million in bonds to finance the expansion of the City’s sewage treatment plant, and to make improvements to the City’s water system. Both improvements were essential to enabling continued development in accordance with the City’s General Plan. In addition, the Agency has acquired vacant industrial properties on the east side of the City and provided ‘off-site’ improvements and other incentives to encourage their development. The Agency has also acquired land for much-needed moderate income residential development (Point Sal Dunes), and has provided grants for commercial facade improvements in the downtown, and approved a program for housing rehabilitation loans. All of these efforts have helped to improve economic conditions within the City, provide jobs and remove physical and economic blight.
Page 6
Chapter J: Introduction
City of Guadalupe Downtown Design Guidelines
In 1999, the City Council created in informal group of design professionals, planners, builders, developers, business owners, and agency representatives to explore issues related to improving the downtown area. The committee met once a month to discuss improvement possibilities and mechanisms to promote quality design in new development. The result of these efforts was the adoption of the Downtown Design Guidelines which is intended to supplement the City’s general plan and zoning ordinance by providing a clearer understanding of the City’s expectations regarding the design of new development in the downtown.
The Guidelines address a range of design issues in the downtown, including:
O Site planning
□' Parking and circulation
Q Signs
□	Landscaping
□	Guidelines specific to commercial and residential development
□	Historical preservation
The Guidelines also include an overall Downtown Concept Plan that provides a vision for the future form and character of the Downtown.
Page 7
Figure 1 -2: Planning Area and Vicinity
Legend
» * General Plan area
- City Limits/Sphere of Influence
Figure 1 -3: Aerial View of
City and General Plan Area in 1994

Chapter I: Introduction
H.	Relationship of the General Plan to Other Plans
The Guadalupe General Plan governs land use decisions within the incorporated boundaries of the city. Lands outside the city are governed by Santa Barbara County.
Another important regional planning agency is the Santa Barbara County Association of Governments (SBCAG), which was formed to provide a framework for addressing issues of regional importance among its eight members, which are:
City of Santa Barbara City of Buellton Santa Barbara County
City of Santa Maria City of Lompoc City of Guadalupe
City of Capentena City of Solvang
The Santa Barbara County Association of Governments, or SBCAG for short, was established in 1966 as a voluntary council of governments under a joint powers agreement executed by each of the general purpose local governments in Santa Barbara County. SBCAG is an independent entity governed by a twelve-member Board of Directors consisting of a city council representative from each of the cities within the county and the five members of the county Board of Supervisors.
The original agreement under which SBCAG was established cited the need “to examine common problems and suggest solutions.” SBCAG’s central purpose continues to be the collaborative discussion and resolution of problems and issues that are regional or multi-jurisdictional in nature. SBCAG’s responsibilities and programs include the following:
Metropolitan Planning Organization (MPO). SBCAG has been designated by the Governor as the agency responsible for all transportation planning and programming activities required under federal law. This includes the development of long range transportation plans and multi-year funding programs, and the selection and approval of transportation projects using federal funds.
Regional Transportation Planning Agency (RTPA). Designated by the Secretary of the California Business, Housing and Transportation Agency, SBCAG is responsible for the multi-modal transportation planning, programming, and fund allocation required by state statutes. This includes the annual allocation of Transportation Development Act (TDA) funds.
Local Transportation Authority (LTA). As the Local Transportation Authority (LTA), SBCAG is responsible for administering the 1/2 cent county-wide sales tax authorized by voter approval of Measure D in November, 1989. This tax is projected to generate almost $500 million for local and regional transportation projects over twenty years. SBCAG is responsible for the annual allocation of more than $18 million to local agencies as well as the development and construction of fifteen state and
Page 10
Chapter I: introduction
regional projects identified in the Measure D plan at a total cost of more than $132 million.
Airport Land Use Commission (ALUC). SBCAG is designated as the Airport Land Use Commission (ALUC) and is responsible for protecting public health, safety, and welfare by ensuring that vacant lands in the vicinity of airports are planned and zoned for uses compatible with airport operations. To do this, SBCAG must determine that the adoption of local land use plans and policies will minimize the public’s exposure to excessive noise and safety hazards.
Service Authority for Freeway Emergencies (SAFE). This program is responsible for the installation, operation and administration of the system of approximately 350 roadside call boxes in Santa Barbara County. This system is financed by a $1 per year fee on all motor vehicles registered within the county.
Affiliate Census Center. SBCAG has been designated by the State Department of Finance to serve as the affiliate census center for Santa Barbara County. As such, SBCAG serves as the conduit for government and public access to census data.
Congestion Management Agency (CMA). As the CMA, SBCAG is responsible for the development and implementation of the county-wide Congestion Management Program (CMP) required in all urban counties in California. The CMP is a comprehensive program designed to reduce auto-related congestion through capital improvements, travel demand management, and coordinated land use planning among all local jurisdictions.
Traffic Solutions. SBCAG also administers an interagency Transportation Demand Management (TDM) program that promotes ridesharing, public transportation, biking, walking, telecommuting, and other transportation alternatives on a county-wide basis. Traffic Solutions also works directly with employers to assist in developing employee transportation programs. Traffic Solutions administers the Clean Air Express, a commuter subscription bus service.
Other planning documents that affect Guadalupe include the Air Quality Management Plan (AQMP) to comply with State and federal Clean Air laws, and the Congestion Management Plan (CMP) which is intended to reduce traffic on the county's highways. The Guadalupe General Plan contains policies and programs to supplement the requirements of each of these plans.
I.	Special Districts
In addition to the City, there are two special districts closely involved with shaping Guadalupe's future: the Guadalupe Union Elementary School District and the Santa Maria Union High School District. The School Districts provides education facilities and services for elementary through high school aged children.
Page 11
Chapter II: Environmental and Regulatory Setting
A.	Introduction
This chapter of the General Plan provides a summary of environmental, economic and demographic characteristics that define the context for land use planning in Guadalupe. A more detailed discussion of these issues is provided in the General Plan Database, which is published separately as an appendix to the General Plan.
B.	Local and Regional Setting
The City of Guadalupe is a small agricultural service center located in northern Santa Barbara Country about ten miles west of the City of Santa Maria. Two State highways provide access to the community, Highway 166 which travels east/west, and State Highway 1 which bisects the City in a north/south direction. Guadalupe is also at the junction of the Southern Pacific Railroad and the Santa Maria Valley Railroad, a spur line serving the former sugar beet plant at Betteravia and the agricultural and oil producing areas of the Santa Maria Valley.
The two most prominent features of the landscape surrounding Guadalupe are the fertile agricultural lands that characterize the Santa Maria Valley, and the Santa Maria River which forms the northern boundary of the City.
West of the City lie the Guadalupe-Nipomo Dunes complex, one of the last large coastal dune complexes in California, The Dunes are home to a wide assortment of unique, rare and endangered plant and animal species, some of which are found nowhere else. The Dunes and the coastal strand beyond,
Page 12
Chapter II: Environmental and Regulatory Setting
provide a recreational and open space amenity enjoyed by residents and tourists alike.
C.	Community History
Guadalupe derives its name from the 35,000 acre Rancho Guadalupe granted by Governor Alvarado under Mexican rule in 1837 to Don Ramon Estudillo, and later to Diego Olivera and Teodoro Arrelares. The City derived its name from the Virgin of Guadalupe who was the patron saint of Catholic Mexico. A diseno or map dated 1837 shows the Rancho as bounded on the north by the slopes of Nipomo Mesa, on the south by the "sulphur Hills' south of Guadalupe Lake, on the east by a line running northerly from Guadalupe Lake, and on the west by the sand dunes of Oso
Flaco. The diseno shows the dry Santa Maria Riyer (Arroyo Seco de Santa Maria) on the valley floor (Liana de La Larga), Guadalupe Lake (Laguna), the marshes below it (Clenaga), the lake's outlet (Arroyo de La Laguna), the creek flowing through Guadalupe to the mouth of the Santa Maria River (Arroyo de Guadalupe), the Ranch -Corral (Corral de Guadalupe), and the King's Highway (Camino Real).
With the founding of Mission San Luis Obispo
in 1772 and Mission Purisima in 1787. the Camino Real through Guadalupe became a well traveled way, although it was seen as an alternate to the route through what is now Santa Maria and Nipomo. The Ranch south of the Santa Maria River was probably part of the grazing land for Purisima Mission. The Arrelanes home, which is no longer standing, is believed to have been the first in the Santa Maria Valley and the nucleus for the American settlement which was given the name Guadalupe in 1874. The home was built in 1867, a store was established in 1871, and a post office in 1872.
The more recent historical past of Guadalupe can be traced back to 1841 when the 32,408 acre Guadalupe Rancho was granted to cattle ranchers Diego Olivera and Teodoro Arrelanes. The City was the focal point in the Santa Maria Valley and attracted Italian-Swiss dairymen who were among the first settlers in the area. Agricultural activity also flourished in the area due to the fertile soil. In 1873, the City was officially established as a settlement. By the turn of the century, all of the major components that would shape the City's development had occurred. The railroad came through in 1901 and the roadway between Guadalupe and Santa Maria was fully improved in 1982. Guadalupe was officially incorporated in 1946.
The physical development of Guadalupe can be divided into two eras. Initial development in Guadalupe occurred in the northern portion of the City while later development, due to the railroad, occurred in the southern portion of the town. Today, Guadalupe is a mixture of the very old downtown central core, post World War II housing developments and new residential developments occurring in the southeast and southwest portion of the City.
Page 13
Chapter 11: Environmental and Kegnlatory Setting
D.	Environmental Setting
Agriculture
Agriculture is the dominant land use in the Santa Maria Valley and the primary economic force in the region. The fertile alluvial soils deposited by the Santa Maria River, combined with the moderating influence of the nearby Pacific Ocean, combine to provide ideal conditions for the cultivation of a variety of row crops, including lettuce, strawberries, broccoli, and celery.
Many of the properties surrounding the city are encumbered by a Land Conservation Act contract. The California Land Conservation Act (Williamson Act), California Government Code Section 51290 et seq., encourages the conservation of agricultural lands by providing a tax incentive to land owners who contract with the County to restrict land uses to agriculture and compatible uses.
According to the Santa Barbara County Annual Crop Production Reports, the total acreage in crop production in Santa Barbara County has remained fairly stable over the past five years as shown in Figure 2-1, while the total value of crops produced as grown steadily, as shown in Figure 2-3.
Figure 2-1: Acreage in Production, 1995-2000 in Santa Barbara County
Acreage In Production
Santa Barbara County 1995-2000
Acres
Page 14
Chapter II: Environmental and Regdatory Setting
Crop Value
Santa Barbara County 1995-2000
Figure 2-2: Total Value of Crops Produced in Santa Barbara County, 1995-2000
According to the California Department of Conservation, the acreage of prime and other important agricultural land has continued to decline as land is converted to uses other than agriculture. Table 2-1 provides a summary of the conversion of important farmlands to other uses from 1992 to 1998.
Table 2-1
Conversion of Important Farmland
to Non-Agricultural Use, 1992-1998
Source: California Department of Conservation
Farm Land Type	Acres Converted to Non-Agricultural Use			Total
	1992-1994	1994-1996	1996-1998	
Prime Farmland	738	618	571	1927
Farmland of Statewide Importance	82	81	0	163
Unique Farmland	217	243	293	753
Farmland of Local Importance	0	6	6	12
Total:	1,037	948	870	2855
Page 15
Chapter II: Environmental and Eegulatory Setting
Flooding and Ponding
Guadalupe is located along the south bank of the Santa Maria River which is formed by the confluence of the Cuyama and Sisquoc Rivers east of the City of Santa Maria. The flow of the Cuyama River is regulated in part by Twitchell Reservoir which is located some twenty miles to the east. In addition, a number of levees have been constructed by the US Army Corps of Engineers along the banks of the River that extend along the south side of the river in the vicinity of Guadalupe.
Areas near the City that are subject to flooding in a 100-year storm have been mapped by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (see Figure 11-1). The General Plan designates these areas for open space.
Within the City there are areas of shallow groundwater where localized ponding may occur following a significant storm event. These areas are located generally east of Obispo Street and south of 11th Street.
Geologic and Seismic Hazards
As with most coastal areas of California, Guadalupe lies in a seismically active region subject to periodic earthquakes. Seismic hazard areas are shown on Figure 11-2.
Another potential geologic hazard associated with alluvial soils and shallow groundwater is liquefaction. Liquefaction occurs in poorly consolidated soils and shallow groundwater. When energy is introduced into the soil, as may occur with a seismic event, groundwater tends to migrate upward causing the soils to lose its cohesiveness and its capacity to support structures. Given the alluvial soils and shallow groundwater conditions in Guadalupe, liquefaction could occur during a seismic event.
Biological Resources
The area within and surrounding the City’s planning area supports habitat for a number of plant and animal species, some of which are listed by the State and/or federal government as being rare, threatened or endangered. The primary natural habitats occurring within the City’s planning area include riparian vegetation along the banks of the Santa Maria River, the wetlands occurring south of 11th Street and east of Obispo Street and the drainage channels that cross certain properties in the planning area, such as the DJ Farms property.
Archaeological Resources
The area in and around the City of Guadalupe was home to significant populations of native peoples., primarily of the Chumash and their predecessors. Major archaeological sites in the region are characterized by their concentrations of marine shellfish debris. Although some archaeological sites have been found west of the City in the Guadalupe-Nipomo dunes, relatively little is known about the archaeology of the City’s planning area. Nonetheless, previously undiscovered archaeological resources of local and/or regional significance may be discovered through the continued development of lands within the planning area.
Page 16
Chapter II: E.fii>imnmerital arid Regulatory Setting
Water Supply
The City of Guadalupe derives all of its domestic water supply from groundwater originating in the Santa Maria Groundwater Basin which underlies the City and a significant portion of northern Santa Barbara and southern San Luis Obispo Counties. Although the groundwater basin has been studied extensively over the years, the most important aspect of the basin from a land use planning standpoint is the presence of a confining layer in the upper alluvial unit of the western part of the basin that substantially restricts the downward percolation of surface waters to the main aquifer.
The status of the groundwater basin with regard to its safe yield (the amount of water that can be safely withdrawn from the basin without it being depleted) is in dispute. As a result, the basin is currently (2001) the subject of adjudication to appropriate the groundwater to the various rights holders. The outcome of that process is unclear at this time, but the implications for land use planning in the Santa Maria Valley are profound because it will determine the amount of water each rights holder may withdraw on an annual basis.
Further complicating the water supply issue is the recent (2001) enactment of amendments to the Government Code and Public Resources Code regarding the documentation of water supplies that must precede approval of certain sizes and types of projects. A more detailed discussion of the provisions of these new laws is provided in Chapter III: Issues Addressed by the General Plan.
E.	Population and Demographics
Estimates of future population growth provide an important indicator of the potential future demand for different land uses, especially housing. This section of the General Plan discusses past population and demographic trends within the City of Guadalupe which provide a basis for projecting future population growth and the demand for land. The data were derived primarily from the 2000 US Census as well as from the California Department of Finance and the Santa Barbara County Association of Governments (SBCAG).
Household Characteristics
Table 2-2 summarizes household characteristics derived from the 2000 US Census. Clearly, the majority of households in Guadalupe consist of married couples with children. Households without children comprised nearly one half the total households in Guadalupe in 1990.
Page 17
Chapter 11: Environmental and Regulatory Setting
Table 2-2
City of Guadalupe Selected 2000 Household Characteristics
Source: 2000 US Census
Characteristic	2000 Total	Percentage
Family Households (families)	1,217	86.1
With own children under 18 years	761	53.8
Married-couple family	888	62.8
With own children under 18 years	590	41.7
Female householder, no husband present	239	16.9
With own children under 18 years	131	9.3
Non-Family Households	197	13.9
Householder living alone	159	11.2
Householder 65 years and over	87	6.2
Households with individuals under 18 years	871	61.6
Households with individuals 65 years and over	368	26.0
Average household size	4.00	-
Average family size	4.24	-
Age and Gender
Tables 2-3 and 2-4 summarizes age and gender profiles for Guadalupe residents in 2000, based on US Census data. Based on these data, the 2000 population (both sexes) is mostly younger than age 30, which correlates with the high percentage of families. The younger population results in a high percentage of the City’s population being of school age.
There were slightly more males than females residing in Guadalupe in 1990, which was generally consistent with the distribution for Santa Barbara County in 1990.
Page 18
Chapter 11: Environmental and Regulator Setting
Table 2-3
Population Age Profile
City of Guadalupe, 2000
Source: 2000 US Census
Age Group	Number	Percentage
Under 5 years	522	9.2
5 to 9 years	607	10.7
10 or 14 years	551	9.7
15 to 19 years	556	9.8
20 to 24 years	444	7.8
25 to 34 years	824	14.6
35 to 44 years	811	14.3
45 to 54 years	551	9.7
55 to 59 years	165	2.9
60 to 64 years	146	2.6
65 to 74 years	289	5.1
75 to 84 years	147	2.6
85 years and over	46	0.8
Total	5659	99.8
Medium age	26.7	00
Table 2-4
2000 Gender Profile
Source: 2000 US Census
Jurisdiction	Female	Male	Total
Guadalupe	2,773	2,886	5,659
Santa Barbara County	199,584	199,763	399,347
Ethnicity
Table 2-5 provides a summary of ethnicity among Guadalupe residents, asa reported by the 2000 US Census. Residents of Hispanic origin make up the largest segment of the population, followed by Caucasian and Asian/Pacific Islander.
Page 19
Chapter II: Environmental and Eegulatory Setting
Table 2-5 Ethnic Distribution
City of Guadalupe and Santa Barbara County
Source: 2000 US Census
Ethnic Background	Guadalupe		Santa Barbara County	
	Population3	Percent3	Population	Percent
All Races				
Caucasian /White	2,903	51.3	305,228	76.4
Asian	448	7.9	20,886	5.2
American Indian	178	3.1	8,880	2.2
Black or African American	60	1.1	11,374	2.8
Native Hawaiian or Pacific Islander	47	0.8	1,561	0.4
Some Other Race1	2,190	38.7	60,683	15.2
Hispanic Origin				
Hispanic or Latino2	4,781	84.5	136,668	34.2
Notes:
1.	All races other than those listed.
2.	Persons who consider themselves to be of Hispanic or Latino origin,
3.	Totals exceed total city population and 100 percent because individuals may report more than one race.
Educational Attainment
Table 2-6 summarizes educational attainment in Guadalupe as reported by the 1990 US Census (2000 Census data are expected in June, 2002). In 1990, over 20 percent of Guadalupe residents aged 18 and over had obtained at least a high school diploma or equivalent. Nearly 11 percent of these residents listed some type of college degree. Both percentages are lower than that of Santa Barbara County, which had over 21 percent with a high school diploma or equivalent, and nearly 24 percent with some college training.
Page 20
Chapter 11: Environmental and Regulatory Setting
Table 2-6
City of Guadalupe Educational Attainment
(from the 1990 Census, 2000 available in June 2002)
Educational Level	Guadalupe		Santa Barbara County	
	Population	Percentage	Population	Percentage
Less than 9lh grade	1,223	43	22,123	9.5
9th to 12th grade, no diploma	534	18.7	24,033	10.3
High school graduate	580	20.4	48,821	21.1
Some college	328	11.5	55,455	23.9
Associate Degree	56	1.9	19,290	8.3
Bachelor’s degree	82	2.9	38,445	16.6
Graduate / Professional	38	1.3	23,180	10
Income
According to the 1990 US Census, the median household income for Guadalupe residents (where one half of the incomes are below this figure and one half are above) was $22,169 which was slightly lower than Santa Barbara County’s median of $35,667. More recent data reported by the California Department of Housing and Community Development indicate the median family income for Santa Barbara County (for purposes of federal housing program eligibility) is now around $56,500. Assuming the ratio remained constant since the 1990 census, the current median household income in Guadalupe would be about $27,120.
Table 2-7 summarizes income levels for the City of Guadalupe from the 1990 US Census. Table 2-7 shows that nearly 74% of Guadalupe residents reported earnings less than the County median.
Page 21
Chapter 11: ’Environmental and Regulatory Setting
Table 2-7
City of Guadalupe Households by Income
(1990 Census Survey, 2000 available in June 2002)
Income Level	Households	Percent of Total
Less than $5,000	113	8.2
$5,000 to $9,000	93	6.7
$10,000 to $14,999	232	16.9
$15,000 to $24,999	348	25.4
$25,000 to $34,999	236	17.2
$35,000 to $49,999	179	13
$50,000 to $74,000	152	11
$75,000 to $99,999	11	.8
$100,000 to $149,999	8	.5
$150,000 of more	0	0
Median Household Income	$22,169	
Page 22
Chapter II: Environmental and l^ggulaioiy Setting
G. Existing Land Use
The City’s physical layout is compact, with agricultural preserves and the Santa Maria River currently limiting urban expansion. State Highway 1 and the Southern Pacific Railroad provide a distinct physical and psychological separation of the City.
Residential land uses are an estimated 208 gross acres of the community. Commercial land uses occupy some 34.0 gross acres, principally in the central business district along Guadalupe Street. Industrial uses occupy 55.0 acres. Approximately 63.0 acres of the City are vacant and 65 acres are used for agricultural production. Public land uses and flood plains comprise the remainder of the community.
The City’s commercial district core is located along Guadalupe Street between Seventh Street and Eleventh Street. The area is commercial in character with numerous small retail and service businesses. Several structures provide retail space on the ground floor with residential uses on the second floor. According to a 1980 City survey, there were approximately 108 households residing in hotel units, predominantly in the downtown area.
A field survey of central floor space in the City and Central Business District was conducted during May,
1985. Eating and drinking establishments are by far the largest commercial grouping in terms of numbers while food and liquor stores occupy the largest amount of floor space. The City’s commercial base is presently limited in
diversity of goods and services. Guadalupe households must travel outside the city to purchase basic necessities. Vacant commercial floor space equals 19.0 percent of the total existing.
Industrial uses are primarily located adjacent to the Southern Pacific Railroad tracks between West Main Street and the easterly extension of Seventh Street. A second industrial area is located adjacent to the railroad just north of Eleventh Street. Industrial uses are linked to the agriculture industry of the Santa Maria Valley, with several packing houses providing the City's largest source of employment.
Residential neighborhoods have developed adjacent to the commercial and industrial areas. Most of the City's multiple-family housing development is located in the northern section of town while single-family tracks have developed in the southwesterly and southeasterly corners of the City. The City's housing stock is modest in construction and size but, on average, well maintained.
Two significant parcels within the City remain in agricultural production. The two largest properties are located adjacent to Obispo Street near Fourth Street. Neither property owner expresses an intention to sell, the properties for short-term development for either residential or industrial users as permitted under the existing General Plan and Zoning Ordinances of the
Page 23
Chapter 11: Environmental and Regulatory Setting
City. To mitigate land use impacts these properties will remain designated for urban use and will be encouraged to develop.
The General Plan project area includes unincorporated county territory. These include the Main Street Elementary School site, the Gularte Tract, and the flood plains to the north and west, all adjacent to the City limits. The Gularte Tract consists of approximately 24 dwelling units in substandard conditions on relatively large lots and also several vacant lots. The County of Santa Barbara recently improved the Infrastructure (streets, curbs, gutters) and the City upgraded water and sewer service to the area. The Gularte Tract is proposed for redevelopment to new residential uses, possibly apartments or infill single-family development.
Page 24
Chapter III:
Issues Addressed by the General Plan
A.	Introduction
The process of preparing a general plan involves making informed choices about the future. Questions such as: how big should the City become? how fast should it grow and where? and, how can we provide jobs, housing, commerce and public services for the present and future residents? are all fundamental to this decision-making because the answers shape the goals, policies and objectives of the new plan.
This chapter provides an overview of the issues addressed by the 1989 general plan and 2002 amendments. The issues discussed in this chapter were derived from a number of sources, including the General Plan Database, new or revised information regarding the city’s population and economy, and changes to the laws governing land use that have been enacted since the last comprehensive revision of the Plan.
B.	Overview of the 1989 General Plan
The City’s general plan was adopted in 1989 following a comprehensive revision prompted by the Local Agency Formation Commission who recommended the City update its general plan before considering a request for a significant expansion of its sphere of influence.
The population of the City at that time (1986) was 4,850 residents. The general plan assumed that the City’s population would grow considerably over the following years, reaching about 8,200 residents by 2010. As of 1986 almost all available land suitable for residential development within the City had been developed. At the time the 1989 plan was adopted, vacant land suitable for residential development could accommodate only 130 dwelling units which was insufficient to house the City’s projected future population growth.
Thus, to accommodate the additional 3,400 residents, the general plan designated an additional 1,000 acres for urban development and proposed a sphere of influence that corresponds to this new planning area. The plan projected a need for an additional 900 dwelling units which could not be accommodated on the remaining vacant land within the City, and which would be developed on land to the east and southeast over the next 25 or more years. Additional land for commercial development was designated at the southwest corner of Highway 166 and Highway 1. The plan designated lands within its planning area as agriculture^ recognizing that all of the soils surrounding the City are considered prime, and that each property is subject to a Williamson Act Contract. The areas designated for future urban development were chosen for their proximity to the existing developed city and in light of significant environmental and/or regulatory constraints to development elsewhere, which include:
Page 25
Chapter 111: Issues Addressed by the General Plan
LJ Prime agricultural land and lands encumbered by Williamson Act contracts',
AU of the land surrounding the City to the east, south and west is considered primae agricultural land is currently encumbered by Williamson Act contracts. There are three ways for land to be removed from the Williamson Act Contract. The first is to file a Notice of Non-Renewal, allowing the contract to expire over a 10 year period. The second is to receive approval from the County for immediate cancellation and payment of penalty fees. The third method aUows for immediate canceUation without penalty for land annexed to a City if a protest was filed by the City and upheld by LAFCO.
In the case of land within the City of Guadalupe's proposed Sphere of Influence, a Notice of non-renewal filed by the property owners appears to be the only method available in order to cancel the Williamson Act Contract. Immediate canceUation may be approved for a few specific reasons for which urban development activities do not qualify. The City of Guadalupe did not have any professional planning staff at the time that the land adjacent to its boundaries was placed under Williamson Act Contracts and thus it did not protest the Williamson Act Contracts at the time they were implemented.
Q The Santa Maria Paver which constraints expansion to the north because of potential flooding issues and significant riparian habitat resources;
The City of Guadalupe borders the Santa Maria River to the north. The floodplain extends to the south where it is confined by a series of levees constructed by the US Army Corps of Engineers. Nonetheless, the River and its associated riparian resources offer a formidable obstacles to the northerly expansion of the City.
O The occurrence of shallow groundwater which limits the development potential of remaining vacant land within the City;
Portions of the City are underlain by shaUow groundwater lenses that surface from time to time during period of heavy rainfaU. Even during relatively dry years, the depth to groundwater can be as shaUow as a few feet, which limits the development potential of the overlying land.
□ The County line which, along the Santa Maria River, provides a regulatory barrier to northward expansion of the City.
The Santa Maria River is also the boundary between Santa Barbara County and San Luis Obispo County to the north. Since State law prohibits the City from annexing lands in an adjacent county, the border offers a regulatory boundary to the City’s northerly expansion.
Although the City had proposed a significant expansion of it’s general plan area and sphere of influence, LAFCo eventually approved a sphere that corresponded to the City limits as they existed in 1989, and as shown on Figure 4-1. The sphere was subsequently amended by LAFCo in 1993 to include the sole remaining property adjoining the City not encumbered by a Williamson Act contract, the DJ Farms Specific Plan area, which was annexed to the City. The DJ Farms Specific Plan provides an additional 212 acres of
Page 26
Chapter Hl: Issues Addressed by the General Plan
land for urban development with a range of land uses including residential, commercial, industrial and public-quasi-public uses. The contents of the DJ Farms Specific Plan and its role in the continued development of the City is discussed in greater detail in Chapter 4: The Land Use Element.
The 1989 Plan designates residential areas in the older portion of the City and adjacent to the central business district and railroad for multiple family residential development. Areas have been indicated along Rubio Street for high-density residential development but steep hillsides and existing blight limits this prospect. Furthermore, the area is comprised of small lots unsuitable for larger more economically feasible projects. Development on these lots provides a short term measure until a long term solution of annexing larger blocks of land is achieved.
Much of the existing commercial development is within the City's Central Business District. This area does not have the potential for a modern retail shopping center nor does land south of the Central Business District along Guadalupe Street (Highway 1). Development of the DJ Farms property would offer land large enough for modern establishments and necessary parking. In addition, both major thoroughfares are within 1/2 mile of most of the City population.
C.	2002 General Plan Amendments
One measure of a General Plan’s effectiveness is whether it continues to provide meaningful guidance that helps decision-makers respond to changing circumstances and opportunities as they arise. Another is whether or not the Plan continues to comply with changes to State laws governing land use that may have been enacted after the Plan wads adopted. Moreover, the usefulness of the general plan for decision-making depends in part on its continued relevance to the environmental, regulatory and socioeconomic circumstances that prevail within the City’s planning area. Recognizing that the last comprehensive update of the City’s general plan took place in 1989, the City decided to revisit the general plan with the following goals:
□ To update the factual foundation of the plan with current environmental, economic and demographic data;
O To amend the plan where necessary to comply with changes to State law; Q To re-format the Plan to make it more user-friendly;
Changes have been incorporated in the relevant chapters of the general plan to accomplish these goals.
Revised Population Projections
According to the 2000 US Census, the population of Guadalupe was 5,659. Since that time, another 47 dwelling units have been built and occupied, and the 2002 population can be estimated to be about 5,847.
Figure 3-1 shows historic population for the City derived from the US Census and from California Department of Finance population estimates for the years 1986 to 2000. Between 1986 and 1990 the population of the City grew
Page 27
Chapter I]I: Issues Addressed Ay the General Plan
rapidly from about 4,800 to 5,600 and the 1989 general plan assumed that future population growth would continue at this pace. However, for the ten year period between 1990 and 2000, the City’s population remained virtually unchanged. The relative paucity of population growth in Guadalupe during the 1990s may be partially explained by the pace of residential development in nearby Santa Maria and the unincorporated community of Orcutt where much of the regional demand for housing and jobs is still being satisfied.
Looking at past population trends for surrounding cities provides another indication of regional population and development trends. Figure 3-2 compares historic population figures for cities in Santa Barbara County from 1990 to 2000 using US census data for 1990 and 2000 and Department of Finance estimates for the intervening years. These data show that the populations of Guadalupe and Carpenteria remained fairly constant over this period, while the cities of Santa Barbara and Lompoc grew by about 5%. The cities of Buellton (which incorporated as a city in 1993), Solvang and Santa Maria, all experienced population growth of 10% or more. The City of Santa Maria grew by 13,900 residents (18%,) making it the fastest growing city in Santa Barbara County.
Unfortunately, Census data for the City’s 1990 and 2000 populations provide little insight into future population growth because they are virtually identical and it is unlikely (but not impossible) that the next ten years will result in a similar pattern. Clearly, predicting future population growth for the City involves a certain degree of speculation. Factors that will affect future population growth and housing demand include:
►	Housing costs, both within the City and in surrounding communities;
►	The supply of for sale and for rent housing and the variety of product types;
►	The occurrence of overcrowding;
►	Employment opportunities and the income level supported by local and regional jobs;
►	Regulatory factors such as growth control measures in other jurisdictions and the regional fair-share housing allocations by the State;
►	Infrastructure and environmental constraints.
Household size is another important factor in determining the demand for housing. A larger household size requires fewer dwellings to house (in the absence of overcrowding); conversely, smaller household size requires more dwellings to house the same population. According to the 2000 Census, the average household size in Guadalupe was 4.0 persons, making it the highest among cities in Santa Barbara County. If household size declines in the future as more new housing is constructed and occupied by smaller households, more dwellings will be needed to house the future population. Increasing the amount of affordable for-sale and rental housing in Guadalupe may help address this problem. The implications of future population growth and the demand for land are discussed in the Land Use Element, Chapter 4.
The Santa Barbara County Association of Governments estimates that the City will grow by about 800 residents in twenty years to a population of 6,400, or an annual growth rate of about 0.5 percent. The City’s Draft Water Master
Page 28
Chapter HI: Issues Addressed by the General Plan
Plan (December, 2001) assumes a 2 percent annual growth rate for the next twenty years, for a year 2019 population of about 8,100. And the adopted 1989 general plan is based on a 2010 population of about 8,200 residents, which projects to a 2020 population of about 9,400 residents. Whether these projections represent a “low”, “medium”, or “high” future rate of population growth is unclear in light of the population dynamics over the past fifteen years, during which there was a rapid increase from 1986 to 1990 and virtual stagnation between 1990 and 2000.
Each population projection and the corresponding housing needed to house the remaining population are compared on Table 3-1, below and illustrated on Figure 3-1.
Table 3-1
Comparison of 2020 Population Projections and Corresponding Housing Demand
City of Guadalupe
Source	2000 Population	2020 Population	Remaining Population To Buildout	Dwelling Units Per Year Needed to House Future Population	
				4.0 Persons Per Household	3.0 Persons Per Household
1989 General Plan	5,659	9,400	3,741	52	63
Draft Water Master Plan	5,659	8,100	2,441	34	45
SBCAG	5,659	6,400	741	10	14
Another indicator of the future demand for residences is the rate of residential development experienced in recent years. Table 3-2 summarizes building permit data for the years 1999 through 2002. Prior to 1999, the City issued 133 permits for new single family residences, primarily in the Point Sal Dunes Specific Plan area, or an average of about 17 units per year. Since 1999, the number of permits per year has risen substantially, averaging about 28 units through early 2002. Although the number of permits per year has increased in recent years, which may indicate an accelerating pace for the demand for residential land, the total number is still small in relation to the size of the city and considerably less than the number of units necessary to house the three population projections discussed above.
Page 29
Chapter 111: Issuer Addressed by the General Plan
Table 3-2
Building Permit History for Single Family Residences
1999-2002
Source: City of Guadalupe
Year	Permits Issued
1992- 1998	133
Ave. Permits Per Year Prior to 1999:	17
1999	29
2000	21
2001	26
2002	35
Total 1999-2002:	111
Ave. Permits Per Year 1999-2002:	28
Page 30
Chapter 111: Issues Addressed by the General Plan
Figure 3-1: Population 1990-2020
City of Guadalupe Past and (potential) Future Population
C
O
D
CL
O
CL
9400
9200
9000
8800
8600
8400
8200
8000
7800
7600
7400
7200
7000
6800
6600
6400
6200
6000
5800
5600
5400
5200
5000
4800
0
z





9400
8100

&-

1985
2030
Page 31
Chapter 111: Issues Addressed by the General Plan
Figure 3-2: Comparison of Historic Population for Selected Santa Barbara County Cities, 1990-2000
Population
1990-2000 Population Cities in Santa Barbara County
Source: US Census and Californio Department ot Finance
• Guadalupe
Solvang O Buellton
Page 32
Chapter 111: Issues Addressed by the General Platt
Economic Development and the Availability of Land for Future Development
Guadalupe continues to face serious financial problems. The city collects only a small amount of sales tax because a significant percentage of retail expenditures "leak" to Santa Maria. Furthermore, many residents earn only low incomes, limiting the amount of disposable income available for purchases; jobs outside farm work are limited and per capita tax revenues are the lowest in the region compared to other cities. Guadalupe’s population has a disproportionate amount of low income households compared to all other communities in the region. In a recent analysis of housing needs in the City, the Santa Barbara County Council of Governments noted that more higher income housing was needed for a better balanced community. This is in marked contrast to all other cities in Santa Barbara County.
The problem with this imbalance is lower per capita property taxes and, as noted above, lower per capita sales tax. Thus, while residents need and deserve the usual complement of city services, the financial base to pay for them is limited. The principal approach to improving that situation is to 1) allow new development which will increase the overall population, helping to support local businesses and reducing leakage, 2) providing better paying jobs for the population than is provided by farm labor, and 3) by providing a wider mix of housing, including a more balanced amount of higher cost units, which will increase average incomes (and thus expenditures and sales tax revenues) and bring in higher property taxes. However, the amount and location of suitably zoned land within the City in the early 1990s was inadequate to attract the level of additional development needed to address this situation.
In response, the City prepared the DJ Farms Specific Plan pursued annexation of this sole remaining property adjacent to the City not encumbered a Williamson Act contract. The Specific Plan was adopted in 1993 and the property was annexed to the City in 1994. The Specific Plan designates land for a variety of land uses including commercial, industrial, and public-quasi-public uses (a school and parks), and three different densities of residential development. Buildout of the specific plan area could accommodate as many as 480 dwelling units and up to 380,000 square feet of commercial and industrial floor space. It is hoped that development of the DJ Farms Specific Plan area will play a major role in satisfying the City’s future demand for land and its economic development efforts. The specific plan and its role in the future development of the City are discussed in greater detail in Chapter 4: The Land Use Element.
Changes to State Law
Williamson Act Contracts
As discussed above, all of the properties bordering the City of Guadalupe are encumbered by Williamson Act contracts. Since the City did not protest the execution of these contracts at the time they were entered, the City has little authority to remove land from the contract, even upon annexation to the City.
Moreover, the cancellation of a contract can only be accomplished under certain circumstances which were revised in 2000. Because of abuses to the cancellation procedures over the years, the Department of Conservation must
Page 33
Chapter II J: Issues Addressed by the General Plan
be now be notified in advance of a hearing at which cancellation findings are to be considered. The Department’s responses to the notice must be considered by the local agency prior to taking action. The required findings are as follows:
Finding 1:	That the cancellation is for land on which a notice of
non-renewal has been served pursuant to §51245.
Finding 2: That cancellation is not likely to result in the removal of adjacent lands from agricultural use.
Finding 3:	That the cancellation is for an alternative use which is
consistent with the applicable provisions of the city or county generalplan.
Finding 4: That cancellation will not result in discontiguous patterns of urban development.
Finding 5:	That there are no proximate non-contracted land which
is both available and suitable for the use to which its is proposed the contracted land be put, or, that development of the contracted land would provide more contiguous patterns of urban development than development of proximate non-contracted land.
The Department of Conservation is interpreting each finding more strictly with regard to cancellation in advance of non-renewal.
New Laws Relating to Water Supply
In 1998 language was added to the California Water Code and the Public Resources Code (CEQA) that requires public agencies to request a water supply assessment from the supplying water agency before approving projects of 500 or more dwelling units. If the assessment shows insufficient water supplies to serve the project, the water agency is required to demonstrate how additional supplies will be made available. If the water supply is determined to be insufficient, the agency approving the project must make appropriate findings acknowledging this fact.
SB 221 and SB 610 appear to strengthen the requirements for documenting the sufficiency of water supplies before approving large projects. SB 221 amends the Subdivision Map Act to prohibit the approval of a tentative map of 500 or more dwelling units unless the city or county provides written verification that a sufficient water supply is available, or will be available, prior to completion of the project.
SB 610 amends the California Water Code and the Public Resources Code (CEQA) to require the preparation of a detailed assessment of available water supplies prior to the approval of a residential project of 500 or more units or an industrial park occupying 40 or more acres. The law requires the assessment to be included in the CEQA document for the project (in this case the DEIR). For jurisdictions with an adopted Urban Water Management Plan, the assessment would amount to determining whether the project has
Page 34
Chapter III: Issues Addressed by the General Plan
been accounted for in the projection of water demand contained in the Plan, augmented with the detailed project-specific analyses required by SB 610.
The City has prepared a draft Urban Water Management Plan (JL Wallace & Associates, December, 2001) that in part addresses the provisions of SB221 and SB610. The statute provides a fairly detailed list of topics and information to be included in such a water assessment. To summarize, the Plan must do all of the following:
►	Describe the service area of the water provider (ie, the City), including current and projected population and other factors affecting water management planning. Population projections for the water supplier’s service area are required for the next twenty years in five year increments.
►	Identify and quantify the existing and planned water available to the supplier over the same 5-year increments.
►	If groundwater is identified as a potential source, a copy of any groundwater management plan must be provided, along with a thorough description of the groundwater basin and the amount of water pumped over the past five years. Also required is information regarding the overdraft condition of the aquifer and a “...detailed description and analysis of the location, amount, and sufficiency..” of groundwater projected to be pumped by the agency. If the basin is considered to be in overdraft, the Plan must describe efforts of the agency to alleviate these conditions.
►	Describe the reliability of the water supply and vulnerability to seasonal or climatic shortages.
►	Describe past, current and future water use in five year increments by land use type (single family, multi-family, commercial, etc.).
►	Describe all water demand management strategies currently being implemented and scheduled to be implemented, along with an implementation schedule, and an estimate of potential water use savings.
►	Describe all water supply projects and programs being undertaken to meet present and future water demand, their cost, the amount of water expected from each, and the timeframe for completion.
This is just a cursory description of the requirements; the statute describes all of the requirements in detail. In most cases, the law is careful to state that the required analysis shall be based on information that is “reasonably available”. This appears to mean, for example, that the City need not prepare a comprehensive groundwater basin model to determine safe yield and the future impacts of groundwater withdrawals.
The law also says that if a project has been the subject of the water supply analysis required by the statute (SB 610), no additional water supply analysis is required for subsequent projects. And lastly, if, after all of this analysis, the agency determines that water supplies will not be sufficient, they must include that determination in their findings for the project.
Page 35
Chapter 111: Issues Addressed by the General Plan
Changes to Laws Pertaining to Local Government Organization
In 2000, amendments were enacted to provisions of the California Government Code relating to the responsibilities of Local Agency Formation Commissions (LAFCOs) in deciding local government reorganizations. Renamed the Cortese-Knox-Hertzberg Local Government Reorganization Act of 2000 (CI<H Act), the law now requires that service reviews be conducted for all new changes of government organization. The service review is intended as a decision-making tool that includes an evaluation of existing and future service conditions and a review of the advantages and disadvantages of various government service options. Government Code §56430 requires the preparation of a service review concurrently or in advance of consideration of changes to government organization initiated by a local agency, such as a sphere of influence amendment.
In conducting the service review, §56430 requires that LAFCOs adopt a written statement of determination with respect to each of the following:
►	Infrastructure needs and deficiencies
►	Growth and population projections for affected areas
►	Financing constraints and opportunities
►	Cost avoidance opportunities
►	Rate restructuring
►	Opportunities for shared facilities
►	Government structure options
►	Management efficiencies
►	Local accountability and governance
Any action by the City to amend its sphere of influence, or to annex land within its current sphere, would be guided by the conclusions and recommendations of the service review.
In establishing or revising a sphere of influence, LAFCo is guided by policies aimed at fostering orderly growth. The two overriding concerns of Santa Barbara County LAFCo with regard to the expansion of spheres of influence are 1) the ability of the local jurisdiction to provide public services in a timely and cost-effective manner, and 2) minimizing the premature conversion of prime agricultural lands. At a minimum, these two factors must be addressed in order for the sphere to be amended.
With regard to agricultural land, Santa Barbara County LAFCo policies discourage annexation or incorporation proposals which would allow, or would likely lead to, the conversion of prime agricultural land unless the affected jurisdiction has demonstrated that effective measures have been adopted to preserve the remaining prime lands identified within its planning area/proposed sphere of influence. Such measures could include:
S Establishing agricultural preserves;
S Designating land for agricultural use in the general plan (as in Guadalupe);
S Adopting a growth management plan or specific plan which clearly identifies areas to be preserved;
S Adopting an agricultural element to the general plan;
Page 36
Chapter 111: Issues Addressed by the General Plan
S Acquiring prime agricultural land in fee which is then leased back to farmers;
S Acquiring development rights on farmland.
Overall, LAFCo policies favor strategies for the preservation of agricultural land that offer the greatest degree of permanent protection.
Page 37
Chapter IV: Community
Land Use
Housing
Economic Development and Redevelopment Community Design and Historic Preservation Circulation
Public Facilities
Page 38
Land Use Element
A.	Introduction
When considering the seven topics, or elements that a general plan is required to cover (land use, circulation, housing, conservation, open space, noise and safety), the issue of land use is probably of greatest interest to the public. The Land Use Element determines the locations within the City and its planning area where residential, commercial, industrial, public, and open space land uses may occur at present and in the future. The Land Use Element also works with the other parts of the plan to determine the location, rate and timing of new growth and development.
B.	Land Use Designations
The Land Use Element establishes the following land use designations within the City and its planning area:
Industrial:
Light Industrial
General Industrial
Planned Development-Industrial
Commercial:
Central Business District General Commercial
Agriculture:
Agriculture
Open Space:
Open space Park
Residential:
Low Density Residential Medium Density Residential High Density Residential Residential Planned Development
Specific Plan
As determined by specific plan
Public Facility:
Public Facility Park
C. Industrial (Light Industrial and General Industrial)
In order to provide an opportunity for local employment and an improved tax base, suitable areas for industrial use have been designated. The City presently has existing industrial uses that serve both the local and regional area. There are also industrial businesses involved in the manufacturing of products which are distributed outside of the local economy. The trend of small and medium light industrial firms relocating from large metropolitan areas to smaller communities may be indicative of future industrial development for Guadalupe.
The placement of industrial development is very important with respect to its relationship with surrounding Land Uses. The development of industrial areas need to recognize the balance of protecting both surrounding residents from the nuisances which industry can create, and the high monetary investment
Land Use Element
which industry brings to an area. The primary goal of this section is to protect both industrial and residential uses through goals, policy, and programs outlined in this element. Programs such as the creation of planned industrial parks, the unification of architectural styles, landscaping and buffer zones will ensure a pleasant environment for both the City and the industry.
The land adjacent to the railroad and Obispo Street is well suited for industry since it is adjacent to both major roads and rail transportation. These same qualities likewise make these areas unsuitable for any new or expanded residential use due to high noise levels from existing or potential uses and impacts due to air quality, lighting and other factors relative to industrial operations.
In order to expand the City's economic base, the Land Use Plan has designated additional land for general and light industrial uses south of the present City limits. There are two types of industrial areas proposed on the Land Use Map, Light Industrial and General Industrial. Light Industrial will have a character of use that does not have smoke, fumes, or other noxious effects. General Industrial may have such effects if they cannot be fully avoided, however, all industrial use will be subject to performance standards concerning noise, appearance, traffic, and air pollution.
D.	Commercial
This section identifies the two planning areas associated with commercial development within Guadalupe, the Central Business District and the General Commercial District. While each of these areas has unique characteristics and needs, both must also develop in a manner which addresses the needs of the community as a whole.
The maintenance of a healthy commercial base is important not only for the revenue derived from it, but also because of the convenience offered to residents by their ability to purchase a wide range of products and services locally.
Central Business District
The Central Business District (CBD) is comprised of approximately seven City blocks whose boundaries consist of Pioneer Street to the west and Olivera Street to the east. The northern boundary extends to Eleventh Street with Seventh Street as the southern boundary.
The existing Central Business District is characterized by a mixture of retail semi-retail commercial, restaurants and limited office space. While the majority of the property located east of Pioneer Street is presently developed with older multi-family dwellings, its incorporation into the Central Business District is vital. Extending the CBD into this area will facilitate the location of off street parking behind existing stores as well as provide adequate lot depths to encourage larger scale commercial development.
A well-defined CBD brings many advantages to the City as a whole. First there is convenience for the shopper. With a diversity of shopping opportunities in a single area the need for increased shopping trips and
Page 40
Land Use Element
driving are reduced. Another advantage is the allocation of services and the reduced strain on the City’s infrastructure. Business owners will also benefit; an active shopping environment is conducive to better business. Finally, there are the benefits to the City as a whole. With an active trade center also comes community pride and interest.
Property within the Central Business District should be developed to its highest potential. A parcel of land can be utilized more effectively by the physical expansion of the building, the maximum utilization of yards and side entrances, and by way of reorganization of interior space to accommodate an increase in inventory. The creation of mezzanines and canopy shelters are also conducive to a viable commercial center.
Today’s Central Business District must be competitive with the modern shopping center, i.e., be physically convenient and aesthetically pleasing. The most successful Central Business Districts have a number of characteristics in common. Most important of these are a homogeneous site, easy access, well located and well distributed parking, good vehicular circulation, and the separation of vehicular and pedestrian traffic so that shoppers can walk freely into the shopping core. Furthermore, the walks should be enhanced with trees, planters, benches, and wherever possible, works of art. Areas between buildings or clusters of buildings should be designated as pedestrian ways.
The objectives of the City of Guadalupe CBD are to concentrate development in a functional, efficient manner, and to create an attractive revitalized center for retail businesses and social activities. The end result will be an environment beneficial to the shopper, merchant, landowner, and the community as a whole.
Revitalization of the Central Business District should start with adherence to the following principles:
•	Provision of adequate off street parking.
•	Safe and convenient Pedestrian circulation enhanced by landscaping within the shopping area.
•	Convenient automobile access and inter-parking circulation around the central business core area.
•	Structural soundness of commercial buildings in conformance with the uniform building code, with attention to their architectural treatment. Improvement of visual aspects of signs.
•	Removal from the Central Business District all incompatible uses adversely affecting the environment.
General Commercial District
The primary function of General Commercial development is geared towards providing services to tourists, visitors and other travelers. The businesses encouraged within this district usually include motels, automotive services, and restaurants in addition to other types of commercial activities.
Since General Commercial businesses are automobile oriented, the problem of drawing large numbers of cars into a limited area such as a residential neighborhood can have serious adverse impacts. Therefore, the General
Page 41
Land Use Element
Commercial Land Use designation has been designated on the west side of Guadalupe Street, south of the Central Business District and along the south side of West Main Street, north and south of Guadalupe Street.
Often the development of General Commercial businesses are disorganized, with many unrelated and transient businesses that do not function to their full potential. However, this land use designation will conditionally permit the construction of multi-family residences based on special criteria outlined in the Zoning Ordinance. This provision will be granted only along Guadalupe Street and will promote the mixture of residences with the commercial development along Guadalupe Street which will ease the visual impact and enable the area to develop in a pleasant shopping environment.
E.	Residential
There are three Residential Land Use designations in the General Plan. They range in density from concentrated urban development to low density which promotes single family homes. The Land Use Element promotes a variety of housing types and styles in both conventional and cluster type subdivisions.
More than any other Land Use category, residential uses affect the character and quality of the City. It is more than an immediate impact as decisions made will leave an indelible impression for decades to come.
The City has an established housing Stock that should be maintained and protected. The homes within the original townsite provides both quality housing and a link with the past. Newer tracts are in good structural and aesthetic condition and provide a majority of the housing stock for the City of Guadalupe. A Housing Element was adopted and became part of the General Plan in 1985. That document contained a comprehensive update and analysis of the residential needs in Guadalupe and provided goals and recommendations necessary for the improvement of housing conditions within the City.
The Land Use Element identifies the following types of residentially defined categories; Low Density Residential, Medium Density Residential and High Density Residential. Within each of these areas there are specific permitted and conditionally permitted uses and development standards which are outlined in the City Zoning Ordinance.
The main distinction between the three residential categories is the issue of allowed density. Residential density plays a significant role in the economic and social structure of the City. Density impacts the demand for facilities and services such as streets, utilities, schools, parks and open space.
It is believed that the residential land use pattern designated on the General Plan Land Use Map has equally distributed the amount and types of residential development which will ensure a diversity and mixture of housing types throughout the City.
All residential development should be designed on a "neighborhood unit" basis which provides similar housing within each neighborhood planning area.
Page 42
Land Use LLlement
High Density Residential development needs to be located near activity centers such as retail commercial and major commercial and major circulation routes to mitigate traffic impacts while Low Density Residential subdivisions should be located off of local streets and away from noise and other adverse impacts.
The three Residential Land Use designations are as follows:
Low Density Residential
Up to 6 units per gross acre. This category designates lands for detached single family housing. Any density up to the maximum may be permitted as long as environmental constraints are respected and urban services can be reasonably provided.
Medium Density Residential
Up to 10 units per gross acre. The housing types planned for this density are duplexes and triplexes, townhouses and similar multiple unit residential development. Urban services required for this increased density make location more selective than for lower density. Concerns regarding access, proximity to commercial services, impacts from adjoining uses and meeting housing needs should be addressed when applying this density to the Plan.
High Density Residential
Up to 20 units per gross acre. Areas designated High Density Residential are planned for the greatest density of residential development in the City. The type of units intended for this category are apartments, townhouses or other multiple structures which do not exceed three stories. Flexibility and innovation should be encouraged for projects of these types.
Residential Planned Developments
The Planned Development procedure is intended to encourage imaginative development and provide for effective use of unusual sites by allowing more flexibility in the design of housing projects than normal standards allow. Such variations from zoning and subdivision standards should provide benefit to the project or City which could not be provided under conventional regulations.
To approve a "Planned Development" overlay designation, the Planning Commission must recommend and the City Council will find that the project fulfills the general purpose of this section and meets one or more of the following criteria:
•	It provides facilities or amenities suited to a particular occupancy group (such as the elderly or families with children).
•	It transfers allowable development within a site from areas of greater environmental sensitivity or hazard to areas of less sensitivity or hazard.
•	It provides a greater range of housing types and costs than would be possible with development of uniform dwellings throughout the project site or neighborhood.
•	Features of the particular design achieve the intent of conventional standards (privacy, useable open spaces, adequate parking, compatibility with neighborhood character, and so on) as well as or better than the standards do.
Page 43
Land Use Element
• It incorporates features which result in consumption of significantly less materials, energy or water than conventional development.
Density Bonuses: When approving a Planned Development, the City Council may allow higher densities (more housing units per acre) than typically permitted by the city's zoning regulations. The approval of Density Bonuses is not an automatic entitlement. The community benefit created by increasing densities and the ability of the project to meet the criteria listed above will be the basis for approving Density Bonuses.
In Low and Medium Density Housing Areas, the City Council may approve a Density Bonus of up to 15 percent more housing units per acre. This provision may apply to all Low and Medium Density residential housing areas.
F.	Agriculture/Open Space
While there are few natural resources within the City of Guadalupe, their careful management is essential to the future well being of the City. Resource management is often straddled with trying to find compromises between two conflicting forces.
The City by its very nature urbanizes, yet needs to retain the open space characteristics around it to maintain its attractive and rural qualities.
The City has made a concerted effort to synchronize its planning of resource users to that of the County. As the County has the primary responsibility for resource management, it has a wide variety of resource Land Use categories. The City with its smaller resource management role has created two broad resource Land Use categories.
The Agricultural Land Use designation is involved primarily with active agricultural uses while the Open Space Land Use designation is a combination of grazing activities, sensitive environmental habitats, and passive recreational areas.
There are many Land Uses which conflict with one another necessitating wise Land Use planning. Agricultural is no exception. The activities generated by agricultural land uses include crop dusting, pesticide and insecticide spraying, agricultural burning and generation of odor and dust. Therefore, the Land Use Element has established policies that promote the urbanization of land within its planning area boundaries which .will mitigate land use conflicts and support the protection of all other agricultural land.
G.	Public Facilities/Parks
This Land Use category is concerned with water, sewage, drainage, school, parks and fire protection services in order to provide for continued development and expansion of the City of Guadalupe. The quality and adequacy of public facilities are two of the most important factors of an expanding economy and growth of a community. The development of specific programs for system improvements of both the present and long
Page 44
Land Use Llement
range needs are outside the scope of this study. Such improvements should be the subject of a study for a capital improvement program including a plan for financing.
Lands are needed for the provision of public services such as' water, sewer treatment and other governmental uses. Educational facilities are essential to the well being and continued vitality of a community and parks and recreational lands are designated to provide an aesthetic and healthful City.
The effort in this case is to identify those lands that distinguish themselves due to unique factors attributable to them. Furthermore, policies and criteria have been developed for their continued expansion and to ensure that they are maintained as compatible uses.
H,	Specific Plan
The specific plan category is applied to portions of the City’s planning area where, because of their size, environmental constraints, o an overall comprehensive plan for development provides the best option. Areas governed by specific plans include the Point Sal Dunes and River View residential neighborhoods east of Guadalupe Street and north of Highway 166, and the DJ Farms specific plan area at the southeast corner of Highway 166 and Guadalupe Street.
Point Sal Dunes Specific Plan
The Point Sal Dunes specific plan was approved in 1990 and covers about 60 acres located north of Highway 166 and east of Guadalupe Street along the western entrance to the City. The Specific Plan designates the majority of the plan area for residential development at about 4 dwellings per acre. Land is also set aside for open space along the Santa Maria River, and for parks. The plan area is nearly built out with 250 residences.
River View Specific Plan
The River View Specific Plan area covers a 26 acre site immediately to the west of Point Sal Dunes in the Coastal Zone portion of the City’s planning area. The plan accommodates development of 130 residential units, including 50 single family units and 80 multi-family townhome units clustered in fourplexes.
DJ Farms Specific Plan
When the adopted general plan was conceived, it recommended expanding the City's sphere of influence by about 1,075 acres to provide expansion areas for residential, commercial and industrial land uses. The expanded sphere includes the DJ Farms property and a number of other parcels that are currendy in agricultural preserves. When the plan was adopted, it assigned land use designations to the area within the proposed sphere of influence. However, the revised sphere of influence itself was not approved by LAFCo. One of the consequences is that the general plan shows urban land use designations for agricultural parcels outside the City's sphere of influence.
The City adopted the DJ Farms Specific Plan in 1993 to provide additional land suitable for housing, employment and shopping,. The DJ Farms is a 212
Page 45
Land Use Llemetit
acre, rectangular-shaped parcel located at the southeast comer of Main Street (State Highway 166) and Guadalupe Street (State Highway 1). The parcel is relatively flat and has been in agricultural production for many years with a variety of row crops including broccoli, cauliflower and squash. Surrounding properties to the east, south and west are all in cultivation with similar crops. The Santa Maria Valley Railroad crosses the property from the southeast to the northwest corner where it intersects the Southern Pacific Railroad which runs parallel to the western property line next to Highway 1.
The Specific Plan designates land for a variety of uses, including residential commercial, industrial, and open space/recreation (see Table 4-1). The following land use designations are unique to the DJ Farms specific plan area. Neighborhood Commercial
The neighborhood commercial designation is intended to accommodate commercial development that serves the every day convenience needs of residential neighborhoods. Such uses would include a supermarket, drugstore, and some professional offices.
Mixed Use
The mixed-use designation accommodates a range of land uses on the same site, including retail, offices and dwellings.
Commercial Service
The commercial service designation is intended to accommodate service stations, farm supply stores, lumber, building materials and hardware sales, wholesaling, warehousing, furniture and appliance sales, repair shops and other similar businesses.
Commercial Recreation
The commercial recreation designation is applied to lands intended to accommodate public or private revenue-generating recreation activities, such as a golf course clubhouse and pro shop.
Page 46
Land Use E/ement
Table 4-1			
Summary of Proposed Land Uses DJ Farms Specific Plan, 1993			
Land Use	Estimated Development		Total Acres
Residential	Allowable Density	Estimated Units1	
Low Density Residential	1-6 units per acre	115	22.5
; Medium Density Residential	6-10 units per acre	56	7
High Density Residential	10-20 units per acre	308	22
Commercial Service	80,000 square feet (3.5 FAR)		8.0
Commercial Neighborhood2	165,000 square feet (2.3 FAR)		11.0
Commercial Recreation	40,000 square feet (3.5 FAR)		4.0
Mixed-Use2	25,000 square feet		2.0
Urban Reserve/Light Industrial	70,000 square feet		42.0
School			7.5
Park			5.0
Agricultural Buffer			25.0
Golf Course			46.0
Detention Basin			10.0
TOTAL:	380,000 square feet	480 dwelling units	212.0
1	Total units assumes less than maximum allowable density will be built.
2	Includes some professional offices.
Although the DJ Farms Specific Plan was adopted in 1993, it remains vacant. The downturn of the economy in the early 1990s, along with continued development in nearby Santa Maria are contributing factors. However, recent interest in developing the site suggests that the goals of the Plan may be soon be realized.
I.	Land Use Intensity Standards
State law requires that the General Plan specify standards of population density and building intensity for each land use designation. Standards for
Page 47
Land Use Element
building intensity for residential designations are stated in terms of the maximum number of dwelling units allowed per gross acre and the allowable range of dwelling units per gross acre. Standards for population density for residential land uses are derived by multiplying the maximum number of dwellings allowed per gross acre by the average number of persons per dwelling unit, which for purposes of this General Plan is assumed to be 3.9 based on the 2000 US Census. For example, the maximum population standard for Low Density Residential development is about 6 X 3.9 = 15.6 persons per acre.
For non-residential land uses, building intensity standards are expressed in terms of maximum allowable floor-area ratios (FARs). A floor-area ratio is the ratio of building size to lot area:
Floor Area Ratio = Maximum Building Area Allowed Net Area of Lot
The FAR is most often used to determine the maximum allowable building size for a particular lot, as follows:
Maximum Building Area AJlowed = Net Area of Lot X Floor Area Ratio
For example, a 5,000 square foot lot with a FAR of 1.00 will allow a building of 5,000 gross square feet, regardless of the number of stories in the building (e.g., 2,500 square feet on two floors, or 5,000 square feet on one floor). The same lot with a FAR of 0.50 would allow a 2,500 square foot building, or a 10,000 square foot building with a FAR of 2.00.
Table 4-2 lists the standards for minimum lot size, the allowable range of dwelling units per gross acre, and the maximum allowable floor-area ratio for non-residential land uses.
Table 4-2
Building Intensity Standards
Land Use Category	Maximum Building Intensity
Residential Neighborhood Residential Medium Density Residential High Density Residential	6 units/acre 7-10 units/acre 11- 20 units/acre
Commercial	FAR* of 0.35
Industrial	FAR of 0.3
Public/Institutional	FAR of 0.2
* Floor Area Ratio (FAR), is the ratio of building area to the area of the lot. For example, a floor area ratio of one on a one acre lot results in a building floor area of 43,560 square feet.
Page 48
Land Use Element
J.	General Plan Holding Capacity
The adopted General Plan discusses the “holding capacity” which is the number of dwelling units, commercial and industrial floor space, etc., that can be accommodated based on the amount of land designated for these uses. Due to market forces, the size and shape of parcels and other factors, the maximum development potential is rarely achieved. For this reason, holding capacity is typically expressed as 80 percent of the gross development potential (acres x building intensity).
Table 4-3 summarizes the acreage designated for various land uses by the General Plan, and their corresponding holding capacities. Table 4-3 shows that the General Plan could accommodate a population of about 10,200 residents at full buildout, in addition to about 2.5 million total square feet of commercial and industrial development. It should be noted that these figures represent an estimate of conditions at full buildout of the land designated for these uses inclusive of existing development.
Page 49
Land Uie Llement
Table 4-3
General Plan Acreage and Holding Capacity By Land Use Category
(City Limits and Sphere of Influence)
Land Use Category	Acres	Building Intensity	Estimated Holding Capacity (80% of max. dev. potential}		
			Dwelling Units	Square Feet	Population2
Neighborhood Residential	436	6 units/acre	2,093		8,164
Medium Density Residential	81	7-10 units/acre	648		2,527
High Density Residential	83	11-20 units/acre	1,328		5,179
Central Business District	34	FAR 0.3		394,944	
General Commercial	31	FAR 0.3		356,611	
Neighborhood Commercial1	11	FAR 0.3		166,664	
Service Commercial1	8	FAR 0.3		79,653	
Recreation Commercial1	4	FAR 0.3		38,826	
Mixed Use1	2	FAR 0.3		23,232	100
Golf Course1	46			-	
General Industrial	102	FAR 0.2		1,777,248	
Light Industrial	48	FAR 2.0		836,352	
Parks/Schools/ Other Public	66	FAR 0.2			
Agriculture	428	-			
Open Space	101				
TOTAL:	1,481	1	-	4069	3,674,530J	
TOTAL POPULATION AT BUILDOUT:					15,970
Notes:
1.	Land use designations within the DJ Farms Specific Plan.
2.	Population assumes 3.9 persons per household.
3.	Non-public floor area potential.
Page 50
Land Use Element
According to the 2000 US Census, the City had about 1,450 dwelling units as of January, 2000, not counting dwellings approved or under construction. This leaves a remaining development potential of about 1,186 units that could be constructed within the City’s sphere of influence in accordance with the General Plan.
As discussed in Chapter II, SBCAG estimates that the City’s future (2020) population could reach as high as 6,400, or an additional 740 residents in eighteen years. Assuming the number of residents per dwelling remains constant from 2000 (3.9 persons per unit), an additional 190 dwellings will need to be constructed to house the future population. As illustrated by Table 4-3, the City’s adopted general plan can accommodate almost 1,200 additional dwelling units and a buildout population of about 10,200, or nearly twice the 2000 population.
Although the City’s general plan designates substantial acreage for additional urban development, the actual development potential of the plan area is constrained by regulatory and environmental factors. Note from Figure 4-1 that the City’s sphere of influence (the area into which the City will eventually grow and provide services) as adopted by the Local Agency Formation Commission (LAFCo) is coterminous with the city limits. Land designated for urban development by the general plan cannot be annexed to the city and served by municipal services unless and until it is included within the sphere. Additionally, all of the properties adjacent to the City are encumbered by Williamson Act contracts which limit the use of the property to agriculture for at least ten years. The practical effect of these regulatory and environmental constraints is that the future demand for urban land over at least the next ten years must be satisfied by land already within the Sphere of Influence/City limits. Although the Local Agency Formation Commission (LAFCo) could approve a sphere of influence amendment to add more land to the City’s supply within its general plan area, recent changes to state laws governing sphere of influence amendments require that the City demonstrate the ability to provide public services to its entire amended sphere, including a financing plan.
Table 4-4 summarizes the holding capacity of the City’s sphere of influence. As Table 4-4 shows, the land designated for urban development within the existing sphere is sufficient to accommodate a buildout population of 8,600 residents, which is well above the year 2020 population projected for the City by SBCAG (about 6,400). Thus, it appears that land designated for urban development within the existing sphere of influence can accommodate future population growth for the next twenty or more years.
Page 51
Land Use Element
Table 4-4
Sphere of Influence Holding Capacity, By Land Use Category
Land Use Category	Acres	Building Intensity	Estimated Holding Capacity (80% of max. dev. potential)		
			Dwelling Units	Square Feet	Population
Neighborhood Residential	211	6 units/acre	1,013		3,952
Medium Density Residential	33	7-10 units/acre	264		1,030
High Density Residential	58	11-20 units/acre	928		3,619
Central Business District	34	FAR 0.3		394,944	
General Commercial	21	FAR 0.3		246,259	
Neighborhood Commercial1	11	FAR 0.3		166,664	
Service Commercial1	8	FAR 0.3		79,653	
Recreation Commercial1	4	FAR 0.3		38,826	
Mixed Use1	2	FAR 0.3		23,232	100
Golf Course1	46			-	
General Industrial	102	FAR 0.2		1,777,248	
Light Industrial	48	FAR 2.0		836,352	
Parks/Schools/ Other Public	52	FAR 0.2			
Agriculture	0	-			
Open Space	41				
TOTAL:	671	-	2205	3,564,178s	
TOTAL POPULATION AT BUILDOUT:					8,601
Notes:
1.	Land use designations within the DJ Farms Specific Plan.
2.	Population assumes 3.9 persons per household.
3.	Non-public floor area potential.
Page 52
Land Use Element
K.	Corresponding Zoning Designations
The land use designations contained in the General Plan describe the general uses to which land may be committed in the City of Guadalupe. They do not imply the appropriate land use for a given parcel of land, which will vary based on a variety of factors, such as the location, size and shape of the property, and market conditions for particular land uses. Site-specific development standards are provided in the Guadalupe ZoningOrdinance which divides the City into districts, or zones. By law the zoning districts must be consistent with the land use designations shown on the Land Use Diagram.
Table 4-5 summarizes the various zoning districts that may be used to implement the land use classifications shown on the Land Use Diagram (Figure 4-1). In addition to these base zoning districts, there are a number of combining districts that provide additional standards applicable to specific areas of the City.
Table 4-5
Land Use Designations and Corresponding Zoning Districts
Land Use Designation	Consistent Zoning Districts
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
[to be completed after GP adoption.]
Page 53
Legend		
Neighborhood Residential	Light Industrial	Open Space
(1 -6 units/acre)	General Industrial	:	Agriculture
Medium Density Residential (10 units/acre)	Public Facility ■ \ : Central Business District	\//\ Parcels Subject to Williamson Act Contracts (2001)
High Density Residential (20 units/acre)	;	' . General Commercial	Specific Plan
1 Sphere of Influence City Limits	New Parks (location approximate)	
Redevelopment Project Boundary	Figure 4-1:	General Plan Land Use Diagram
hand Use Element
Land Use Goals, Policies and Programs
Goals
1.	To guide the City of Guadalupe by providing a planning approach which reduces public service costs, preserves community character, and enhances the environmental quality.
2.	To manage development to reduce construction and maintenance costs, improve infrastructure efficiency, prevent urban sprawl, support community preferred life styles and maintain property values.
3.	To separate incompatible land uses for functional efficiency, reduction of nuisance, and improvement of health and safety.
4.	To stabilize and maintain the older portions of Guadalupe for more efficient use of services, protection of the housing supply, prevention of blight and maintenance of property and tax values.
5.	To preserve and encourage residential neighborhoods to strengthen community identity, provide efficient service distribution, reduce transportation demands and protect the family.
6.	To develop vacant and under-utilized land within existing urban and suburban areas for the maximum benefit of the entire community.
7.	To provide long term, high standard commercial growth of a stable and permanent nature that maintains and enhances the quality and well being of the community.
8.	To provide for quality residential development that will provide both attractive and economical dwellings for all segments of the population, yet protect and enlarge the overall community.
9.	To provide for creative opportunities that will encourage development of economic housing and protect the environmental quality through the use of performance standards.
Policies
General Policies
1.	Residential densities will be evaluated based on the total acreage of the site in order to encourage the use of clustering and other innovative land use techniques which preserve the environment and increase community livability.
2.	Annexations shall be reviewed on a case by case basis so as to determine the suitability of the proposal and use and zoning designations in relationship to the existing City land use pattern, and potential future annexations.
Page 55
La/id Use Ulemeni
3.	Projects proposed within the County that fall within Guadalupe’s designated planning area shall be evaluated by the City to determine their consistency With the City’s General Plan.
4.	Planning activities of the City and County should be coordinated to encourage sound and orderly growth of areas that affect the respective jurisdictions.
Agriculture
5.	The City will encourage the urbanization of land within the planning area boundaries to minimize land use impacts with surrounding agriculture land.
6.	The continuation of agricultural uses in the unincorporated areas which do not cause adverse effect to the City will be encouraged by the City of Guadalupe.
7.	Prime agricultural lands characterized by having Class I or II soils and within a Williamson Act Agricultural Preserve shall be protected from urban development until such time it is established that conversion to urban uses is necessary for the viability of the City of Guadalupe.
Central Business District
8.	The City will encourage residential activity above compatible off ice and retail uses in the Central Business District.
9.	The City will encourage through a public awareness program the tax advantage of restoring and revitalizing older existing commercial structures.
10.	The City will work to strengthen its partnership with the private sector to protect and expand the economic viability of the downtown.
11.	The City will reserve the Central Business District for uses which primarily provide retail and service businesses which serve the entire community and visitors.
Commercial (General)
12.	Commercial areas shall 'be served by public utility infrastructure without detriment to the existing systems.
13.	Commercial uses should maintain a screened buffer area between themselves and adjacent land uses of a higher or lower use.
14.	Future commercial uses will be designated only as the urban area expands and not as isolated islands in advance of residential development.
15.	Development of commercial parks or other specialized clusters of supportive commercial activities shall be encouraged.
Page 56
hand Use Element
16.	Commercial development shall meet design and architectural standards as established by the City.
17.	In any residential category developed as a planned development, limited acreage not to exceed 2.5 percent gross acreage may be developed as neighborhood commercial for subdivisions of at least 40 acres and 200 dwelling units. A building permit shall not be issued within this commercial area until 50 percent of the dwelling units in the planned development have been completed.
18.	Residential activity above compatible office and retail uses shall be encouraged.
Industrial
19.	The City will provide for industrial development which serves to improve the local economy and does not otherwise detract from the Guadalupe environment.
20.	The City will provide for quality Industrial development through the use of performance standards.
21.	Areas indicated for industrial development shall be protected from encroachment of residential and/or other incompatible land uses.
22.	Industrial uses shall provide and maintain a buffer between themselves, and adjacent less intensive uses.
23.	Proposed industrial activities shall be served by service infrastructure without detriment to the existing service systems.
24.	Emphasis shall be placed on developing designated industrial sites with a planned industrial park concept.
25.	Ingress and egress to industrial projects shall be consolidated in order to mitigate traffic and land use impacts.
26.	Diversified, clean, labor intensive light industrial uses are to be encouraged that yield multiple economic benefits.
27.	Industrial areas should be located in immediate vicinity of a major circulation collector and have direct access to it.
28.	Permitted industrial uses shall be classified on the basic performance standards rather than the nature of their activity.
29.	The City will provide incentives for non-polluting industries to locate in City (in terms of processing time, lot coverage and other building code bonuses).
Page 57
Land Use Ulement
Residential
30.	New residential development of four dwelling units per acre or more will be permitted only when public services including central water and sewer service are available or provided by the developer.
31.	Varied approaches to residential development will be actively encouraged to promote well designed and innovative residential areas that will provide a variety of housing types and densities.
32.	Residential areas shall be protected from higher intensity uses through buffer zones or other comparable methods.
33.	Incentives may be allowed in the form of a bonus density not to exceed 15% for projects of superior quality and design, providing a variety of amenities that through their innovation and high standards promote a better community and neighborhood vitality and are developed as a planned development.
34.	In order to encourage investment and use of existing infrastructure, a bonus density of one dwelling unit per 6,000 square feet may be allowed In excess of permitted limits for superior projects within the 3.1 designation in the original Guadalupe townsite. Only vacant lots shall be eligible for this bonus density option. This bonus density shall not be combined with any other form of bonus density incentive.
35.	In any residential category developed as a planned development, limited acreage not to exceed 6.25% gross acreage may be developed as Neighborhood’ Commercial for subdivisions of at least 40 acres and 200 dwelling units. A building permit shall not be issued within this Neighborhood Commercial area until 50% of the dwelling units in the planned development have been completed.
36.	Planned development projects which propose innovative designs shall be encouraged.
Programs
1.	The City of Guadalupe shall work with the County of Santa Barbara to discourage parcelization of agricultural land and to encourage the viability of those areas until they are annexed and ready for urban development.
2.	The City shall provide incentives for new businesses to locate in the Central Business District.
3.	The City will develop and implement a program which will enhance, conserve, and revitalize the historic character of the existing Central Business District.
4.	The City will develop "fee incentives" for new mixed-use development in designated areas that enhance the vitality of the Central Business District.
Page 58
hand Use Element
5.	The City will continue with efforts of the Redevelopment Agency that will improve, enhance, and expand the Central Business District.
6.	The City will develop fee incentive programs for the extended Central Business District as part of an overall planned development.
7.	The City will develop and implement a Central Business District Urban design program to include:
a.	Development of an overall master plan.
b.	Listing and prioritisation of downtown beautification projects; i.e., street furniture, water fountains, landscaping, lighting.
c.	Development of overall design theme for the CBD and adjacent areas.
d.	Downtown parking district and improvements.
e.	The downtown district shall be studied to determine an appropriate lighting theme which will make it attractive for nighttime activities and at the same time provide a greater level of public health and safety.
8.	The City Council will appoint a committee that will investigate the alternatives available to the community in strengthening the vitality of the Central Business District. The committee should consist of local downtown merchants, private enterprises and local government.
9.	The City will establish procedures and methodology to improve the local tax base through the continued use of non-polluting commercial and industrial uses.
10.	The City will cooperate with the local Chamber of Commerce and large scale employers to establish the future demands of different types of industrial land uses.
11.	The City should develop design criteria for the renovation and improvement of the downtown and entranceways of the City.
Page 59
Housing Element
A.	Background and Analysis
State law is more specific about the content of housing elements than any other portion of the general plan. The Housing Element is also the only element that is actually subject to review and "certification" by the state.
The Housing Element is required by State law to include all of the following information:
Q Information about the existing housing stock, covering such items as the amount, type, cost, tenure, and structural conditions of the units.
Q An analysis of potential barriers to housing production including both governmental and non-governmental constraints.
Q? Information about energy conservation opportunities in housing rehabilitation and new construction.
Q Information about existing subsidized housing and the possibility of its being lost due to conversion to market-rate units.
Q Specific goals, measurable objectives, policies and implementation measures. Objectives must include targets for housing unit production, based on a "fair share allocation".
The last comprehensive update of the Housing Element was conducted in 1992 and minor revisions were made in 1998 The following discussion summarizes the goals, policies, quantified objectives and programs contained in the Housing Element, which is published separately. The next Housing Element update is scheduled for 2002-2003.
B.	Fair Share Allocation: Overall Production Objective
The California Department of Housing and Community Development (HCD) estimates the statewide need for housing, which is then broken down into regions. Within each region, the area council of governments (in Guadalupe's case, the Santa Barbara County Association of Governments) prepares a more specific regional distribution of the needs to the local counties and cities. This so-called "fair share allocation" is a specific number of units in different price ranges assigned to each local jurisdiction.
In 1992, SBCAG calculated that the City of Guadalupe should accommodate 555 new housing units by 1997 (about 80 units per year) bringing the total dwelling units in the City to about 2000. Of this total allocation, 177 units were needed for households with low, or very low incomes.
According to the 2000 Census, the City was estimated to have about 1,450 total dwelling units which is well short of the overall target set by SBCAG. Still, the City has made some progress toward achieving its share of market rate (for moderate and above moderate incomes) housing which constituted the largest portion of the City’s fair share requirement in 1992.
The Housing Element was updated in 1992 and again in 1998. Please refer to the separate Housing Element section of the Guadalupe Planning Documents.
Page 60
Housing Element
Building permit history for residential construction suggests that the City’s fair share allocation is not likely to be achieved during the timeframe set by the State. Since 1990, a total of 244 dwellings — less than one half the City’s allocation for 1992-1997) were constructed in Guadalupe, which includes 35 that are expected to be constructed in the first quarter of 2002.
Table 5-1
Building Permit History for Single Family Residences 1999-2002
Year	Permits Issued
1990-1998	133
Ave. Permits Per Year Prior to 1999:	17
1999	29
2000	21
2001	26
2002	35
Total 1999-2002:	111
Ave. Permits Per Year 1999-2002:	28
In 2002, SBCAG is expected to issue another “fair share” housing allocation in advance of the next round of Housing Element updates.
Fair Share Allocation Affordability Breakdown
As discussed above, the allocation program breaks down the total housing production goal into various cost categories: units affordable to "very low" income, to "low" income, to "moderate" income and to "above moderate" income households, which are defined as follows:
Very Low = less than 50% of the County median household income Low — 50% - 80% of the County median household income Moderate = 80% -120% of the County median household income Above Moderate = 121% or more of the County median household income
To meet the City's fair share, other programs including incentives and the use of State or federal funds will be required. Such programs are included in this element.
Page 61
Housing Element
C.	Special Needs Groups
Groups with special housing needs include seniors, farmworkers, large families, single-parent families, disabled persons and the homeless. The Housing Element includes programs to address the housing needs of these groups, as well as programs designed to provide flexibility in providing "non-traditional” housing types that may help meet the special needs of groups such as the elderly and single-parent families.
Housing Goals, Policies and Programs
[Goals, policies and programs relating to housing can be found in the Housing Element which is published separately]
Page 62
Economic Development/ Redevelopment Element
A.	Background and Analysis
Sound economic development policy decisions are based on a solid foundation of information and analysis of the local economy. While most communities are primarily interested in various aspects of the local economy, regional and national economic forces must also be assessed. The local information and analysis efforts of Guadalupe should revolve around at least three related elements.
1.	An analysis of industry performance and the components of change for targeted industries.
2.	An assessment of community competitive advantages and disadvantages.
3.	An assessment of recent area business trends.
The primary objective of the analysis of industry performance is to identify the businesses that are growing nationally and those that are declining, and to show how the local community and economic area fare in comparison with national trends. A number of key performance indicators such as employment change, productivity, capital investment, wages, and value of shipments can provide clues. Regardless of the complexity of the performance analysis, the goal is to identify national growth industries that may provide opportunities at the local level. If industries that are growing nationally and that are doing even better locally can be identified, then an initial target industry list for either expansion or assistance programs can take shape. Alternatively, if there are industries that are not performing well locally but that are growing nationally, then some candidates for retention and assistance will have been identified subject to further information collection and analysis.
The community should, to the extent possible, search for the reasons for net changes in local employment. Gains and losses in specific industries are especially important because they can more easily be measured and reasons for the changes can more easily be found. The City and Chamber of Commerce should look for job gains when new businesses are started. Existing businesses are expanded locally, and more people are moving in. Likewise, we should look for job losses when businesses shut down, when employees are laid off, and when people move out. What are the links between these developments? The extent of the changes does not represent an end in itself, rather it is a means to better understand the nature of the local economy, its problems, strengths, and range of policy choices.
Local economic development will be determined in large part by local resources which are the support base for ED programs and activities. The major elements of this base are economic development attitudes, the economic base, and financial resources.
Page 63
Economic Development! ^development Element
Frequently, the attitudes of community groups toward local ED efforts are not considered in the planning process. This may be due to local conflict in the community regarding development or lack of understanding of the ED process itself. An attitude survey can provide valuable information for ED programs. When conflict is substantial or when the community does not perceive development coherently, the survey can help identify issues and development opportunities and produce specific information on shopping patterns, the journey to work, labor force attitudes, and other community characteristics that are critical to effective marketing of the ED programs. Surveys can also aid in building community "vision", a necessary ingredient in ED program development.
The economic base study is the best known and most widely used tool for gathering factual information and gaining a better understanding of the local economy. The economic base started as a theory which said that "the structure of the economy is made up of two broad classes of productive effort - the basic activities which produce and distribute goods and services for export to firms and individuals outside a defined, localized economic area, and nonbasic activities whose goods and services are consumed at home within the boundaries of the local economic area". This means that the more a city can "export" its goods and services to consumers outside its boundaries, the more the city can financially support local (nonbasic) activities.
Consideration of economic base resources to support and target economic development initiatives should go beyond the typical profiling of industry employment and the size, occupational makeup, age, education, and Income of the labor force. Other local "resources" such as existing industrial linkages - that is, how industries support one another within the community - should also be studied. Knowledge of these factors can help refine ED programming by identifying both short term and future markets for Industry recruitment and start up efforts, as well as areas for the "export" of basic activities to Increase capital inflow. Finally, existing training, education, and related services that are important in economic development efforts should be inventoried. One of the greatest barriers to development is the lack of knowledge that organizations and programs have of one another's activities and resources.
The financial resources available for ED activities will obviously affect program choices, strategies, and the local government's role in encouraging development. The financial base for ED can be assembled from a variety of sources, including private sector support, local government resources, and state and federal assistance.
Information on the competitive advantages of a community can provide a basis for developing policies and programs to attract businesses that may be compatible with local resources. Among the most important clusters of competitive advantage factors are demand and supply side forces such as consumer markets, labor, land availability, transportation facilities, raw materials, and access to markets. Local characteristics such as the availability and quality of public services, governmental structure, community attitudes, and external factors such as federal and state programs and regulations also are often important. Analysis of competitive advantages can be done in
Page 64
Economic Development/ Redevelopment Element
conjunction with, an evaluation of community economic development resources.
On February 11,1985, the Guadalupe City Council took the first step toward revitalizing the City and beginning an Economic development program by establishing a Redevelopment Agency which encompassed approximately 550 acres. Redevelopment agencies have broad authority under California law to alleviate conditions of blight and encourage new development. Redevelopment is also a powerful tool available to local governments for the purposes of restoring economic vitality. The Redevelopment Project Area is shown on Figure 4-1.
The Project Area was selected based upon an assessment of the existing physical, social, and economic conditions in the area, and after consideration of long range planning objectives for the City. The primary goals, policies and objectives of the redevelopment agency are incorporated into the General Plan since it is the primary goal of both documents to revitalize and enhance the City of Guadalupe.
The Agency’s primary goal is to restore economic vitality and diversity to the City of Guadalupe. Because of the City's historic dependency upon a sole economic sector (i.e., agriculture), it is subject to seasonal fluctuations in business activity resulting in higher unemployment rates, lower per capita incomes, and reduced municipal revenues. Furthermore, the City’s public service costs, particularly for police services, increase because of the large number of idle or transient individuals. In addition, private investment in new commercial facilities is discouraged because of the small population and uncertain economy. A major thrust of the redevelopment program will be to attract commerce and industry which provide steady, year round employment and higher wages, and to stimulate social and economic development.
Economic Development Goals, Policies and Programs
Goals
1.	To expand employment opportunities to offer stable means of income, promote, stabilize and develop Guadalupe, provide economic security for the community and insure the continued means to maintain the life-style of new and existing residents.
2.	To establish a cooperative relationship with the private sector to foster the development of the City.
Policies
1.	The City shall use its land use and zoning regulations to help protect the economic -position of viable commercial areas.
2.	Local merchants and property owners will be expected to repair and maintain their shops and buildings to the highest possible level within their available financial means.
Page 65
Economic Development/Redevelopment Element
3.	The City will encourage the renovation of older and historic buildings, and the rehabilitation of commercial districts, through low interest loans or other state, federal or redevelopment programs.
4.	Revitalize the Central Business District by providing additional parking, upgrading properties, providing architectural compatibility and improved circulation.
5.	Assist with property rehabilitation and maintenance, thereby improving the visual image of the City.
6.	Encourage and promote new types of commercial and industrial uses In order to diversify the City-s economic base.
Programs
1.	Acquire and assemble land for redevelopment to new residential, commercial and industrial use.
2.	Demolish and clear dilapidated structures.
3.	Rehabilitate and reconstruct substandard commercial or residential structures.
4.	Issue mortgage revenue bonds to facilitate new industrial, commercial, and residential development.
5.	Participate with property owners and business tenants to improve their property and improvements.
6.	Relocate displaced property owners and tenants from acquired properties.
7.	Construct public improvements and facilities which cannot be financed by the private sector acting alone.
Page 66
Community Design and Historic Preservation
A.	Background
The City of Guadalupe has throughout the years been able to retain the quality and character that gives a unique and distinct atmosphere to the community. The preservation of this character, coupled with the new development and modernization of existing structures, must be balanced to enable the City to provide both new economic opportunities along with continuity with its past.
This portion of the General Plan establishes policy and guidelines for the establishment of a Community Design and Historic Preservation program within the City. Although it is beyond the scope of this element to provide specifics, one of the implementation tools proposed as part of this General Plan is the adoption of a design ordinance which outlines specific policies, standards and programs.
B.	Community Design
Community Design is an elusive yet all-encompassing concern that can be thought of as the quality of the City's physical/spatial and visual setting. The resources and components of Community Design include the natural environment (landform, rivers and creeks, vegetation) and built environment (structures, open space, travel routes, districts and neighborhoods, landmarks and focal points). All of these contribute to the overall image, appearance and function of the community.
A Community Design Element will be developed which addresses the interrelationship of built form, the natural environment, and people. Several overall design goals will be analyzed, including: imageability, livability, the relationship of built form to scale, and the adaptability to change. These overall goals will be implemented at several scales: city-wide, district and neighborhood, and site and building.
The purpose of community design at the city-wide scale is to establish a physical framework that achieves the overall design goals. At the district and neighborhood scales, design objectives specific to the needs of each area must be developed. However, there are some general objectives and policies that apply to all districts and neighborhoods. At the city-wide scale the role of design is to create a framework that makes the district or neighborhood an identifiable, understandable, livable and unique entity. At the building and site scale, design focuses on livability, human scale and adaptability to change.
Page 67
Community Design and Historic Preservation
C.	Historic Preservation
To maintain the historic flavor of a community, the State of California has determined that a city may adopt a Historic Preservation Element as part of the General Plan. This General Plan will incorporate Historic Preservation as part of the Community Design Element. As previously mentioned, this Chapter is designed to be general in nature to be
followed by an ordinance which provides specific policies. The City of Guadalupe has many "historic" buildings, some dated from construction periods at the turn of the 19th century. There are presently no designated historic sites in the City recorded on the National Register of Historic Places, the California Landmark Series, or List of State Points of Historical Interest, however, the absence of registered historical sites does not mean that such sites could not be designated.
As part of the implementation program for the General Plan, the City will actively pursue programs for the protection, stabili2ation, preservation, rehabilitation and restoration of potential historic buildings.
A search of the City’s past provides a colorful history. The more recent historical past of Guadalupe can be traced back to 1841 when the 32,408 acre Guadalupe Rancho was granted to cattle ranchers Diego Olivera and Teodoro Arrelanes. The City was the focal point in the Santa Maria Valley and attracted Italian-Swiss dairymen who were among the first non-spanish settlers in the area. Agricultural activity also flourished in the area due to the fertile soil. In 1873, the City was officially established as a settlement. By the turn of the century, all of the major components that would shape the City’s development had occurred. The railroad came through in 1901 and the roadway between Guadalupe and Santa Maria had been finally improved. Guadalupe was officially incorporated in 1946.
The physical development of Guadalupe can be divided into two eras. Initial development in Guadalupe occurred in the northern portion of the City while later development due to the railroad occurred in the southern portion of the town. Today, Guadalupe is a mixture of the very old downtown central core, post World War II housing developments, and new tract developments occurring in the southeast and southwest portion of the City.
The historical architectural aspect of downtown Guadalupe was assessed in 1983 by a Regional Urban Design Assistance Team from the California Polytechnic State University at San Luis Obispo. The design team quickly noted the potential value for renovation and restoration. From a historic preservation standpoint, the downtown core is intact with many of the commercial structures in an architecturally pristine state.
Page 68
Community Design and Historic Preservation
D.	Archaeology
A recent archaeological records search identified several archaeological sites known to exist within a 5 mile radius of the proposed wastewater project which is approximately 1 /2 mile west of the City of Guadalupe. However, within the City boundaries there are no known archaeological sites.
Evidence of human habitation of the Central Coast of California dates back some 10,000 years. The Chumash occupied the dunes west of the City, as well as many other areas of the Central Coast until about the mid-1880s. Over 100 Chumash archaeological sites have been identified from the town of Grover Beach to the north to Mussel Point, with at least 16 shell midden sites used as temporary camps in the dune area. The Chumash were primarily hunters and gatherers, subsisting on fish, shellfish, acorns, seeds, and roots. Chumash archaeological sites in the Guadalupe-Nipomo Dunes Preserve have been recorded on official site record forms by the California Archaeological Site Inventory.
In 1769, Gaspar de Portola led the first Spanish land expedition through San Luis Obispo and Santa Barbara Counties, and traveled through the area now known as Guadalupe up to Monterey. He and his troops stopped overnight at a freshwater lake and named it Oso Flaco Lake after shooting a bear described as “oso flaco” (lean bear).
Thus, there is a possibility that some unknown archaeological site exists. Because the City of Guadalupe is in a sensitive locale which includes the possibility of native American burial sites, precautions should be taken whenever construction occurs. The City's environmental review procedures will ensure the identification and protection of any archaeological sites.
The Southern Pacific Railroad arrived in the area in 1895 and the City’s modem history began to unfold as Guadalupe became the center for agricultural operations in the fertile Santa Maria Valley.
Community Design and Historic Preservation Goals, Policies and Programs
Goals
1.	To conserve the cultural heritage of Guadalupe for future generations.
2.	To guide community growth in an orderly manner that preserves the character of the area.
3.	To encourage development in a manner that is consistent with Guadalupe's unique setting.
4.	To encourage and foster cooperation with private developers to retain the unique character of Guadalupe.
Page 69
Community Design and Historic Preservation
Policies
Historic Preservation
1.	The City will encourage the preservation, restoration maintenance, and monumenting of all significant historical resources in the City.
2.	The City will protect archaeological sites from disruption.
Design
3.	The design element of the General Plan is not meant to strictly limit new development within the community. It may be liberally interpreted as long as the proposed development does not detract from the community.
4.	The design of industrial, multiple family and new housing projects should be of a consistent and compatible nature in their architectural style, scale, and site layout.
5.	Landscaping should be sufficient to buffer large areas of paving, screen objectionable views, buffer incompatible uses, and enhance both the appearance of the development and the community as a whole.
6.	Signs should be consistent with the historic nature of the community and used primarily for identification.
7.	Mechanical equipment, outside storage and other mechanical objects should be placed in inconspicuous locations and screened from view.
8.	In order to preserve the unique and original character of Guadalupe, design themes should model themselves on examples of the architectural style prevalent within the City in the earlier part of this century.
Page 70
Circulation Element
A.	Background and Analysis
The Circulation element includes the general location and network of existing and proposed major thoroughfares which are correlated with the Land Use Element. The Circulation system is graphically displayed on the Circulation Map.
Circulation as used in this section of the General Plan refers to the means for transporting people and goods in and around the City and its surrounding region. Transportation systems have a great deal of influence on how a community has historically developed and will develop in the future. The availability of transportation facilities is a key factor In determining the type and density of development.
The City of Guadalupe is served by a variety of transportation facilities. These include streets/highways, bicycle routes, and a railroad. This portion of the Plan identifies these facilities and systems. From this analysis are derived a Circulation Element to accommodate future growth and improve current facilities.
The network of streets and highways is the City's most important transportation facility. It brings the most people and goods into the community and provides the means for their distribution. To effectively do this the street pattern should facilitate movement to and from shopping, schools, work and other activity centers in the community. Making up this network are routes of different types. These can be classified as highway, arterial, collector and local streets, each of which are discussed below. Proper planning for each type of road is needed to support the Land Use plan. The specifications for these routes are detailed in the City's Public Works Standards.
State Highways, although not under the City’s control, are addressed in this chapter and designated on the City's plan. Doing this allows us to acknowledge their influence on our street network and plan city routes compatible with the State system. State Highways are the responsibility of the California Department of Transportation (Caltrans) and their alignments and specifications are determined by Caltrans. Both types of routes serve primarily through traffic users.
B.	Highways
State Highway 1 or Guadalupe Street bisects the City extending north into the Five Cities area of San Luis Obispo County and south through Orcutt and toward Vandenberg Air Force Base. Highway 1 is designated as a Scenic Highway on the State's plan, necessitating special care in preservation of the scenic character of the route.
Page 71
Circulation dement
State Highway 166 extends from the southerly edge of Guadalupe, east to Highway 101 in Santa Maria. It serves as an arterial between the two cities and also carries traffic between the two highways. Any increases in regional traffic as a result of increased population will likely occur along this route.
C.	Arterials
These streets provide the major routes for traffic flow within the City. They connect the areas of high traffic generation, therefore, their function is to move large volumes of traffic and should be designated to perform that function.
D.	Collectors
Guadalupe's lineal pattern and limited number of railroad crossings suggest a series of parallel north-south collector streets extending north from West Main Street and south from Eleventh Street, with an intermediate collector connecting across town from Pioneer Street over the railroad to Flower Street. This collector system will lead residential traffic to and from the schools, commercial areas and industrial areas within the City. Eleventh Street, crossing the railroad at the north end of town, extends from Pioneer Street east to Simas Road and continues as a collector, to West Main Street. West Main Street, on the south side of town, serves as a collector west of Guadalupe Street, picking up traffic from the other collector streets and leading it to the arterials.
Obispo Street will serve as an industrial collector, necessitating a design to provide for agricultural truck traffic.
E.	Local Streets
These are used to provide access to abutting property, locations for utility easements, and fire breaks between buildings. Carrying traffic is a secondary function of local streets and they should be designed to discourage through traffic. Heavy trucks should be excluded from these streets.
F.	The Railroad
The coastal route of the Southern Pacific Railroad (SPRR) passes through the center of Guadalupe and provides a separate and distinct transportation system. Much of Guadalupe's agricultural industry involves the transfer of produce from field trucks to the railroad, with appropriate packing and processing in sheds at this point. Increased use of trucks for long distance hauling has made the packing sheds into a dual purpose transfer point into both railroad cars and long haul trucks depending upon the crops and the market.
The main line of the railroad carries long distance through traffic and numerous spurs provide for local loading and unloading.
Page 72
Circulation Element
The SPRR is both an asset and a liability to the City. While it does provide service to the proposed and existing industrial areas, it also divides the community and exposes the length of the City with noise, dust and visual pollution. Safety is also a concern. The SPRR crosses several major streets at grade and is a source of possible injury and death. Residential areas adjacent to the tracks should be fenced to reduce movements across the tracks. Landscaping and other beautification and buffering program should be undertaken where possible to minimize land use and noise impacts.
Page 73
e as a Sphere of Influence ------- City Limits
Legend
Future Collector Street State Highways
Future Signalized Intersection
Figure 8-1: Circulation Diagram
Circulation dement
Circulation Goals, Policies and Programs
Goals
1.	To develop circulation routes to promote efficient transportation, reduce hazards and pollution, and conserve energy.
2.	To provide a street system which will adequately serve homes, businesses, industry, recreation, and other uses as they develop according to the Land Use Element.
Policies
1.	Traffic should be routed around, rather than through, residential neighborhoods.
2.	The circulation system shall be consistent with adjacent land uses.
3.	Curbside parking should be reserved for downtown shoppers and tourists. People who work downtown should use spaces along side streets surrounding the heart of the downtown or in all day parking lots.
4.	Landscape amenities should be provided to enhance the overall City image.
5.	The City will continue to control outdoor advertising through the development of a sign ordinance.
6.	Off-street parking should be provided to the extent that is needed. Bikeways
7.	Bicycle transportation facilities should be provided wherever feasible.
8.	Where possible, bicycle routes should be developed to lead to schools, shopping centers and recreational facilities.
Programs
1.	The City will promote an ongoing street maintenance program.
2.	The City will seek state, federal and other sources of funds to effectively implement local scenic improvement measures.
Page 75
Public Facilities Element
A.	Background
This portion of the City’s General Plan is concerned with the necessary public facilities required in order to provide for continued development and expansion of the City of Guadalupe.
Environmental characteristics influence population growth, density and distribution. They also affect both the nature and cost of public improvements. Topography, geology and climate are characteristics which affect the construction and operation of public facilities.
Quality and adequacy of public facilities are two of the most important requirements of an expanding economy and growth of a community. The conclusions and recommendations contained In this report provide for the public facilities necessary for the future growth and development of the City of Guadalupe.
However, further study on special issues should be conducted. The development of specific programs for system improvements of both the present and long range needs are outside the scope of this study. Such improvements should be the subject of a study for a Capital Improvement Program including a plan for financing.
B.	Water
In December, 2001, the City prepared a draft Water Master Plan to guide the present and future management of water resources. The following discussion of water supply and management is summarized from that study which is available for review in its entirety at City Hall, 918 Obispo Street.
Water Supply
The City derives its water supplies from two sources: local groundwater originating in the Santa Maria Groundwater Basin, and the State Water Project.
Groundwater
The City extracts groundwater from Santa Maria Groundwater Basin which underlies the city and much of norther Santa Barbara and souther San Luis Obispo Counties. The City shares this resource with agricultural and other domestic users throughout the Sarita Maria Valley. The available storage of the basin is estimated to be about 1.5 million AF. It is unclear whether or not the basin is in a state of overdraft, where extractions exceed recharge. A lawsuit is pending in 2002 which could specify the amount of groundwater each of the various users can legally withdraw on an annual basis. Until the lawsuit is decided and the basin is adjudicated, the City is free to pump as much water from the basin as it needs.
Page 76
Public Facilities Fitment
The City operates one well located on Fifth Street. The well was constructed in 1978 and produced water of marginal quality. The well can pump 750 gallons per minute. Since the City is not restricted as to the amount of groundwater it may pump, the City extracts water on an as-needed basis depending in State water deliveries. Two other wells are owned by the City but are currently inoperable.
State Water
Since 1998 the City has received 550 AFY from the State Water Project to augment the City’s groundwater supplies. Although the City’s allocation is 550 AFY, the allocation is not guaranteed and cutbacks in deliveries will occur depending on rainfall and snowpack in the norther part of the State, the origin of this supplemental water source. The State water is carried to City via a pipeline from the Central Branch located 11 miles to the east of the City. Existing (2000) Water Demand
In 2000, the City produced 731 acre-feet (AF) of water1 and sold 574 AF to customers. The difference between the amount produced and the amount sold to customers represents un-metered (ie, un-accounted for) losses. Thus unaccounted for water constituted just over 21 percent of the total water produced.
Based on the water production of 731 AF and a 2000 population of 5,659, the per capita water demand including un-accounted for water, is 115 gallons per capita per day. This is low when compared to similar municipalities.
Future Water Demand
The Water Master Plan assumes an additional 2,444 persons will reside in Guadalupe over the next 18 years for total population of about 8,100. Future per capita water demand is expected to increase from its present level (115 gallons per capita) because of larger residential lots and increased industrial demand. Thus future water demand for the City, assuming a population of 8,100 and increased industrial demand, is estimated to be about 385,000 gallons per day, or about 431 AFY.
Total Water Supply and Future Demand
Table 9-1 summarizes the City’s current supply compared with future demand. As Table 9-1 shows, absent expansion of the City’s water supply, a shortfall will occur before the City reaches its projected 2020 population.
^An acre-foot is about 325,000 gallons.
Page 77
Public Facilities Fitment
Table 9-1
Water Supply Versus Future Demand
Source: Wallace and Associates, 2000 Draft Water Management Plan
Source	2000 (Acre-Feet Per Year)	2020 (Acre-Feet Per Year)
Groundwater	275	275
State Water	550	550
Total:	825	825
Demand	731	1,159
Surplus/(Deficit)	94	(334)1
1. Based on pumping 275 AFY, only, from groundwater basin.
Pumping additional groundwater and blending it with State water is one strategy to provide the additional water supply needed for future population, so long as safe drinking water standards are maintained. Other options include:
□	Purchase additional State water
Q Construct new wells in groundwater zones of higher quality
Q Implement water conservation programs
□	Treat water at the well head to reduce total dissolved solids
Q Manage the rate of future development consistent with available water supplies
The Santa Maria Ground Water Basin is also experiencing a net accumulation of salt each year which could affect water quality, but due to the large storage capacity of the basin this has not yet materially affected water quality on the City of Guadalupe.
The City's water distribution system will require upgrading to provide adequate water pressure and fire flows. Some parts of the City now have undersized 2” and 4” water lines instead of the needed 6”, 8” or 10” lines. Water pressures vary throughout the City due to the age and condition of the water distribution system.
C.	Wastewater Collection and Treatment
The City operates a wastewater treatment plant located west of the developed portion of the city and north of Highway 166 (see Figure 10-1). The plant provides primary treatment (with separate anaerobic sludge digestion), four aerated lagoons and standby chlorination. The nominal treatment plant capacity is 0.56 million gallons per day (mgd). The City plans to employ an Activated Integrated Pond System (AIPS) for wastewater treatment in which the capacity of the treatment plant can be readily increased by simply constructing more and larger ponds. Planned expansion of the plant will raise the capacity to 1.0 mgd. Based on a per capita wastewater generation of 80 gallons per day, the 1.0 mgd plant capacity would accommodate a population
Page 78
Public Facilities Element
of about 12,000 residents. Current (2002) wastewater flow averages about 0.6 mgd. Disposal of treated effluent involves a series of ponds and spreading ground near the treatment plant.
In 1993, the treatment plant operated under a Cease and Desist order from the Regional Water Quality Control Board (RWQCB). The order directed the City to upgrade the treatment plant to prevent accidental releases of wastewater into the nearby Santa Maria River during storms. As a result, temporary disposal of surplus effluent has been practiced since 1987 on about ten acres north of the river on a 75 acre leased parcel. The area is flat and consists of sandy soils not underlain by shallow groundwater, making it more suitable for percolation of treated wastewater. The long-term solution to effluent disposal is the construction of a force main under the Santa Maria River to spreading grounds to the north.
D.	Solid Waste
Municipal waste is collected for the City of Guadalupe by a franchisee (HSS). The Cityand disposed of in the Qty of Santa Maria-s Class II landfill. The City averages 2 loads, 4 times a week totaling 13 tons of municipal waste. The Santa Maria landfill serves the Santa Maria Valley and the southern part of San Luis Obispo County. The tipping fees are currently $7.20 per ton.
In the short term, development activities impact the Santa Maria Qty landfill which has a life expectancy of ten years. The development of new disposal sites or expansion of the current site will thus be necessary within the near future.
E.	Police Protection
The City of Guadalupe police department currently employs twelve full time, swom officers and five reserve officers. There are also two office staff persons, an evidence technician, and two police volunteers. Twelve sworn officers for a population of 5,659 is a ratio of one sworn officer per 471 residents, or 2.1 per 1,000 residents. This level of staffing is slightly higher than other cities of comparable population.
Response times are within three minutes to virtually the entire city due to the city’s relatively compact geographic area and the central location of the fire department on Obispo Street adjacent to City Hall.
F.	Fire Protection
The City of Guadalupe Fire Department operates out of a single fire house adjacent to City Hall. The Department currently employs two part time fire chiefs, one full time fir fighter and 15 volunteers. Nine of the volunteers have emergency medical training certification. The Fire Department currently utilizes two fire trucks, one purchased on 2001, a rescue unit and one command vehicle.
Page 79
Public Facilities Flement
To provide adequate fire protection for present and future residents and development, the Fire Department has identified the following staffing and equipment goals:
□	One full time fire chief
□	Five full time firefighters to provide 24 hour staffing
Q One fire prevention officer
□	One secretary
Q One new fire truck with sky-boom and rescue ladder
□	A new fire station with at least three bays to park fire trucks inside at one location, and to provide training and bedroom accommodations for 24 hour coverage
Public Facilities Goals, Policies and Programs
Goals
1.	Improve and expand the City infrastructure system to encourage new areas for growth, expand services, and reduce costs.
2.	Provide areas for public facilities that are central economical, and compatible with surrounding areas.
3.	Provide public facilities based on community needs and consistent with the General Plan goals and policies.
4.	Provide public services and facilities of adequate types and capacities to the residents and businesses of Guadalupe in an efficient and economical manner.
Policies
1.	Additional services or infrastructure necessitated by population increases shall be provided as part of each new proposed development.
2.	Public facility uses should be sited so as not to detract from existing or potential adjacent land uses.
3.	Government facilities should buffer themselves from adjacent uses of a less intense nature.
4.	The cost of new services or facilities shall be distributed equitably among the beneficiaries.- »...
5.	The efficient and cost-effective delivery of public services and facilities will be promoted by designating areas for urban development which occur within or adjacent to areas with adequate public service and facility capacity.
6.	The expansion of the public sewage system will be encouraged.
Page 80
Public Facilities Element
7.	All improvements to the existing water service system necessitated by the approval of a new development project will be financed entirely by the project proponent either by fee or actual construction.
8.	For those areas- lacking adequate improvements accommodating sewer and water service and where growth projections warrant it, sewer and water master plans will be developed. Non-local sources of funding should be identified for Implementing the capital improvement plans.
9.	All improvements to the existing sewer service system necessitated by the approval of a new development project shall be financed entirely by the project proponent either by fee or actual construction.
10.	Natural overflow channels will be incorporated in drainage systems where practical..
11.	Wherever feasible, consideration will be given for joint use of portions of park land or open space for retention and percolation ponds.
12.	Fees will be charged for needed construct ion of drainage structures. For development in urban areas at urban densities, developer a shall be required to provide a drainage conveyance system of curbs and gutters.
13.	Where it is demonstrated to be necessary or beneficial, drainage channels should be located within their natural basins to provide a minimum amount of disturbance to the natural environment.
14.	All drainage originating on development sites will be contained on-site unless plans for acceptance of drainage to off-site sumps have been approved.
15.	All drainage channels shall be protected from obstructions In order to retain the natural characteristics of the area and maintain an adequate drainage system for storm waters.
16.	Where it is demonstrated to be beneficial, any newly constructed channels should follow natural water courses.
17.	Development will not be approved unless adequate flood protection can be assured prior to recordation of the final map. Mitigation measures will be required for property subject to subsidence and flood hazards.
18.	Development will be sited so as not to create downstream flooding or ponding of storm waters adjacent to or on other properties.
19.	Domestic solid waste will be collected and disposed of at an approved landfill.
20.	Long range planning for expansion of existing or alternative sites for solid waste disposal will be undertaken by the County.
Page 81
Public Facilities Flement
21.	No new dwelling units will be allowed within a 1,200 foot buffer area surrounding landfill sites unless specific mitigation measures are established to protect the public health and safety.
Parks and Recreation
22.	New residential developments shall be responsible for developing and/or assisting in the development of neighborhood parks as required by the Planning Commission, Recreation Commission and City Council.
23.	Design and layout of park sites should be a cooperative venture of the City and affected special districts and government agencies..
Schools
24.	In evaluating a development application, the City will consider both its physical and fiscal impact on the local school district.
25.	The City will plan land uses adjacent to existing and proposed school sites which do not generate significant noise, traffic or other similar effects.
Programs
1. The City will work with the school district when they are selecting future school sites.
Page 82
Chapter V. Natural Resources
Conservation/Open Space and Parks and Recreation
Page 83
Conservation and Open Space Element
A.	Background
The Conservation and Open Space element of the General Plan is dedicated to the efficient and wise use of natural resources and environmentally sensitive areas in order to assure their continued availability for use, appreciation and enjoyment.
The impact of population growth and the variety of development on the physical environment of the City is an important consideration in formulating policies about future growth. In recent years, public attention focused on natural resources has caused a general awareness of their limits. Considerable attention has also been focused on man-made resources as a result of a community experiencing deficiencies in services such as sewers, schools, police and fire protection. Whether an affected resource is natural or man-made, the "danger signal" is not often heard until a resource deficiency is translated into a monetary cost to the public. This General Plan has established appropriate locations for different land uses and policies on the basis of minimizing conflicts between them and for providing these services in the most effective manner.
Existing open space in the City of Guadalupe and surrounding territory serves several purposes: resource preservation and management, public health and safety, and outdoor recreation. Furthermore, most of the City’s open space resources serve more than one of these purposes.
The City of Guadalupe's General Plan Land Use Map establishes three categories of open space for the City. They are: 1) Agricultural, 2) Parks (Recreational Open Space), and (3) Open Space. Land classified as agricultural is cultivated for crops. Parks includes existing and proposed recreational facilities, including neighborhood and community parks. Open Space includes areas subject to flood hazard, groundwater recharge areas, well farms and areas adjacent to creek beds and/or rivers.
B.	Agriculture
The purpose of this category is to set aside and promote the preservation of farmland within the fertile Santa Maria Valley. Prime farmland is land that has the best combination of physical and chemical characteristics necessary to be economically feasible for sustaining high crop yields. As Guadalupe has historically been an area of agricultural importance, it is the goal of the General Plan to preserve this land use for the future. There are however "island pockets" of agricultural land located within the City and adjacent to its urbanized planning area boundaries that have been redesignated from agricultural to urban uses. There are many land uses which conflict with one another necessitating wise land use planning. Agriculture is no exception. The activities generated by agricultural land uses include crop dusting, pesticide and insecticide spraying, agricultural burning and the generation of odor and
Page 84
Conservation and Open Space
dust. After careful analysis, it was determined that the urbanization of these lands would minimize existing and potential land use and environmental impacts. The City will continue to work with Santa Barbara County in support of preserving agricultural land in the unincorporated area of Guadalupe which do not conflict with urban uses.
Williamson Act Contracts
All of the properties bordering the City of Guadalupe are encumbered by Williamson Act contracts. Since the City did not protest the execution of these contracts at the time they were entered, the City has little authority to remove land from the contract, even upon annexation to the City.
Moreover, the cancellation of a contract can only be accomplished under certain circumstances which were revised in 2000. Because of abuses to the cancellation procedures over the years, the Department of Conservation must be now be notified in advance of a hearing at which cancellation findings are to be considered. The Department’s responses to the notice must be considered by the local agency prior to taking action. The required findings are as follows:
Finding 1:	That the cancellation is for land on which a notice of
non-renewal has been servedpursuant to §51245.
Finding 2: That cancellation is not likely to result in the removal of adjacent lands from agricultural use.
Finding 5: That the cancellation is for an alternative use which is consistent with the applicable provisions of the city or county generalplan.
Finding 4: That cancellation will not result in discontiguous patterns of urban development.
Finding 5:	That there are noproximate non-contracted land which
is both available and suitable for the use to which its is proposed the contracted land be put, or, that development of the contracted land wouldprovide more contiguous patterns of urban development than development of proximate non-contracted land.
The Department of Conservation is interpreting each finding more strictly with regard to cancellation in advance of non-renewal.
C.	Open Space
Areas subject to inundation by the Santa Maria River are considered part of the flood plain and unavailable for the development of habitable structures. Development regulation may be accomplished through the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance. The open space provided by the Santa Maria River is valuable for its visual effect and recreation potential.
Page 85
Conservation and Open Space
Beautification areas can also be designed for unused parts of rights-of-ways and building sites. These areas when properly landscaped, enhance and beautify the city, making it more attractive to residents and visitors. Another type of open space is the common area within cluster residential developments. These areas provide relief from the concentrated urban development and supply needed recreation areas for portions of the population. These areas can be coordinated with existing parks and landscaped property to create a network of greenways. Furthermore, bikeways and walkways can connect the various greenways to provide access from all sectors of the community. The Land Use plan can be the vehicle for establishing such a network.
C.	Parks and Recreational Facilities
Recreational facilities are becoming increasingly important to the residents of Guadalupe. As leisure time increases, more people reach retirement age, schools teach recreation skills as part of their general curriculum, and outdoor activities become a more important part of many peoples lives, the City must plan for providing additional land for possible recreational facilities. The terms "Parks" and “Recreational Facilities" are used interchangeably in this chapter.
Provisions for recreational facilities is one of the key municipal services provided to the citizens of Guadalupe. The complete recreation system is made up of various facilities, some of which are not owned by the City. An example is a regional park which services a sub-region and is often times owned in whole or in part by the Federal, State, or County Government or other agency. The City has two such facilities, those being the State beach four miles to the west, and LeRoy Park, a County owned facility located north of the City limits. Existing school facilities and grounds can also provide recreational opportunities. There is one elementary school and one junior high school in the City which have a variety of building and facilities which could be used to great advantage.
There are three distinct age groups which use recreation facilities with various degrees of intensity. Children below the ages of 13 or 14 are the most intense users of recreation facilities. Next, retired persons who have more leisure time also use recreation facilities to a large extent. Finally, the use of recreation facilities by people in the age group of from 14 to 65 is more limited than the other two groups. Each of these age groups require different types of recreation areas and different facilities. The younger people require areas for more active play, while the older persons prefer the more passive activities. The middle age group needs facilities which the whole family can use.
Existing Park and Recreation Facilities
Guadalupe has over 34 acres of land dedicated to parks and recreational uses. Based on a 2000 population of 5,659 there are approximately 6.0 acres of parkland per 1,000 Guadalupe residents. There is also an abundance of nearby regional parks and open space areas which include the Rancho Guadalupe Dunes County Park, the Guadalupe-Nipomo Dunes Preserve and County Parks in the nearby City of Santa Maria. Figure 10-1 shows the public parks and recreation facilities in Guadalupe.
Page 86
Conservation and Open Space
There are many sets of park standards. Some are based on state and national experience while others are related only to the local jurisdiction for which they were developed. The following standards are based on previous experience, both statewide and local.
Park facilities can be classified by size, use and service area as follows:
Regional Parks
County, state, or federally owned land. These parks are usually in close proximity to a city.
They include major open space, are open to the public, and provide such services as golf courses which may be operated by a city, county, or private enterprise. The Guadalupe Dunes State beach to the west is classified as a regional park.
Community Parks
In general, a community park serves an area which includes one or more secondary schools.
This area is a group of neighborhoods forming a recognized section or district of the city.
These parks are planned primarily for young people and adults, and provide indoor and
outdoor facilities to meet a wider range of recreational activities than does the neighborhood recreation center. LeRoy Park is classified as a community park. Also, the Guadalupe gymnasium located in the City Hall is used on a community basis.
Neighborhood Parks
These parks should be planned and developed to meet the specific needs of the neighborhood to be served. Although participation in a neighborhood park, particularly during the summer months, is primarily by teenagers and school children, the facilities should offer services comparable to the demographic make up of the entire neighborhood. These parks usually require 2-5 acres. To be an effective part of the park and recreation system, it is necessary to blend a combination of activity area, passive or active, and landscaping to buffer activities from each other and from the surrounding residences.
Mini-Parks
The size and location of mini-parks are determined primarily by the availability of vacant land. They average from 1 /2 to 3 acres in size, and may service any age group depending on neighborhood needs. These parks offer play and quiet game areas, multi-purpose courts, and landscaping. Development of mini-parks can remove many existing eyesores and hazards.
Several other open space opportunities may be provided through the use and development of flood plains, beautification areas, common greens, and other open spaces.
Page 87
Conservation and Open Space
The following gives a description of the current park facilities using the park classification system above.
□	Ten public parks are provided in this plan to be actively used for recreation purposes and open to the public without charge.
Q LeRoy Park is an existing County Park located adjacent to the City limits and is improved with restrooms, playground equipment, and picnic facilities. This park is designated to serve a regional function.
LI Central Park, located south of Tenth Street, developed as a community park. The park includes a variety of passive and active recreational facilities.
□	Neighborhood mini parks are proposed and/or are existing throughout the newer subdivisions in the western portion of Guadalupe. Four new parks are indicated by symbol on the General Plan Land Use Map, one in each new area indicated for future residential expansion. These parks should be developed and dedicated as conditions of approval of new residential subdivisions in those areas.
Existing Parks and Recreation Facilities in Guadalupe, 2002
Park	Type	Acres
Leroy Park	Community Park	3.01
Jack Oconnell Park	Community Park	27.0
Central Park	Community Park	2.0
Unnamed Mini Parks	Mini-Parks	2.0
Total:		34.0
Notes:
1. Although the Leroy Park property consists of 25 acres, only about three acres are developed with park facilities. The remainder lies in the flood plain of the Santa Maria River.
Future Park Development
The current park facilities are fairly well distributed to serve the developed parts of our community. The areas which are furthest from these facilities, however, will need additional park land provided as they develop. There are various ways of providing this parkland.
The 1989 General Plan does not express a desired ratio of parkland to population. However, most cities aim for a ratio of one acre per 250-333 residents, or 3 to 4 acres per 1000 residents. The City’s developed acreage of parks currently exceeds this ratio by a considerable margin based largely on
Page 88
Conservation and Open Space
the Jack Oconnell Park acreage. Thus, the City’s developed acreage of parks is considered sufficient to serve future population growth.
While there are no precise methods of calculating the amount of land necessary for future parks, each project and area that develops will have to be evaluated for its park demand and the opportunities available to meet that demand. Although there are no quantitative measures established this should not be construed to mean that park facilities will not be required. No community can be timid about park requirements and expect to enhance its image - either as a place to live in or develop in. Each park area established brings benefits to both the community and to the developers.
Guadalupe must judge for itself how much park and open space land is needed and what roles these will play in its development pattern. Developers should recognize this before presenting projects to the City. Without cooperation between developers and the City, adequate park and open space lands will not be provided. Such an inadequacy could prove detrimental to both.
School-Park Development
School facilities and major public utility easements are additional open space candidates. The schools make little use of their properties after school hours, weekends and summers when these properties could be used more effectively. Likewise, most utility easements are used only for the utility equipment. Multiple use of these properties would serve two purposes: (1) to provide additional recreation areas and, (2) to make a portion of the easement used for recreation more attractive to the neighborhood.
Joint City-School recreation programs can be approached from a number of aspects. Each method should be explored in an effort to gain maximum use of buildings and grounds. The more use the City can gain with fewer facilities, the less it will have to provide through general fund budgeting and park and recreation tax levies. The same, of course, holds true in obtaining agreements with the various utility companies to use their land which is presently used for a single purpose. Additional advantages to this joint use program are: First, more recreation has been produced for each dollar spent. Full advantage is taken of all existing facilities where parks and playgrounds were not duplicated. Second, the whole recreation program can be broadened to take in all groups - infants, children, teenagers, adults, and senior citizens; service and social groups; hobby groups; civic groups; and, most important of all, the family.
Potential Sources of Funding for Parks and Open Space
Table 10-1 provides a summary of various options available for obtaining, developing and maintaining park and recreation lands and facilities. These options are not alternatives; rather, they are a menu of choices from which the City can choose. Some park and recreation facilities can be obtained through methods which have little direct cost to the local tax payer. These methods include grants, joint use agreements, and donations. Additional lands and facilities can be provided by developer dedications, program fees, and options such as an assessment center. These options involve some direct cost to local residents. In the case of an assessment district, all homeowners
Page 89
Conservation and Open Space
in a district would pay a yearly fee to support park and recreation facilities and programs.
The City plans to adopt an ordinance to fund parks and recreation in accordance with Section 66477 of the Subdivision Map Act (the Quimby Act). The City's Quimby Ordinance will allow the City to require the payment of a fee or the dedication of an equivalent area of parkland when new residential subdivisions are proposed. The law states that “the dedication of land or the payment of fees, or both, shall not exceed the proportionate amount necessary to provide three acres of park area per 1,000 persons residing within a subdivision subject to this section, unless the amount of existing neighborhood and community park area, as calculated pursuant to this subdivision, exceeds that limit, in which case the legislative body may adopt the calculated amount as a higher standard not to exceed five acres per 1,000 persons residing in a subdivision subject to this section.” In addition to Quimby fees, facilities would be provided by grants, donations, user fees, community fund raising events, joint ventures, and joint use agreements.
Conservation and Open Space Goals, Policies and Programs
Goals
1.	To maintain and expand projects which promote City beautification and open space for the health and enjoyment, recreational opportunities, and the natural environment of Guadalupe and the Santa Maria Valley.
2.	To provide stable areas for long term open space that will not be subject to premature urban development.
3.	To preserve, enhance, and utilize the natural environment consistent with human needs.
4.	To manage water resources for the continuing benefit of both human needs and environmental conservation.
5.	To preserve aesthetic and visual amenities.
6.	To protect and expand the City Park system.
7.	To support efforts to maintain and improve the air quality of the area.
8.	Provide recreational facilities adequate to meet the needs of all age groups of the City.
9.	Cooperate with other agencies In order to obtain needed recreational facilities.
Policies
1.	Open space and wildlife qualities are essential to the well being of Guadalupe and shall be protected.
Page 90
Conservation and Open Space
2.	The parcelization of viable resource lands will be discouraged so as to maintain the viability of open space.
3.	Areas designated for open space uses will be protected f rom premature residential and commercial development activities.
4.	The City of Guadalupe shall work with the County of Santa Barbara to discourage parcelization of fringe resource land and to encourage the viability of those areas until they are annexed and ready for urban development.
5.	Agricultural land designated for urban uses within the proposed Sphere of Influence will be subject to urban development when necessary for orderly urban expansion.
6.	Areas of riparian vegetation will be preserved when feasible as important wildlife and visual resources.
Air Quality
7.	All roads and parking areas shall be paved on new projects.
8.	The City shall review development projects for impact on air quality.
9.	The City will encourage non-polluting industries to locate and expand within Guadalupe. Support improvements to existing industries which reduce negative impacts to air quality.
Parks and Recreation
10.	The provision of parks and recreational facilities to serve City residents will be encouraged. Special attention will be directed to providing parks along creeks, rivers, and streambeds.
11.	Developers of new residential subdivisions may be required to dedicate land and/or pay fees in lieu of dedication for the acquisition and development of recreational facilities which directly serve the needs of the subdivision.
Programs
1. The City will work with the school district to provide recreational activities for the residents of the community.
Page 91
Conservation and Open Space
Table 10-1 Methods to Obtain
Park & Recreation Lands and Facilities
Source: Tools and Strategies, Protecting the Landscape and Shaping Growth, New York & Washington, D.C., April 1990.
Method	Examples
Donations & Similar Methods	Donation. In this case a landowner gives all or partial interest in his/her property to another entity (government, non-profit or another landowner).
	Exchanges. Public agencies or non-profit can exchange developable land for land with high park, recreation or open space value.
	Surplus Property. A government agencies may have surplus property inappropriate for their needs which could be transferred to a park, recreation or open space district for use.
	Transfer of Development Credits (TDCs). Under an established TDC program, an owner of publicly designated land can sell development rights to other landowners whose property can support increased density or square footage.
Grants	Fundraising. Money may be provided through foundations, corporations and community efforts.
	State & Federal Grants. State and federal agencies may provide grants or matching funds for park, recreation and open space projects to local agencies.
Public/ Private Agreements	Joint Use Agreement. Is an agreement between two or more agencies to provide facilities or land area. School districts and park agencies commonly form joint use agreements to provide additional recreation areas for community use.
	Joint Public/Private Development. A developer and a government agency may form an agreement to provide a community service. For example, a developer may provide land and/or money for a municipal golf course. Without the developer's involvement the land costs may be too high for a local government to incur. The developer may receive a portion of the facility's revenue as payment for his/her initial investment.
Fees	Special Assessment District. This fee is placed on an area or a community, basically those areas benefiting by new park, recreation and open space projects or facilities.
	Bond Act. In this case a community may borrow money through issuance of bonds. This a common way to provide funds for open space and parks. Bonds are usually approved through referendum on a local or statewide basis.
Regulation	Exaction. As a condition of obtaining subdivision approval, local government requires developers to pay a fee or dedicate land for parks or open space.
	Environmental Review, As part of the California Environmental Quality' Act (CEQA) a developer may be required to protect sensitive resources and provide needed community facilities (such as parkland, new roads, or a fire station).
Purchase	Fee Simple. Is outright purchase of full title to land and all rights associated with the land.
	Easement or Development Rights Purchase. In this case a partial interest in property' is transferred to an appropriate nonprofit or governmental entity. As ownership changes, the land remains subject to the easement restrictions.
	Bargain Sale. A bargain sale includes part donation (by the property owner) and part fee simple sale. In this case the property is sold at less than fair market value.
	Life Estate. In this case the landowner may donate his/her property during their lifetime but has use of the property until an agreed upon time (such as the end of their lifetime).
Page 92
To Rancho Guadabjra Dunes Counry Pork
C yaw ford Muharj & Chirk
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
McKenzie Middle School Jack Oconnell Park Wastewater Treatment Plant Central Park
City Hall/Police Station/Fire Station Mary Buren Elementary School Cemetery
Leroy Park

Sphere of Influence City Limits New Parks
(location approximate)
Legend
Public Facility
■ Existing Parks
////. Open Space
Figure 10-1: Public Facilities and Parks
Chapter VI. Hazards
Safety
Noise
Page 94
Safety Element
A.	Background
In land use planning it is important to avoid certain conditions where development would be hazardous. Such hazards include seismic activity, flooding, fire hazard areas, unstable slopes and noise impact areas. The Safety Element identifies potential natural and human-made hazards and provides policies, programs and standards to protect people and property from such hazards.
This portion of the Plan is intended to: "Make the health, safety and well being of the citizens of Guadalupe an explicit consideration in the planning process".
The State General Plan Guidelines allow for the City of Guadalupe to adopt that portion of Santa Barbara County's Safety/Seismic Safety Element that pertains to the City of Guadalupe’s planning area. The County Plan, which was approved on January 22, 1979, (and amended in 1991) was deemed by the City staff to be sufficiently detailed and to contain appropriate policies and programs addressing the safety issues facing the City of Guadalupe, and the City has elected to adopt that portion of the Safety/Seismic Safety Element of Santa Barbara County. However, to provide the community with an overview of the potential risks facing Guadalupe, this section provides a synopsis of safety issues. Furthermore, the Technical Appendix (Data Base) provides additional data and analysis regarding safety and seismic Safety.
B.	Seismic Activity
This section outlines potential seismic hazards in the Guadalupe planning area In order to reduce losses and dislocation from these hazards. Seismic hazards generally Include surface ruptures from faulting, ground shaking, ground failures, the effects of tsunamis and landslides. It should be emphasized that not all of these factors are present in our planning area.
There are no known faults within or near Guadalupe. The closest faults are the Pezzoni fault, approximately 10 miles south of Guadalupe, and the Santa Maria fault, approximately 8 miles to the east. Both of these faults are considered inactive. However, it should be emphasized that while there are no known faults within Guadalupe, subsequent studies may reveal faults heretofore unknown. Prudent design practice is to establish criteria for development in these cases. Should faults be identified, planning for seismic hazards should consider all adverse aspects of seismic events. These include ground surface rupture along the fault., ground shaking due to the propagation of seismic shock waves, liquefaction of saturated soil, settlement of granular soils clue to seismic densification, seismically-induced landslides, and generation of tsunamis.
Safety measures related to seismic activity and earthquakes involve prevention of damage and restitution of services. Building requirements should follow
Page 95
Safety Element
recommendations set forth by the Uniform Building Code which establishes building requirements for all new structures based on predicated earthquake intensities.
The City of Guadalupe should be equipped to restore utility services as quickly as possible. Restoring the water supply is an important consideration as ruptured water lines affect fire fighting services as well as water for drinking. Sewer line breaks may endanger public health, and damaged roads restrict travel. Privately operated utilities such as gas and electricity must also be restored. PG&E will be responsible for ensuring their personnel, materials, and equipment can be mobilized quickly and concentrated in any area of need to repair their facilities.
C.	Flooding
Flooding can be a hazard to development along nearly any waterway. The City of Guadalupe is concerned about flooding primarily from the Santa Maria River. As previously noted, the City of Guadalupe is located immediately south of the Santa Maria River. Although the City is situated above the floodplain, the river is subject to high flows
following periods of intense precipitation, and the • flood waters resulting from these high flows can impair the suitability of land to the east of the City for various uses. Area subject to flooding during a 100-year storm event are shown on Figure 11-1.
The 100-year flood has a statistical likelihood of occurrence of 1% per year, or once every 100 years.
The extent of damage from flooding of the Santa
Maria River is mitigated by the construction of y^g ganta Maria River, facilities for the control of flood flows.
Furthermore, a Federal Flood Control project has
been constructed in the Santa Maria Valley and therefore the amount of the flood peak in the Santa Maria River has been reduced by storage of flood waters in Twitchell Reservoir on the Cuyama River (the major tributary of the Santa Maria River). Levees have been constructed on the valley floor to contain the flood waters originating below Twitchell Reservoir as well as the releases from that reservoir.

D.	Fire Safety Measures
Fire protection is an important safety consideration for the City of Guadalupe. The level of fire protection depends upon a number of factors: response time, available equipment, adequacy of water supply, fire resistance of buildings and areas, and access. The City has two full-time Fire Chiefs, one full time firefighter and a volunteer staff of 15. Fire capabilities of new developments must be carefully planned to give maximum service at minimum cost. Land use, circulation, water and fire service are all important factors of service costs and system adequacy.
To minimize response time to fires, circulation should be such that equipment can be maneuvered quickly and safely to the area of need. To
Page 96
Safety Element
ensure this, streets must be designed which provide adequate width, turning radii, cul-de-sac lengths and turnarounds. The City recognizes the importance of circulation for fire safety and submits all subdivision plans to the Fire Chief for comment and recommendation. Minimum street width standards provides for sufficient access for emergency vehicles in the future.
Other circulation related safety considerations are evacuations due to fires and spills and leaks of dangerous materials. Details of such evacuations must, of course, be handled at the time of need. However, the City will be preparing an Emergency Response Plan to ensure the safety of its residents.
Safety Goals, Policies and Programs
Goals
1.	Protect the public health, welfare, and safety from the potential hazards of flooding, earthquakes, and fire.
Policies
1.	Liquefaction: No building will be permitted along the Santa Maria River.
2.	Every building and development project should be reviewed and evaluated by the fire department prior to issuance of final building permit.
3.	New development will not be sited in areas of shallow groundwater.
4.	Improve water system capabilities as they affect fire service.
5.	The City of Guadalupe will utilize the Goals, Objectives and Policies of the Santa Barbara County Safety and Seismic Safety Element as they pertain to the City.
Flooding
6.	Encourage passive open space uses within flood plains.
7.	Prohibit development in floodways.
Programs
1.	Develop and enforce community standards which serve to provide protection from flood, earthquake, and fire hazards.
2.	Seismic: Adopt and enforce building and grading codes which protect the City from seismic event damages as outlined in the County of Santa Barbara Safety and Seismic Safety Element.
3.	Encourage programs designed to give citizens training in first aid and knowledge of proper action in emergency training.
Page 97
Safety Element
4.	Retain use of the Uniform Fire and Building Code in Guadalupe.
5.	Periodically review the City's capital improvements, both existing and planned.
Page 98

Note: Mop for illustration purposes, only. For detailed flood information, consult Flood Insurance Rote Mops for Santa Barbara County.
a o? »a Sphere of Influence ------- City Limits
Legend
IV///J 100-Year Floodplain
Figure 11-1: Areas Subject to Flooding in a 100-Year Storm
North
t
Legend
////I High Seismic Risk Highest Seismic Risk
AH Other Areas Are Moderate Seismic Risk
Figure 11 -2: Seismic Hazard
Noise Element
A. Background and Analysis
The purpose of the Noise Element is to identify the location and relative intensity of noise in the environment and to identify Land Use policies and other controls to restrict the exposure of sensitive receptors to excessive levels of noise.
Noise characterizes today’s life more than any other quality. It must be realized, of course, that noise is a product of many different activities, many of which are essential to the normal functioning of today’s community. Some are required by reason of their nature and purpose to be loud and disturbing such as sirens, car horns, etc. However, noise can nevertheless be reduced, controlled, or located where least harmful and disruptive to normal community function.
Land values are obviously affected by noise levels of surrounding areas, much as land values are effected by other inconsistent uses. This is witnessed by the depressed price of homes located adjacent to freeways or other facilities throughout the country. Regulations in this plan which minimize noise impacts will provide a benefit to property owners by maintaining a healthy environment. Clearly, land use planning to minimize noise and/or land use conflicts with respect to noise is a proper function of the City.
Recognition of the problems of noise is made by many governmental agencies. The Noise Control Act (Division 28 of California Code) reads in part:
a)"Tbe legislative body hereby finds and declares that; excessive noise is a serious hazard to the public health and welfare".
bfi'Exposure to certain levels of noise can result in physiolofical, psychological, and economic damage".
c)"There is a continuous and increasing bombardment of noise in the urban, suburban, and rural areas. All Californians are entitled to a peaceful and quiet environment without the intrusion of noise which may be hazardous to their health and welfare".
It must be recognized that noise should be an important factor when considering land use. There are many land uses clearly unsuitable for noisy environments. Other uses must be protected or located to ensure healthy conditions for the citizens. Others still do not require environments quieter than required to protect workers from the hazards of noise. Thus, to allow a hospital in a noisy area is clearly improper as it is to a] low residences in extremely noisy areas. Conversely, to allow a loud use to be placed in an existing quiet residential area is not proper.
The purpose of the City of Guadalupe Noise Element is, therefore, to minimize the negative effects of noise and to aid in the provision of a healthy
Page 101
Noise Element
environment with adequate protection from excessive noise and the accompanying effects. The City of Guadalupe will strive to regulate the location, intensity, duration, time, frequency, and the level of noise in the community in such a way as to provide maximum relief from noise and minimum cost inconvenience to those regulated.
To regulate noise with respect to the above criteria, standards must be used to insure fairness, attainment of goals, and ease of application. These standards must take into account the various activities that will take place in the City and the proper times and locations for those activities.
How Noise is Measured
Noise is frequently measured in decibels (dB). The A-weighted decibel (da) refers to the range of sensitivity of the human ear to sounds of different frequencies. On the da scale, the normal range of hearing is from 3 da to about 140 da. The sound level of everyday speech ranges from about 60 to 65 da. Because people are more sensitive to noise at night, sleep disturbance usually occurs at about 40 to 45 da. Figure 12-1 and Table 12-1 provide a summary of the relative magnitude of various common sounds.
There are two scales of measurement that are used to account for the increased sensitivity of noise at night; the community noise equivalent level (CNEL) and the day-night average level (Ldn). These scales apply: the A-weighted decibel to measure the average level of noise that results throughout a 24-hour period. The CNEL and the Ldn apply a weighting factor to evening and nighttime values. To calculate the measurements, the day is divided into different time periods.
The CNEL and the Ldn differ in how they average noise levels, but the results are essentially the same. The following table shows how the CNEL and the Ldn apply the weighting factors to measure noise.
Page 102
Noise 'Element
Tabla 12-1
CNEL and Ldn Comparison
Community Noise Equivalent Level
Daytime: 7 a.m. to 7 p.m. — weighting factor of 1 dB Evening: 7 p.m. to 10 p.m. — weighting factor of 5 dB Nighttime: 10 p.m. to 7 a.m, — weighting factor of 10 dB
Day-Night Average Level
Daytime: 7 a.m. to 10 p.m. — weighting factor of ldB Nighttime: 10 p.m. to 7 a.m. — weighting factor of 10 dB
Table 12-2
Magnitude of Common Sounds
Sound	Sound Pressure Level (dB)	Relative Sound Pressure	Relative Loudness
Jet Take-Off, 200 feet	120	1000	64
Riveting Machine	110		32
Power Mower, 5 feet	100	100	16
Motorcycle, 50 feet	90		8
Inside Sports Car (50 mph)	80	10	4
Vacuum Cleaner	70		2
Ordinary Conversation, 3 feet	60	1	1
Private Business Office	50		%
Inside Average Residence	40	0.1	1/4
Soft Whisper, 5 feet	30		1/8
Inside Recording Studio	20	0.01	1/16
Rustle of Leaves	10		1/32
Threshold of Heating	0	0.001	1/64
Page 103
Nofie Element
B.	Sources of Noise
In order to understand the noise problem in Guadalupe and alleviate present and avoid future problems, existing noise problems in Guadalupe must be investigated.
Section 65302(g) of the Government Code requires a detailed survey of the following facilities in terms of their existing and future noise generation:
O Highways and Freeways Q Primary arterials LI Railways Q Industrial plants
Each of the above mentioned facilities are examined below in detail.
Highways and Freeway Guadalupe Street is not only the primary north-south connection for the City but is also designated as State Highway 1, a popular route for tourists and agricultural related vehicles. This road bisects the City with population centers located on both sides. There are houses north of this road, east of Obispo, and west of Pioneer Street. An elementary school is located on the south side of Main Street, within the County.
Primary Arterials
Obispo Street, Tognazzini Avenue, Tenth Street, and Eleventh Street serve as primary arterials within the City. Future circulation plans call for a connection to be built to link both parts of Pioneer Street and creating another north-south route. In addition, Fifth Street is proposed to be extended across Guadalupe Street and the railroad tracks to connect through to Fourth Street and eventually east to Simas Street.
Impacts related to vehicle traffic are most significant during the heavy commute periods between 7:00 a.m. - 9:00 a.m., and between 4:00 p.m. - 6:00 p.m. A recent study, however, also revealed that the proportion of Average Daily Traffic occurring between 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. is much higher than normal, eight percent of total ADT as compared to five percent for normal urban arterials. Consequently, nighttime noise impacts are anticipated to be higher than normal with a correspondingly higher Ldn.
Railroad Operations
The Southern Pacific Transportation Company currently has regular runs through the City via the rail track which runs adjacent to Guadalupe Street. The Southern Pacific tracks are operated seven days a week with runs throughout the day and night. The train speed in Guadalupe is posted at 25 miles per hour and the average duration of the trip through the City is estimated to be 5 to 10 minutes.
Based on criteria developed by the U.S. Department of Transportation, sound levels of up to 80 dB(A) would be expected fifty feet from the rail track. This noise attenuates at the rate of approximately 4 dB(A) per doubling of distance
Page 104
Noife Element
so that the minimum 60 dB(A) contour would be approximately 1600 feet from the track. However, due to the short duration of the noise, a standard Ldn rating is not indicative of the substantial effect of this noise on the adjacent homes near the tracks. Most of the City's residents are within 1600 feet of the railroad and thus affected on an intermittent basis.
Industrial Operations
Industrial operations are located primarily adjacent to the SPRR. Those uses north of Eleventh Street do have some apparent off-site noise. The other generators are sufficiently removed from residential receptors so as not to have a significant adverse impact.
As in many other planning areas, residential neighborhoods are a primary concern of this element. This is because residential activities demand the lowest noise levels in the community, with the exceptions of special facilities such as schools, libraries, hospitals, etc.
The health, welfare and well-being of the citizens of Guadalupe are most directly affected in these residential areas and the activities in these areas are mostly incompatible with a noisy environment.
Efforts should be made to insure that commercial vehicles do not use residential streets except where absolutely necessary.
Design and location of City streets and facilities should be such that increases of noise from the facilities is minimized.
D.	Land Use Compatibility Standards
Some land uses are more tolerant of noise than others. For example, schools, hospitals, churches, and residences are more sensitive to noise intrusion than commercial or industrial activities. For this reason, land use compatibility with the noise environment is an important consideration in the planning and design of new developments. As ambient noise levels affect the perceived amenity or livability of a development, so too can the mismanagement of noise impacts impair the economic health and growth potential of a community by reducing the area's desirability as a place to live, shop and work.
State Guidelines and Standards
Section 1092 of Title 25, Chapter 1, Subchapter 1, Article 4, of the California Administrative Code includes noise insulation standards which detail specific requirements for new multi-family structures (hotels, motels, apartments, condos, and other attached dwellings) located within the 60 CNEL contour adjacent to roads, railroads, rapid transit lines, airports or industrial areas.2 An acoustic analysis is required showing that these multi-family units have been designed to limit interior noise levels with doors and windows closed to 45 CNEL in any habitable room. Title 21 of the California Administration Code
An exception is made for railroads where there are no nighttime (10 PM to 7 AM) operations and where daytime (7 AM to 10 PM) operations do not exceed four per day.
Page 105
Noise Element
(Subchapter 6, Article 2, Section 5014) also specifies that multi-family attached units incorporate noise reduction features sufficient to assure that interior noise levels in all habitable rooms do not exceed 45 CNEL.
Section 65302 (f) of the Government Code specifies that it is the responsibility of the local agency preparing the general plan to specify the manner in which the noise element will be integrated into the zoning plan and tied to the Land Use Element, Circulation Element, and the local Noise Ordinance. The Noise Element, once adopted, also becomes the guideline for determining compliance with the State noise insulation standards discussed above.
The Office of Noise Control, established by the California Noise Control Act of 1973, has developed criteria and guidelines for local agencies for use in setting standards for human exposure to noise and preparing noise elements. The noise standards developed by the Office of Noise Control and intended as guidelines for municipal noise elements are summarized in Figure 12-2. Standards for interior noise levels are provided by Table 12-3.
Each locality, in developing a noise element, must make a determination regarding how much noise is too much. A community's sensitivity to noise may be taken into account by starting with the general guidelines and then applying adjustment factors which allow acceptability standards to be set which 1) reflect the desires of the community and its assessment of the relative importance of noise pollution and 2) are below the known levels of health impairment.
Local Policies and Standards
Policies and implementation programs outlined in the Noise Element focus on establishing noise projections for proper planning and reducing the noise impacts at sensitive receptor locations. They include: 1) identifying noise sources and determining noise exposure levels; 2) adopting acceptable levels of noise for land use categories; 3) adopting a comprehensive noise ordinance; 4) promoting effective enforcement of existing federal and state noise standards; 5) requiring proper acoustical site planning and acoustical construction; and 6) evaluating noise analyses which have been required for new development projects.
Noise Goals, Policies and Programs
Goals
1.	Preserve the quiet rural atmosphere of the City of Guadalupe.
Page 106
N&ise Elemenf
Policies
1. In order to maintain an acceptable noise environment, the maximum acceptable noise levels for various land uses are:
Residential - Low Density
Residential - Multi-Family
Transient Lodging
Schools, Libraries, Churches, Hospitals
Auditoriums
Playgrounds, Parks
Commercial
Industrial
Maximum Lan
60
65
65
65
60
65
70
75
2.	Acceptable noise standards may be less than the maximum specified where it is determined that increase noise levels will substantially alter the ambience of a given neighborhood or area.
3.	Residential uses proposed in areas which have measured or projected level of noise in excess of 65dB(A) should be required to include noise attenuation features. Such features should effectively reduce the level of interior ambient noise to a maximum of 45dB(A). Mitigation measures may include such features so setbacks, berms, barriers, walls, or building insulation. Noise attenuation features as described in Section 1092 of Title 25 of the California Administrative Code, Noise Insulation Standards, may be used in lieu of building specifications.
4.	The City will enforce California Vehicle Code standards relating to noise emissions (Section 23130,23130.5, 27150,27151, 38370, and 38365).
5.	The City will consider implementation of a noise complaint recording system.
6.	Sensitive land uses such as residences, hospitals, rest homes, or other such uses should be designated on the Land Use Element of the General Plan for areas which have an existing or projected level of noise less than 65dB(A). if this Is not feasible, such developments should be conditioned to require noise mitigation measures to reduce the potential for adverse noise impacts.
Page 107
Noise Element
Figure 12-1: Magnitude of Common Sounds
PUBLIC REACTION	NOISE IEVEL (dBA)		COMMON INDOOR NOISE LEVELS	COMMON OUTDOOR NOISE LEVELS
		110	Rock Band	Jet Flyover at 1,000 it.
1OCA£ COMMMiX ACJMIY WtlH ■NFLUEWAL GO LEGAL ACFCW		n 100	inside Subway Train	Gas Lawn Mower at 3 Ft.
IFHEfiS OF PROTEST		■ 90	Food Blender at 3 ft.	Diesel Truck al SO It.
			Garbage Disposal at 3 ft.	Noisy Urban Daytime
COMPtAMS til&y		£ so	Shouting al 3 ft.	
COMPLAINTS PCSStBlf		I 70	Vacuum Cleaner at 10 fL Normal Speech al 3 ft.	Gas Lawn Mower at 100 ft. Commercial Area
COMPLAINTS OAflt		J GO	Largo Business Office	Heavy Traffic al 300 ft.
		50	Dishwasher Next Room	Quiet Urban Daytime
ACCEPTANCE	Kg p H 40 h		Small theater. Conference Room (Background) Ubrary	Quiet Urban Nighttime Quiet Suburban Nighttime
	p	30	Bedroom at Night Concert Hall (Background)	Quiet Rural Nighttime
	r	so	Broadcast and Recording Studio	
		10		
		0		
Page 108
Noise Element
Figure 12-2: Land Use Compatibility Standards for Noise
Land Use Category
Community Noise Exposure Ldn orCNEL, dBA 55	60	65	70	75	80
Residential: Low-Density Single Family, Duplex, Mobile Homes
Residential: Multiple Family
Transient Lodging: Motels, Hotels
Schools, Libraries, Churches, Hospitals, Nursing Homes
Auditoriums, Concert Halls, Amphitheaters
Sports Arena, Outdoor Spectator Sports
Playgrounds, Neighborhood Parks
Golf Courses, Riding Stables, Water Recreation, Cemeteries
Office Buildings, Business Commercial and Professional
Industrial, Manufacturing,
Utilities, Agriculture
INTERPRETATION
NORMALLY ACCEPTABLE
Specified land use is satisfactory, based upon the assumption that any buildings involved are of normal conventional construction, without any special noise insulation requirements,
CONDITIONALLY ACCEPTABLE
New construction or development should be undertaken only after a detailed analysis of the noise reduction requirements is made and needed noise insulation features included in the design. Conventional construction, but with closed windows and fresh air supply systems or air conditioning will normally suffice.
NORMALLY UNACCEPTABLE
New construction or development should generally be discouraged. If new construction or development does proceed, a detailed analysis of the noise reduction requirements must be made and needed noise insulation features included in the design.
CLEARLY UNACCEPTABLE
New construction or development should generally not be undertaken.
Adapted from: Office of Planning and Research, State of California Genera Plan Guidelines, Appendix A: Guidelines for the Preparation and Content of the Noise Element of the Genera Plan, 1990.
Page 109
Noire Element
Table 12-3
Interior and Exterior Noise Standards
Land Use Categories		Energy Average CNEL	
Categories	Uses	Interior3	Exterior2
Residential	Single Family, Duplex, Multi Family	453	60
	Mobile Home	...	654
Commercial, Industrial and Institutional	Motel, Hotel, Transient Lodging	45	65s
	Commercial Retail, Bank, Restaurant	55	...
	Office Building, Research and Development, Professional Office, Government Office	50	...
	Amphitheater, Concert Hall, Auditorium, Meeting Hall	45	...
	Gymnasium	50	...
	Sports Club	55	...
	Manufacturing, Warehousing, Wholesale, Utilities	65	...
	Movie Theaters	45	...
Institutional	Hospitals, Schools	45	65
	Church, Library	45	...
Open Space	Parks	...	65
Notes:
1.	Indoor environment excluding bathrooms, closets and corridors.
2.	Outdoor environment limited to private yards of single family residences, multi-family private patio or balcony served by a means of exit from inside, mobile home parks, hospital patio, park picnic area, school playground, hotel/motel recreation area.
3.	Noise level requirements with closed windows. Mechanical ventilation system or other means of natural ventilation shall be provided per Chapter 12 Section 1205 of the Uniform Building Code.
4.	Exterior noise level should be such that interior level will not exceed 45 CNEL.
5.	Except areas affected by aircraft noise.
Page 110
Chapter VII: Implementation
The process of implementing or carrying out the goals, policies and programs contained in the Guadalupe General Plan will require the completion of a series of steps. The implementation process will begin with the formal adoption of the plan itself by the City Council after completion and certification of an environmental impact report (EIR). The EIR will identify the environmental consequences that will likely result if further land use and development occurs in Guadalupe as envisioned by the General Plan. The next step will be for the City to initiate amendments to its zoning ordinance and zoning map to incorporate the changes outlined in the plan.
At the conclusion of this process, the plan will be carried out through the review and approval of residential subdivisions and commercial or industrial development in accordance with the goals, policies and programs of the plan, and the establishment of new public services, facilities, and infrastructure as recommended by the plan. Table 13-1 summarizes the important steps toward implementation of the plan.
The plan also identifies a number of desirable objectives to be achieved in the next five years and the next ten years. These objectives are summarized in Table 13-1 and include [to be decided by City Council]. These objectives represent measurable milestones by which the success of the plan can be periodically evaluated. Following Table 13-1 is an implementation timeline for each program, including the responsible department/agency.
Interpreting The General Plan
The entire text of this document and the Land Use Diagram (Figure 4-1), Circulation Diagram (Figure 8-1) and other maps which accompany it constitute the Guadalupe General Plan. Rezoning of parcels to a higher intensity of use consistent with the land use designation on the Land Use Diagram will require that an appropriate application be filed with the City Planning Department. This will ensure that the proposal can be reviewed and appropriately conditioned so as to carry out the overall purposes and intent of this plan, and to preserve, protect and perpetuate the existing scale, design and small town character of Guadalupe.
The wide range and complexity of subject matter covered by the General Plan is certain to generate questions of interpretation. As questions arise, the City Planning Department can interpret the Plan and/or refer the matter to the Planning Commission. Interpretations made by the Planning Commission may be appealed to the City Council.
The word "general" is a key to understanding the nature of the plan’s policies and programs. It implies overall agreement on major issues without a straight-jacket of inflexibility; it implies variation and encourages innovation while working toward the achievement of common goals; and it implies the need for adjustment of policies and proposals as changing conditions may dictate. While not inflexible, neither is the plan to be viewed as totally malleable so as
Page 111
Chapter WJ: Implementation
to accommodate whatever position or policy may be sought through interpretation.
A properly administered general plan demands that the rule of "reasonableness" be applied to permit flexibility, variation and adjustment as long as the integrity of basic policies and proposals is maintained.
Achieving Zoning Consistency With The General Plan
State law requires the City's zoning ordinance and zone map be consistent with the policies and programs of the General Plan. In order to fulfill these requirements and give the town the types of zoning districts and procedural regulations needed, a high priority of the City after adoption of the plan will be to revise its zone map and any amendments to the ordinance necessary to fully carry out the provisions of the General Plan. This process has been accomplished concurrently with the update of the General Plan.
Amendments of the City’s Sphere of Influence and Annexations To The City
Annexations to the City may be necessary in the future to achieve the overall intent of this plan. When evaluating the appropriateness of future annexations to the City, the following criteria should be considered:
1.	The costs and capability of providing adequate public facilities and the levels of government services required.
2.	The effects on adjacent areas, social and economic interests, and the governmental structure of the City.
3.	Conformity with LAFCO policies which seek efficient patterns of urban development, including those that favor guiding urbanization away from existing sensitive resource areas and encourage the development of existing vacant lands within the existing urban area before allowing development outside the current boundaries.
Implementation Strategy And Annual Report
Amendments to the State Planning and Zoning Law (effective January 1, 1985), require a systematic approach to General Plan implementation. Section 65400 of the Government Code requires the Planning Department to investigate and recommend to the City Council
" ...reasonable and practical meansfor implementingthe GeneralPlan or elements of the General Plan, so that it will serve as an effective guide for orderly growth and development, preservation and conservation of open space land and natural resources, and the efficient expenditure of pubic funds relating to the subjects addressed in the General Plan"
State law also requires the City Council to receive an annual report on the status of the General Plan and progress toward its implementation. This requirement seeks to avoid the often fragmented and incomplete attention to plan implementation that has characterized the actions of some cities and counties. The most common implementation practices have been to respond to requests for plan amendments and zoning applications, to prepare a capital
Page 112
Chapter VTl: Implementation
improvement program, and to undertake special projects as desired. To assist in the ongoing monitoring of the plan's implementation, Table 13-1 sets forth a series of objectives by which the success of the plan can be assessed.
Amendments and Updates
State law allows the General Plan to be amended four times per calendar year. Individual amendments may be initiated by the public, as for a specific development project, or by staff, the Planning Commission or City Council. The Planning Commission must review and make a recommendation to the City Council on all proposed changes to the General Plan. The City Council must decide all General Plan amendments, which are also subject to compliance with the relevant provisions of the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA).
To respond to change and to continue to adequately address the needs of the residents of Guadalupe, a comprehensive revision or update of the General Plan may be needed from time to time. Although State law does not set a specific time frame for such a comprehensive update (except for the Housing Element, which must be updated at least every five years), the objectives of the Plan should be reviewed annually to determine the progress toward achievement of the goals described therein.

Page 113
Appendices
A.	City Council Resolution of Adoption
B.	Planning Commission Resolution of Adoption
C.	General Plan Land Use Map
Page 114
Appendix
RESOLUTION NO. 87-784
A RESOLUTION OF THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF GUADALUPE THAT THE COMPREHENSIVE GENERAL PLAN AND LAND USE MAP REFLECT THE PLANNING POLICY FOR THE CITY AND FULFILL THE REQUIREMENTS OF THE COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT BLOCK GRANT.
WHEREAS, the City of Guadalupe recognizes the need to plan for the future growth and allocation of resources for Guadalupe; and
WHEREAS, the City Council and Planning Commission held study sessions regarding policy and planning issues to be reviewed as part of the Comprehensive General Plan; and
WHEREAS, the Planning Commission of the City of Guadalupe held regularly scheduled Public Hearings on June 19,1986, October 20,1986, December 15,1986, and January 19,1987, for the purpose of reviewing the proposed General Plan; and
WHEREAS, on January 19, 1987 the City Planning Commission did recommend that the Comprehensive General Plan fulfilled the requirements of the Community Development Block Grant; and
WHEREAS, the City Council did hold a public hearing on January 26, 19-87 for the purpose of reviewing the proposed Comprehensive General Plan; and
WHEREAS, notices of said public hearings were made at the time and in the manner required by law; and
WHEREAS, the City of Guadalupe did apply for, and received funds from the Community Development Block Grant program to assist in the preparation of the General Plan.
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT RESOLVED by the City Council of the City of Guadalupe that the Comprehensive General Plan meets the requirements of the Community Development Block Grant.
PASSED, APPROVED AND ADOPTED at a regularly scheduled meeting of the City Council held January 26, 1987.
ATTEST:
MAYOR
CITY CLERK
STATE OF CALIFORNIA COUNTY OF SANTA BARBARA CITY OF GUADALUPE
Page 115
Appendix
I, Nancy C. Etteddgue, duly elected Clerk of the City of Guadalupe, DO HEREBY CERTIFY that the foregoing Resolution No. 87-784 was introduced at a regularly scheduled meeting of the City Council of the City of Guadalupe held on the 26th day of January 1987, and was adopted by the City Council at that same meeting by the following roll call vote:
AYES: Councilmembers Gloria Parlanti, Renaldo Pili, Saburo Watanabe and Mayor Frank T. Almaguer
NOES: None
ABSENT: None
Page 116
Appendix
(805) 343-134001
City of (jtoadaCupe	(sos) 343-2391
918 Obispo Street Post Office Box 898
GUADALUPE, CALIFORNIA 93434-0898
December 1986
To: City Council, via Planning Commission From: City Administrator
Subject: Submittal of Comprehensive General Plan
At nearly every meeting of the Planning Commission or the City Council, decisions are made which influence the future of the City. These decisions may Include changes in zoning, approval of a large development, or the spending of funds for a public improvement. What Is the basis for these decisions? Do they relate to one another? Does each' decision make for a better community? To ensure that current and future decisions lead to a common goal, the City of Guadalupe has prepared the following comprehensive update of the General Plan.
The General Plan is an expression in words and-maps of how the City of Guadalupe would like to change over time. It is a policy statement articulated by the City Council of the community's intentions. It is a portrayal of the City in the future to be used as a point of reference for official decisions. It also is Intended to ensure that public and private efforts will be coordinated in developing an even better City in the future.
To fulfill these functions, the General Plan has been developed as a comprehensive document that is concerned with all the factors which influence the City — social, cultural, economic, environmental, and physical. It is both short-range and long-range in that it seeks to provide for the needs of the community for tomorrow and for as far into the future as it Is useful and possible to anticipate. By definition the Plan is meant to be "general" in nature, it should provide broad guidelines for the management of growth while at the same time leaving sufficient flexibility to accommodate change.
This Plan has been prepared under the close guidance of the City Council and with the active involvement of the Planning Comm I ss I on. It is the result of extensive consideration of citizen input on the part of City Council, Planning Commission and City Staff. Decisions made in conformance with the General Plan will, therefore, be implementing policies that have received the greatest possible citizen involvement and should thus represent the best interests of the community.
Finally, while acknowledging that I am fully responsible for the accuracy and usefulness of this document, I would like to acknowledge the valuable contribution made to this project by City Planner/Senior Administrative Assistant, Andrew D. Radler. Mr. Radler’s professional skills, knowledge, and dedication have added immeasurably to the content and quality of this General Plan.
Respectfully Submitted,
Manuel A. Rede City Administrator
Page 117