                                                 City of Atascadero
                            General Plan Land Use, Open Space and Conservation Element
II.      Land Use, Open Space &
         Conservation Element
     A. Introduction
    The Land Use, Open Space and Conservation (LOC) Element is intended to guide development
    and revitalization projects consistent with community values. Three mandatory General Plan
    elements have been consolidated to ensure internal consistency and to address the importance
    of Open Space and Conservation issues within the community. An optional Recreation Element
    of the previous General Plan has also been consolidated within the LOC Element. This change
    has been made to ensure that recreation and land use issues are given equal consideration.
    Detailed park improvement standards of the previous Recreation Element will be addressed in
    Park Master Plans. Optional Economic and Fiscal Elements of the previous General Plan have
    also been consolidated under the LOC Element.
    The LOC Element designates the general distribution and intensity of land uses, including
    housing, commercial, business, industry, open space, conservation areas, recreation areas, and
    public facilities. Table II-2 summarizes existing development in the City. Table II-3General
    Plan Land Use – Projected Potential Development and the Land Use Diagram control the land
    use distribution and the maximum development potential for the City in 2025
    The guiding principle of the LOC Element is to retain the historic Colony land use pattern and
    rural character of the City. This will be achieved by focusing mixed uses and moderate
    densities into the downtown and nodes along the Urban Core of El Camino Real and Morro
    Road, and by preserving natural resources, open space, and "elbow room" with rural density
    surrounding the Urban Core. The Urban Form Diagram (Figure II-3) depicts a distinct
    downtown at the center of the Urban Core. Radiating out along El Camino Real is a series of
    mixed-use nodes surrounded by lower-density single family residential neighborhoods. Areas
    beyond the Urban Core are designated as rural residential up to the Colony boundary and an
    open space greenbelt is designated as a buffer surrounding the Colony.
     B. Population
    Demographics and population projections are fundamental to a General Plan. Detailed
    demographic and socioeconomic information and analysis is contained in the Housing Element
    (Section V). The LOC Element deals primarily with population on a dwelling unit basis. In
    2001, the City had approximately 3,000,000 square feet of commercial and industrial buildings
    and 10,000± dwelling units. The 2000 Census population estimate was 26,411 persons which
    included the 1999 annexation of approximate 1,200 persons at the Atascadero State Hospital
    (ASH).
    Final Plan                                       Page II-1                             June 25, 2002

                                                    City of Atascadero
                         General Plan Land Use, Open Space and Conservation Element
Historically, the City of Atascadero experienced periods of explosive growth rates following
World War II. During the decade of the 1990's these rates began to stabilize into more
sustainable growth rates averaging between 1% and 2% annually. The General Plan assumes
that an annual growth rate averaging 1.25% will be sustained during the next 20 years. Based
on this assumption the General Plan buildout would be reached around 2025 (Table II-1). Table
II-3       General Plan Land Use – Projected Potential Development provides a statistical
summary of the land uses and population that could be accommodated within the General Plan
Land Use Diagram Figure II-2.
                         Table II-1          General Plan Population Projection
                             Year              Population                  10 Year Average
                                                                              Growth Rate
                         1940                            2,600 pp
                         1950                            3,400 pp                  31%
                         1960                            4,583 pp                  35%
                         1970                            9,100 pp                  99%
                         1980                          16,232 pp                   78%
                         1990                          23,138 pp                   43%
                         2000                          26,411 pp                   14%
                         2010                          29,904 pp                   13%
                         2020                          33,860 pp                   13%
                         2025                          36,030 pp
                              Table II-2            Existing Development, 2001
                                   Land Use Type                               Sq. Ft.
                            Commercial                                            2,683,000 sf
                            Industrial                                              416,000 sf
                            Residential                                                    Units
                              Group Quarters                                           260 du’s
                              Single-Family Detached                                6,768 du’s
                              Single-Family attached                                   280 du’s
                              2-to-4 Unit                                              869 du’s
                              5-plus Unit                                           1,217 du’s
                              Mobile Home                                              601 du’s
                            Total Units                                             9,995 du’s
                            Population                                       26,411 persons
                            Source: Department of Finance 2000, GIS Floor Area Analysis, 2000 Census
Final Plan                                              Page II-2                                     June 25, 2002

                                            City of Atascadero
                       General Plan Land Use, Open Space and Conservation Element
 C. Urban Reserve Line
The City of Atascadero covers 15,600± acres of the original 29,980± acres of the historic Colony.
The Urban Reserve Line (URL) includes portions of the Colony area that are planned for urban
and suburban uses with City services and facilities. The Urban Reserve Line generally coincides
with the historic Atascadero Colony boundary. The URL is largely dictated by topographic
considerations, existing land use patterns, and community desires to maintain the existing
Colony Boundary.
The primary area of possible future expansion of the City limits is planned to be the Eagle
Ranch. The Eagle Ranch consists of 400± undeveloped Colony lots that are entitled to water
service as shareholders of the Atascadero Mutual Water Company. Since it is likely these
existing lots would be developed in the County once the Williamson Act Contracts expire in
2009, the General Plan's policy is that this development should occur within the City.
Development within the City would provide the City with best mechanisms to control the
project's impacts to the City's circulation system, public facilities and emergency services.
The Urban Reserve Area is divided into two sub-areas, the Urban Services Area and the Rural
Services Area. The Urban Service Area includes urban and suburban land planned to receive
higher levels of services such as parks, drainage, emergency services, and street maintenance
and is designated by the Urban Services Line (USL). The General Plan calls for infill
development inside the USL where services can be provided in a cost-efficient manner. Beyond
the USL, the plan intends for the Rural Service Area to retain rural residential to reinforce the
City's identity and maintain open space characteristics.
 D. Land Use Designations
The Land Use Element and Diagram establish distinct residential and non-residential land use
categories that identify where certain types of uses may occur. While the General Plan outlines
overall development parameters, the Zoning Ordinance implements these designations through
regulations for specific districts and allowed uses. Table II-3          General Plan Land Use –
Projected Potential Development establishes the land use designations of the General Plan and
lists maximum potential development for each designation.
Final Plan                                      Page II-3                                   June 25, 2002

                                                                           City of Atascadero
                                           General Plan Land Use, Open Space and Conservation Element
                       Table II-3               General Plan Land Use – Projected Potential Development
    Land                     Maximum                        Average         Minimum Lot                  Acres                 Projected                Projected
     Use                      Density                          FAR                 Size                     (ac)           Dwelling Units              Population
 Designation                                                                                                                       (du)            2.65 people/unit
                                                                                                                                                            (pp)
RR / RE / SE       0.1 - 0.4 unit/acre gross**                                 2.5 -10 ac                   9,340.4 ac               3,634 du                   9630 pp
SFR-Z                 1.0 unit/acre gross**                                   1.5 - 2.5 ac                     655.2 ac                652 du                    1728pp
SFR-Y                  2.0 units/acre gross                                      1.0 ac                     1,579.5 ac                2,831du                    7503pp
SFR-X                   4.0 units/acre net*                                      0.5 ac                        472.7 ac              1,380 du                   3658 pp
MDR                      10 units/acre net                                       0.5 ac                        217.1 ac              1,116 du                   2958 pp
                 24 units/acre net (minimum                                      0.5 ac
HDR                     20 units/acre net)                                                                     303.0 ac               3,801du                10,070 pp
GC                       20 units/acre net                  0.3 FAR                                            292.1 ac                194 du                     514 pp
SC                                                          0.4 FAR                                             41.8 ac
D                        20 units/acre net                  3.0 FAR                                             62.3 ac                  55 du                    146 pp
MU                       20 units/acre net                  0.3 FAR                                             66.6 ac                208 du                     551 pp
CPK                                                         0.4 FAR                                             82.9 ac
CREC                     10 units/acre net                  0.1 FAR                                               6.7 ac
IND                                                         0.4 FAR                                             65.2 ac
AG                0.1 - 0.4 units/acre gross**                                2.5 - 10 ac                       43.9 ac
REC                                                                                                            501.7 ac
PUB                                                         0.4 FAR                                         1,174.3 ac
OS                                                                                                             277.4 ac
Total                                                                                                  15,182.6 ac               13,871 du                 36,758 pp
                 “Net” shall mean minimum lot size exclusive of private or publicly owned abutting road rights-of-way while “Gross” shall include
                  abutting road right-of-way to center line.
                  FAR (Floor Area Ratio): The FAR expresses the percentage of a site area that could be covered by a building. The FAR is not considered an
                  absolute cap under this General Plan but is used as an overall land use designation average to calculate traffic and job generation related to
                  the uses. Actually site utilization restrictions are determined by the zoning ordinance's setback, landscaping, parking and height
                  standards.
                  Downtown FAR is assumed with an average of 0.4 with a max of 3.0.
                 * The maximum density sets a limit to the number of units that may be developed in each land use designation. The General Plan also sets
                  minimum lots size areas that are allowed through the subdivision process consistent with the "Elbow Room" principle. The minimum lot
                  sizes are more restrictive than the maximum densities in order to reflect historic small lot development densities and to allow for new
                  planned development projects that incorporate smaller lot sizes with innovative design concepts.
                  ** Density is adjusted by performance standards in this land use designation. The maximum density may be lower based on the
                  application of performance standards.
       Residential density (the number of dwelling units allowed per acre, calculated prior to
       dedications for streets and other improvements) may decrease due to site constraints or increase
       if State-required affordable housing density bonuses are incorporated. Non-residential uses
       allowed in residential districts, such as schools and churches, can reduce potential population,
       while population can grow if group quarters increase.
       Final Plan                                                              Page II-4                                                         June 25, 2002

                                                City of Atascadero
                           General Plan Land Use, Open Space and Conservation Element
           1.    Residential Land Use Designations
This section provides a description of each of the official residential land use designations and
the corresponding zoning districts. The Rural Estates areas are beyond the USL and tend to
have large lots, while Suburban Estates, Rural Residential and Single Family Residential areas
are inside the USL and range from large lots to suburban densities. Densities generally decrease
with distance from the Urban Core to maintain the rural atmosphere of the community and
preserve the large lots that are a distinguishing feature of Atascadero.
Rural Residential (RR), Rural Estate (RE), Suburban Estate (SE)
These areas are intended for detached single-family homes on lots sizes of 2.5-10 acres gross
with allowable accessory agricultural and livestock uses. Allowable lot size is based on
performance standards that include neighborhood and site characteristics including slope,
distance from the center of the community, average neighborhood lot size, soil percolation
capability, and adequacy of access.
Corresponding zoning districts are RR, RS, P, L, and OS.
Single-Family Residential (SFR)
These areas are intended for detached single-family homes on lots sizes of 0.5-2.5 acres with
densities ranging from 1.0 du/acres to 4.0 du's/acre, depending on neighborhood and site
characteristics. Lower densities are applied in areas with relatively steep topography, oak
woodlands, and areas further from the downtown. Accessory agricultural and farm animal
raising may be allowed based on zoning.
Within the SFR designation, there are three distinct minimum lot size designations: SFR-Z, SFR-
Y, and SFR-X.
           SFR-Z:
           The minimum lot size ranges from 1.5 to 2.5 acres gross based on performance
           standards. Lot size is calculated based on neighborhood and site characteristics
           including slope, distance from the center of the community, average neighborhood lot
           size, soil percolation and adequacy of access.
           Corresponding zoning districts are RSF-Z, LSF-Z, P, L and OS.
           SFR-Y:
           The minimum lot size is 1.0 acre gross with or without sewer service. Second dwelling
           units may be permitted within this designation based on zoning standards.
           Corresponding zoning districts are RSF-Y, LSF-Y, P, L and OS.
           SFR-X:
           The SFR-X designation has a maximum density of 4.0 dwelling units per acre (du/ac)
           with a minimum lot area of 0.5 acres net. Smaller lot sizes allowing up to 4.0 du/ac may
           be allowed through a planned development overlay process.
Final Plan                                          Page II-5                               June 25, 2002
                                              City of Atascadero
                         General Plan Land Use, Open Space and Conservation Element
           Corresponding zoning districts are RSF-X, LSF-X, P, L, and OS.
Medium-Density Residential (MDR)
These areas are intended for up to ten attached or detached residences per acre. In addition to
apartments and townhouses, this designation allows mobile home subdivisions and mobile
home parks. The minimum lot area is 0.5 acres net, although smaller lot sizes may be allowed
through a planned development overlay process. Zoning standards require adequate parking,
setbacks, landscaping, on-site recreation areas, individual storage, and building and parking
area screening from abutting lower density single-family areas. Maximum densities shall be
reduced based on lot slopes. All development within this district is subject to appearance
review.
The corresponding zoning districts are RMF-10, P, and L with appearance review required.
High-Density Residential (HDR)
These areas are intended for a minimum of 20 and a maximum of 24, multi-family residences
per acre, including mobile homes parks. The minimum lot area is 0.5 acres net, although
smaller lot sizes may be allowed through a planned development overlay process. Zoning
standards require adequate parking, setbacks, landscaping, on-site recreation areas, individual
storage, and building and parking area screening from abutting lower density single-family
areas. Maximum densities shall be reduced based on lot slopes. All development within this
district is subject to appearance review.
The corresponding zoning districts are RMF-20, P and L with appearance review required.
           2.   Mixed Use Designations
This section provides a description of each of the official mixed use land use designations and
the corresponding zoning districts. The mixed use districts are primarily commercial districts
where multi-family residential uses may be appropriate on a conditional basis.
General Commercial (GC)
This designation includes office, neighborhood, retail and tourist commercial zoning districts.
Office areas allow a range of professional, business, and administrative service uses with small-
scale retail uses. Mixed-use development with attached multi-family residential up to 20 du/ac
maybe conditionally permitted by zoning.
Neighborhood commercial areas accommodate daily shopping and service needs of
surrounding residents, with businesses such as small markets, convenience stores, drug stores,
salons, and other personal services. Neighborhood convenience centers should be concentrated
at intersections of collector or arterial streets.
Final Plan                                        Page II-6                              June 25, 2002
                                             City of Atascadero
                        General Plan Land Use, Open Space and Conservation Element
Retail commercial zoning districts are provided to meet both the comparison and convenience
shopping needs of residents in the City and surrounding area. The intended principal tenants
of retail commercial areas include specialty and department stores, and supermarkets. Retail
nodes should be located at the intersections of arterial streets (including state highways) and
major collector streets. A master plan of development is required for prime undeveloped
commercial sites to prevent fragmented development from occurring that would comprise the
retail potential of these sites. Mixed-use multi-family residential development maybe
conditionally allowed up to 20 du/ac based on zoning. Exclusive development of multi-family
may be allowed along the El Camino Real corridor provided they are located on mid-block infill
lots that are not best reserved for commercial development. Along Morro Road, mixed use
multi-family and commercial projects are permitted in the GC land use provide a commercial or
office use is provided along the street frontage.
The tourist commercial zoning districts provides for uses that serve the traveling public, such as
motels, restaurants, automotive services, and other compatible uses. Tourist commercial nodes
are appropriately located along Highway 101 interchanges.
Corresponding zoning districts are CP, CN, CR and CT with appearance review required.
Downtown (D)
This designation allows a mix of retail, office, restaurant, personal service, commercial and
residential uses. To encourage pedestrian orientation, businesses are encouraged to occupy
small lots with sidewalk storefronts, and residences are allowed on upper floors. Mixed-use
multi-family residential development is conditionally allowed up to 20 du/ac, higher densities
may be approved through a planned development process. Design and parking standards are
different from other areas to encourage a development pattern consistent with a historic
Downtown. Development within the Downtown will be consistent with the Downtown
Revitalization Plan and support the Atascadero Main Street Program.
Corresponding zoning districts are DC and DO with appearance review required.
Mixed Use (MU)
This designation is intended to encourage a mix of retail, office and residential uses within
individual projects to encourage pedestrian orientation and create a synergy between housing
and goods and services needed by surrounding residents. Housing can occur alongside or
above non-residential uses. All mixed-use designations shall be accompanied by a planned
development overlay that will establish a master plan of development for the site and all mixes
of uses. The maximum residential density shall be 20 du/ac.
The corresponding zoning district is a MU/PD overlay in a CR or CP district with appearance
review required and a Planned Development Overlay.
Commercial Recreation (CREC)
This designation allows private recreational land uses, including private parks for active and
passive recreation, playgrounds, playfields, swimming pools, and golf courses as well as tourist
Final Plan                                       Page II-7                                June 25, 2002
                                             City of Atascadero
                        General Plan Land Use, Open Space and Conservation Element
recreation such as RV parks. Multi-family uses such as mobile home parks may be
conditionally allowed up to a maximum residential density of 20 du/ac.
The corresponding zoning district is LS, OS, and P with appearance review required.
           3. Non-Residential Designations
Non-residential designations are intended to concentrate businesses, industry and services in
appropriate locations that serve the community, rely on existing infrastructure, and protect
residential neighborhoods. Site-specific zoning requirements (such as screening outdoor
storage lighting from off-site) are often required to mitigate impacts associated with high-
intensity uses. All non-residential uses are subject to appearance review.
Service Commercial (SC)
This designation accommodates more intensive uses than allowed in other commercial areas,
such as lumberyards, building material supply, wholesaling, storage, auto sales, auto and
equipment repair, and printing establishments. These areas are appropriate for uses that would
be detrimental to or not benefit from pedestrian orientation, and that frequently have outdoor
storage needs involving trucking activity and movement of large products. Locations for this
designation include districts along freeway frontage or with direct access to arterial streets (to
preclude truck traffic using local residential streets).
The corresponding zoning district is CS with appearance review required.
Commercial Park (CPK)
This designation applies to areas along the northern portion of El Camino Real to accommodate
uses that require large parcels, such as automobile and mobile home sales, factory outlet
centers, traveler destination and recreation complexes, craft uses, nurseries and planned
commercial developments. Certain types of light industrial uses, including research and
development facilities and clean manufacturing facilities, along with office parks and business
uses may also be appropriate in this area.
The corresponding zoning is CPK with appearance review required.
Industrial (IND)
This designation provides for a range of uses, from intensive individual operations such as auto
body shops, contractor staging areas, outdoor storage facilities, and manufacturing plants, to
lower intensity businesses in light industrial park developments master planned on large
parcels. Typical industrial park uses include small-scale manufacturing, assembly, research and
development, computer-based services, and product fabrication. Campus-type site
development is required for larger industrial park projects.
The corresponding zoning districts are I and IPK with appearance review required.
Final Plan                                       Page II-8                                June 25, 2002
                                              City of Atascadero
                         General Plan Land Use, Open Space and Conservation Element
Agriculture (AG)
This designation is limited to several parcels along Graves Creek that are used for crop
production. It is not expected that this designation will be expanded to additional parcels in the
planning area.
The corresponding zoning districts are RR, RS, A and OS.
Public Facilities (PUB)
This designation, which applies to parcels that are publicly owned and/or house publicly
operated facilities, is intended to meet the public service, institutional, educational, religious,
and cultural needs of the community. This designation includes the Atascadero State Hospital,
which the General Plan allows as a mental health facility use. Community facilities require
large areas of land and may have specialized site location requirements.
The corresponding zoning districts are P and L with appearance review required.
Public Recreation (REC)
This designation is reserved for public park and recreation facilities available for public use and
owned by a public entity. Residential subdivisions are not allowed under this designation.
Future park sites may be designated with a non-site specific (REC) designation.
The corresponding zoning districts are L, P, and OS with appearance review required.
Open Space (OS)
This designation covers areas with environmentally sensitive natural or cultural resources,
areas to be used for the managed production of natural resources, and areas subject to natural
hazards such as floods or landslides. Open Space land generally is intended to remain free of
structures but may be developed with low intensity recreational improvements such as trails,
landscaping and tot lots. Open Space may be developed with public-serving facilities and
utilities provided by the City and Water Company including the development, production,
treatment and transmission of the public water supply.
The corresponding zoning districts are L, P, and OS with appearance review required.
           4. Corresponding Zoning Districts
Table II-4 establishes the corresponding Zoning Districts that are consistent with the General
Plan Land Use Designations and appearance review requirements. Zoning Consistency
determinations with the General Plan shall be consistent with Table II-4.
Final Plan                                        Page II-9                                  June 25, 2002
                                              City of Atascadero
                        General Plan Land Use, Open Space and Conservation Element
           Table II-4:   General Plan Land Use Designation and Corresponding Zoning
                Land Use                   Corresponding Zoning           Appearance Review
               Designation                         Districts                  Requirement
                RR/RE/SE              RR, RS, P, L, OS                        Grading Only
                  SFR-Z               RSF-Z, LSF-Z, P, L, OS                  Grading Only
                  SFR-Y               RSF-Y, LSF-Y, P, L, OS                  Grading Only
                  SFR-X               RSF-X, LSF-X, P, L, OS                  Grading Only
                   MDR                RMF-10, P, L                                 Yes
                   HDR                RMF-20, P, L                                 Yes
                    GC                CP, CN, CR, CT                               Yes
                    SC                CS                                           Yes
                     D                DC, DO                                       Yes
                    MU                CR, CP: (MU/PD overlay)                      Yes
                   CPK                CPK                                          Yes
                  CREC                LS, OS, P                                    Yes
                   IND                I, IPK                                       Yes
                    AG                RR, RS, A, OS                           Grading Only
                   REC                L, P, OS                                     Yes
                   PUB                P, L                                         Yes
                    OS                L, P, and OS                                 Yes
Final Plan                                       Page II-10                                 June 25, 2002
                                City of Atascadero
           General Plan Land Use, Open Space and Conservation Element
                    Figure II-1:     General Plan Setting
Final Plan                         Page II-11                         June 25, 2002
                                City of Atascadero
           General Plan Land Use, Open Space and Conservation Element
            Figure II-2       General Plan Land Use Diagram
Final Plan                         Page II-12                         June 25, 2002
                                              City of Atascadero
                         General Plan Land Use, Open Space and Conservation Element
E.            Land Use, Open Space, and Conservation Goals,
              Policies and Programs
The overall guiding principle of the General Plan is to maintain the rural character and identity
of Atascadero while assuring orderly development and infill and efficiently providing needed
goods and services to the community within the Urban Core. The following goals, policies and
programs are designed to help the community achieve this objective.
           1.  Land Use and Rural Character Policies
Atascadero combines city and country elements in a woodland setting with rugged hillsides,
abundant vegetation, and creeks that require careful planning and development. Throughout
the City live oak, valley oak, and blue oak woodlands define the character of Atascadero with
pines found on the higher ridges, which top 2,000 feet at the southwest City limit. South-facing
slopes are home to chaparral vegetation, while willows, sycamores, bay laurel and cottonwoods
line the creeks. The Salinas River defines the eastern boundary of Atascadero and at 1,332 feet,
Pine Mountain is the most prominent hill Downtown.
In accordance with the original Colony design, the historic downtown is ringed by residential
neighborhoods that transition into lower-density rural areas. A number of landowners raise
animals, including domestic pets, livestock and horses. Commercial activity is focused along El
Camino Real, Morro Road and near Highway 101 interchanges with mixed-use nodes planned
at Del Rio and El Camino Real, Downtown, Curbaril and El Camino Real, and Santa Barbara
and El Camino Real.
Goal LOC 1.              Protect and preserve the rural atmosphere of the
                         community by assuring “elbow room” for residents by
                         means of maintenance of large lot sizes which increase
                         in proportion to distance beyond the Urban Core.
Policy 1.1.      Preserve the rural atmosphere of the community and assure “elbow room” in
                 areas designated for lower density development by guiding new development
                 into the Urban Core to conform to the historic Colony land use patterns of the
                 City and to respect the natural environment, hillside areas, and existing
                 neighborhoods.
                 Programs:
                 1. Atascadero should retain its overall character and rural atmosphere with the long-
                     term protection of the environment as primary guiding criteria for public policy
                     decisions.
                 2. Concentrate higher density development downtown and within the Urban Core, and
                     focus master planned commercial uses at distinct nodes along arterial corridors.
Final Plan                                        Page II-13                                       June 25, 2002

                                         City of Atascadero
                    General Plan Land Use, Open Space and Conservation Element
           3. Require residential densities to decrease as distance from the Urban Core increases.
           4. Outside of the Urban Core and Single Family Neighborhoods, maintain lot sizes of
               2.5 to 10 acres based on performance standards and natural constraints including
               slope, distance from the center of the community, average neighborhood lot size, soil
               percolation capability, and adequacy of access,
           5. Update and maintain the Appearance Review Manual to include provisions for
               incorporating local cultural and architectural themes into site and building design that
               are appropriate for each land use designation.
           6. Update and maintain the Zoning Ordinance to address the size, use, and appearance
               of accessory structures to ensure neighborhood compatibility.
           7. Within the Urban Core encourage infill development or the revitalization or reuse of
               land already committed to urban development where utilities and public services
               exist.
           8. Appropriate land use and corresponding lot size and density shall be determined by
               site conditions, slope, neighborhood characteristics, and proximity to the Urban Core
               rather than by the availability of sewer.
           9. Require the approval of specific plans consistent with Government Code Section
               65450 for single family residential project of 100-units or greater.
           10. Require the comprehensive master planning of large development projects to
               minimize environmental impacts and maximize community compatibility. Projects
               identified in and shall be required to have an approved Master Plan of Development
               prior to any site development. The Master Plan of Development may be approved in
               the form of Conditional Use Permit, Planned Development, or Specific Plan.
Final Plan                                   Page II-14                                      June 25, 2002
                                               City of Atascadero
                          General Plan Land Use, Open Space and Conservation Element
                     Table II-5:        Master Plan of Development Overlay Areas
 Overlay               Location                EIR Maximum Density                       Special Features
Number
    1      Rochelle Single Family Project    50 single family residential units  Equestrian staging area with Salinas
                                             max.                                 River / De Anza Trail access required.
                                                                                 Trail connection to El Camino Real
                                                                                  required
    2      Woodlands Specific Plan           269 residential units max:          Specific Plan approval required
                                              143 single family units max       Minimum 40% open space required.
                                              126 multi-family units max
    3.     Dove Creek Mixed Used Center      200 dwelling units max              Site design issues will be addressed in
                                             300,000 square feet of               the Master Site Plan, which will require
                                             commercial development max           approval from the City Council.
    4.     Neighborhood Shopping Center:     Commercial Center 80,000 sf         Mixed use preferred as residential
           South San Anselmo at                                                   transition
           El Camino Real
    5      Neighborhood Shopping Center:     Commercial Center 150,000 sf        Preferred site for a neighborhood
           Northeast Del Rio at                                                   shopping center with grocery store
           El Camino Real
    6      Southeast Del Rio at              Commercial Center 150,000 sf        Site of master plan commercial center
           El Camino Real                                                         compatible with Factory Outlets.
                                                                                
    7      Single Family Cluster             56 clustered market rate units at   Public access and buffering of Graves
           Development                       ½ acre density.                      Creek
                                             14 deed restricted affordable       ±6.5 acre public park
                                             bonus units (moderate income)       sewer service required
                                             [25% density bonus]
    8.     Mixed Use Center:                 Mixed Use Commercial Center         Single family residential buffers
           Portola / US 101                  170,000 sf                           required.
    9.     Neighborhood Shopping Center      Neighborhood Commercial             Circulation and driveways locations of
           Southeast Curbaril at El Camino   Center 20,000 square feet            all parcels to be shared and minimized.
           Real
   10.     Northend Annexation               No increased intensity modeled.     Future use to provide an attractive Civic
                                                                                  Gateway appearance.
                                                                                 Public access to Paso Robles Creek
                                                                                  required.
   11.     Eagle Ranch Annexation            Development of existing 400         Specific Plan required
                                             colony lots                         Historic colony lots and roads to be
                                                                                  reconfigured and clustered to minimize
                                                                                  impacts.
                                                                                 Public open space, trails and parks to
                                                                                  be provided.
                                                                                 Resort facilities
   12.     Atascadero Avenue Triangle           10 dwelling units combined      Development on Lot 1 shall include
                                                  max on Lots 2 & 3               additional landscape buffer
                                                2 dwelling units max on Lot 1
Final Plan                                         Page II-15                                               June 25, 2002

                                            City of Atascadero
                     General Plan Land Use, Open Space and Conservation Element
Policy 1.2: Ensure the rural character of Atascadero is preserved by respecting the historic
            Colony boundaries and cooperate with the County on regional planning issues
            surrounding the Colony.
            Programs:
            1. The ultimate General Plan development boundary shall be the Urban Reserve Line
                shown in Figure II-5. The Urban Reserve line approximates the historic 1913
                Atascadero Colony boundary and is recognized as the ultimate boundary for the City of
                Atascadero, expansion beyond this boundary is inconsistent with the General Plan.
            2. Develop agreements with the County to maintain rural residential, agricultural and
                open space uses beyond the Urban Reserve Line, including continuation of existing
                agricultural uses.
            3. Work with the County to maintain a greenbelt and rural land use patterns outside the
                Urban Reserve Line and to create an agricultural buffer around the original Colony
                boundary.
            4. In cooperation with the County, consider establishing a greenbelt or other type of
                buffer between Atascadero and Templeton.
            5. Oppose any land use changes east of the Salinas River that would result in more
                intensive or higher density development.
            6. Oppose any land use changes by the County within unincorporated portions of the
                Colony that would result in more intensive or higher density development.
            7. Execute a Memorandum of Understanding whereby the County seeks City comment
                on development proposals in the area between Vineyard Drive and Cuesta Grade,
                between the ridges east of the Salinas River and Cerro Alto Campground.
            8. Cooperate with LAFCO and the County to incorporate the Eagle Ranch into the City's
                Sphere of Influence for eventual annexation.
            9. It is the City's position, that Eagle Ranch shall be developed within the City and any
                development of the site prior to annexation will be opposed.
            10. Prior to the annexation of Eagle Ranch a Specific Plan shall be approved by the City
                which will provide a comprehensive development plan for the property that address
                issues including, clustering of Colony lots, public facilities, circulation facilities, parks,
                open space, conservation easements, and a fiscal analysis of service costs.
            11. Update and maintain the Zoning Ordinance to designate the Eagle Ranch property
                as a future Specific Plan area to be subject to future environmental and site-specific
                review prior to annexation.
            12. Require the approval of a planned development and master plan of development
                prior to supporting any LAFCO annexation request of property located north of the
                San Ramon interchange on the west side of US 101.
Final Plan                                     Page II-16                                           June 25, 2002
                                City of Atascadero
           General Plan Land Use, Open Space and Conservation Element
                Figure II-3:      Urban Form of Atascadero
Final Plan                         Page II-17                         June 25, 2002
                                    City of Atascadero
               General Plan Land Use, Open Space and Conservation Element
           Figure II-4:    Master Plan of Development Overlay Areas
Final Plan                             Page II-18                         June 25, 2002
                                           City of Atascadero
                    General Plan Land Use, Open Space and Conservation Element
Policy 1.3: Enhance the rural character and appearance of the City, including commercial
            corridors, gateways and public facilities.
            Programs:
            1. Update and maintain the Appearance Review Manual to include provisions for rural
                character design features, street trees, landscaping, parking, fencing, screening, and
                architectural design (except for single family development), with standards tailored to
                specific areas of the City, including commercial corridors, and gateways such as
                Highway 101 and Morro Road.
            2. Require landscaping and/or screening to buffer non-residential uses from residential
                areas.
            3. Continue to support the Neighborhood Preservation Program.
            4. Update and maintain the Sign Ordinance with higher standards for the quality and
                visual impact of signs.
            5. Develop incentives to encourage existing uses to upgrade to contemporary design
                standards, including frontage and parking lot landscaping, and the screening of
                loading and service areas.
            6. Work with Caltrans to implement a freeway landscape and maintenance plan for the
                Highway 101 corridor.
            7. Develop a program to abate uses solely devoted to outdoor storage.
            8. Beautify the City's primary entryways indicated in by creating Civic Gateways. The
                freeway and other vehicular approaches to Atascadero shall be made more attractive
                through judicious application of the elements including landscaping, civic
                monuments, and rural character site development.
            9. Continue abatement programs to remove unsafe buildings, and require the cleanup
                of premises and vacant lots with code violations. Clean-up campaigns and
                beautification of existing facilities and neighborhoods shall be encouraged.
            10. The City will develop standards and undergrounding districts to require the
                undergrounding of existing utilities within the Urban Core.
            11. New utilities will be undergrounded in all proposed subdivisions and development
                projects.
Final Plan                                    Page II-19                                     June 25, 2002
                                             City of Atascadero
                     General Plan Land Use, Open Space and Conservation Element
Policy 1.4: Ensure that “darkness” remain a rural characteristic by requiring that all exterior
            lighting does not result in significant off-site spillage or glare.
            Programs:
            1. Amend and maintain the Sign and Zoning Ordinances to require that all non-
                decorative exterior lighting shall be shielded to direct light toward buildings or the
                ground.
            2. Provide street lights only in the Downtown, along El Camino Real, at major
                intersections, and locations where street safety is of concern.
Goal LOC 2.          Preserve residential neighborhoods and the winding
                     tree-lined nature of the street and road system.
Policy 2.1: Ensure that new development is compatible with existing and surrounding
            neighborhoods.
            Programs:
            1. Require that the appearance, mass and scale of multi-family development is
                compatible with adjacent single-family neighborhoods.
            2. Develop standards and procedures to allow the Planning Commission to grant up to
                a 15% density bonus for attached multi-family project of exceptionally high design
                quality through the Conditional Use Permit process.
            3. Update Public Works standards for roadways to provide for street trees and
                landscaping consistent with the community's rural character.
            4. Allow for alternate road standards in rural areas in order to minimize grading and tree
                removals.
            5. Do not allow single-family planned developments on prime multi-family sites with all
                of the following characteristics:
                a)   site area greater than two acres
                b)   slopes less than 10%
                c)   arterial or collector street frontage
                d)   neighborhood is appropriate for multi-family development.
            6. Require Conditional Use Permit approval for social establishments, including senior
                citizen facilities, in residential areas.
            7. Residential second units shall be permitted in all single-family residential districts
                consistent with the requirements of the zoning ordinance. “Guesthouses” and
                “granny units” shall be considered second units for purposes of issuing building
                permits and collecting capital facility impact fees.
Final Plan                                      Page II-20                                      June 25, 2002

                                City of Atascadero
           General Plan Land Use, Open Space and Conservation Element
                 Figure II-5:      Urban Reserve Diagram
Final Plan                         Page II-21                         June 25, 2002
                                City of Atascadero
           General Plan Land Use, Open Space and Conservation Element
                       Figure II-6:     Civic Gateways
Final Plan                         Page II-22                         June 25, 2002
                                          City of Atascadero
                     General Plan Land Use, Open Space and Conservation Element
Policy 2.2: Allow for the orderly development of neighborhoods by allowing for the
            consideration of lot size reductions for lots that are significantly larger than the
            surrounding neighborhood.
            Programs:
            1. Within the Urban Services Line allow for planned developments to approve lot sizes
                below district minimums in the SE, SFR-Z and SRF-Y land use areas only, when no
                more than two (2) lots are surrounded on all sides within the same land use
                designation by non-conforming lots. Minimum lot sizes shall not exceed maximum
                General Plan densities of the next lowest single-family land use designation.
Policy 2.3  Incorporate Pedestrian and Transit Oriented design concepts into new residential
            and commercial development within the Urban Core.
            Programs:
            1. Incorporate urban design concepts from the Air Pollution Control District's Transit
                Oriented Design Guidelines into new projects within the Urban Core.
            2. Update the Appearance Review Manual to include pedestrian and transit oriented
                design concepts.
            3. Pedestrian walkways shall be prioritized in new residential developments and
                between residential developments and commercial areas.
Goal LOC 3.          Transform the existing El Camino Real “strip” into a
                     distinctive, attractive and efficient commercial, office
                     and industrial park area which can provide for the long-
                     term economic viability of the community.
Policy 3.1: Encourage retail businesses at efficient and attractive nodes along El Camino Real
            and Morro Road with mixed office and residential uses between those nodes.
            Programs:
            1. Designate the southeast corner of the Curbaril Avenue and ECR intersection for a
                master planned retail commercial use.
            2. Designate and protect the east side of the Del Rio Road and El Camino Real
                intersection for a master planned retail commercial use.
            3. Designate parcels northwest of the Santa Barbara and El Camino Real intersection
                known as Dove Creek for a mixed-use planned development.
            4. Designate the area between San Jacinto Avenue and Rosario Avenue along El
                Camino Real for neighborhood commercial and office uses.
            5. Develop incentives to attract new businesses to under utilized locations along El
                Camino Real.
Final Plan                                   Page II-23                                     June 25, 2002

                                          City of Atascadero
                    General Plan Land Use, Open Space and Conservation Element
           6. Require new development to comply with provisions of the Appearance Review
               Manual specific to the El Camino Real corridor, including the incorporation of
               landscaping and pedestrian walkways, and providing reciprocal driveway access
               easements between sites, where feasible.
           7. Conditionally allow mixed-use or exclusive multi-family infill development in the mid-
               block portions of General Commercial areas along El Camino Real.
           8. Preserve primary intersections for commercial development with a land use overlay
               that requires the approval of an overall Master Site Development Plan prior to
               approval of any development plans.
           9. Conditionally allow, mixed-use office and multi-family development along Morro
               Road, provided each development has an office or commercial frontage use with
               recessed parking.
           10. Utilize the Capital Improvement Program to prioritize street tree planting, streetscape
               improvements and street repair projects along El Camino Real.
           11. Amend and maintain the zoning ordinance to require Conditional Use Permit
               approvals of bars, dance halls, night clubs, drive through restaurants, and service
               stations (all gasoline sales uses).
           12. Develop street design standards for El Camino Real that provide for street trees,
               landscaping, and pedestrian comfort.
Final Plan                                   Page II-24                                      June 25, 2002
                                            City of Atascadero
                     General Plan Land Use, Open Space and Conservation Element
Goal LOC 4.          Provide for a strong and distinctive Downtown Area.
Policy 4.1: Cooperate with the Atascadero Main Street Organization to promote downtown as
            the City’s cultural, entertainment, and commercial center, and to concentrate
            governmental facilities downtown.
            Programs:
            1. Provide mixed-use/pedestrian scale zoning and development standards for the
                downtown. Encourage government, arts, entertainment, recreation, business
                facilities and residential uses to be mixed in multi-story buildings with sidewalk
                orientation and recessed or off-site parking.
            2. Continue to implement the Main Street Program and the Downtown Revitalization Plan.
            3. Develop a master plan for the Sunken Garden and surrounding block to establish the
                area as a vibrant dining, community gathering area and civic destination.
            4. Integrate Atascadero Creek and Stadium Park into the function and experience of
                Downtown.
            5. Encourage the relocation of the Junior High School to an area outside of the
                Downtown.
            6. Mixed-use multi-family residential development is allowed up to 20 du/ac, higher
                densities may be approved through a planned development process.
Policy 4.2: Enhance the appearance of the downtown area and improve pedestrian circulation.
            Programs:
            1. Update and maintain the Appearance Review Manual to specify pedestrian oriented
                design requirements for the Downtown area.
            2. Review all architectural design, signs, parking, and circulation for development within
                the “D” land use category to ensure compatibility with the Downtown Revitalization
                Plan.
            3. Develop a comprehensive streetscape and pedestrian access plan for the Downtown
                area.
Final Plan                                     Page II-25                                      June 25, 2002

                                              City of Atascadero
                         General Plan Land Use, Open Space and Conservation Element
                     Figure II-7:    Master Plan of Development Overlay Areas
           Redevelopment Area Diagram
           dissolved February 1st, 2012. State
           Bill ABX1-AB26-AB1484
Final Plan                                       Page II-26                         June 25, 2002
                                                 City of Atascadero
                        General Plan Land Use, Open Space and Conservation Element
           2. Open Space Policies
Open space is land where basic natural features have been retained. It can include wilderness
areas as well as a small park in the heart of the City. The value of open space then can be
viewed according to its function. Open space can have a productive function wherein lands are
used for agriculture, forestry, or water supply. Open space lands can also have a protective
function as in the case of flood plains or limitations on developments in watershed areas. A
third function of open space is structural, which has to do with helping shape the form of the
community by establishment of urban reserve lines surrounded by green belt uses.
Passive recreation is an additional important function of open space. There is also a scenic
function of open space recognizing natural, visual relief of a mountain, hill, and forest in
contrast to the man-built environment. The varying functions of open space generally do not
occur separately. A stream has protective value as a flood channel as well as for wildlife
habitat, recreational, and scenic values. This multiple use and value concept of open space
should be stressed and recognized. Any government action to improve one of the functions of
open space should be taken with assurance that other values are not damaged or destroyed.
Towards this end the following goals and policies are established to guide community decision-
making:
Goal LOC 5.             Preserve the contours of the hills. Buildings built on
                        hillsides shall conform to the topography using the
                        slope of the land as the basis for the design of the
                        structure.
Policy 5.1:     Reduce multi-family densities and increase single-family lot sizes as site slope
                increases.
Policy 5.2:     Require hillside development and subdivisions to blend in with surrounding
                topography.
                Programs:
                1. Update and maintain the Appearance Review Manual to include standards for hillside
                    design and grading including driveway design and slopes, undergrounding of utilities,
                    and erosion control.
                2. Update and maintain the Zoning Ordinance to require structures to be located below
                    prominent ridgelines visible from City streets, when alternative building sites are
                    available.
                3. Update the Zoning Ordinance to include standards for minimizing hillside grading,
                    cuts, fills, and ridgeline disturbance.
                4. Prohibit development on slopes 30% or greater, unless no other feasible building site
                    exists.
Final Plan                                          Page II-27                                    June 25, 2002
                                             City of Atascadero
                     General Plan Land Use, Open Space and Conservation Element
            5. New lots with slope averaging 30% or greater are not permitted except when they
                contain building envelopes with less than 20% average slope (including driveways
                and leach fields), and when the creation of such parcels includes an offer of public
                dedication or easement that would directly benefit City residents, and where native
                tree impacts are minimal.
            6. Require the building envelopes, driveways, leach fields with schematic grading plans
                to be provided for all lot line adjustments, parcel maps, and tract maps proposed on
                sites with slopes greater than 10%.
            7. The City shall require open space uses in hazard lands including those areas subject
                to inundation, high wildland fire risk, and high levels of seismic or other geological
                hazard as identified in the Safety Element.
Policy 5.3: Prevent unnecessarily intensive grading of development sites.
            Programs:
            1. Update and maintain the Municipal Code to require approval of grading plans prior to
                any site disturbance.
            2. Limit grading to the minimum area necessary to accomplish site development.
Goal LOC 6.          Preserve natural flora and fauna and protect scenic
                     lands, sensitive natural areas, historic buildings and
                     cultural resources.
Policy 6.1: Ensure that development does not degrade scenic and sensitive areas, including
            historic sites, creeks, riparian corridors, wetlands, woodlands, hillsides and other
            valuable habitats.
            Programs:
            1. Encourage use of planned developments to cluster projects around open space
                easements, parks, open space dedication and minimize impacts to natural resources.
            2. Seek funding to purchase or require dedication of areas of unique habitats or scenic
                value, especially in areas lacking adequate park facilities and open space.
            3. Require native trees and plant species to be incorporated into landscaping plans.
            4. Scenic and sensitive lands including creeks, riparian corridors, wetlands and other
                areas of significant habitat value shall be protected from destruction, overuse, and
                misuse by the use of zoning, tax incentives, easements, or fee acquisition.
            5. Public and private development in close proximity to scenic and sensitive lands,
                including creek reservations, wooded areas, flood plains, prominent view sheds and
                historic sites shall be designed to minimize impacts.
            6. Scenic and open space easements, parklands and open space dedications shall be
                required as mitigation for subdivisions and development projects that impact,
                floodplains, creek reservations, wooded areas, scenic backdrops, sensitive areas,
                historic sites, cultural sites, and similar areas.
Final Plan                                      Page II-28                                     June 25, 2002
                                            City of Atascadero
                     General Plan Land Use, Open Space and Conservation Element
            7. The City shall carefully evaluate both public and private projects to require the
                preservation of trees, watersheds, natural slopes, and other natural features.
            8. Subdivisions shall be reviewed in accordance with the Appearance Review Manual
                and the principle of maintaining the rural and natural character of the community.
            9. Attention shall be paid to the aesthetic result of land division. Building sites shall
                minimize disruption of natural slopes, native vegetation and watersheds by the
                careful selection of building sites, leach fields and driveways. Building designs
                inappropriate for hillside locations shall not be approved.
Policy 6.2: Protect prehistoric cultural resources from disturbance associated with
            development.
            Programs:
            1. Maintain a current GIS-based map of generalized areas of known archaeological
                resources.
            2. For discretionary projects within the generalized areas of archaeological resources,
                require Phase I surveys to determine the extent and significance of archaeological
                sites prior to approval.
            3. For discretionary projects located in areas of known resources, require Phase II
                surveys to determine the significance and mitigation requirements for identified
                resources.
            4. Require short and long-term mitigation measures for significant archaeological
                resource sites; include avoidance of impacts, burial under sterile fill, and/or
                monitoring of earthmoving activities.
            5. If determined appropriate by a qualified archaeologist, actively involve Native
                Americans with any work located within known archaeological sites.
            6. If archaeological resources are unearthed during construction, suspend all earth-
                disturbing work until appropriate mitigation is established.
Policy 6.3: Encourage conservation and preservation of neighborhoods, Colony Homes and
            sound housing, including places and buildings of historical and architectural
            significance.
            Programs:
            1. Actively utilize the Historic Overlay zoning district to protect known historic structures,
                significant Colony homes and colony sites.
                Responsibility:       CDD, Planning Commission, City Council
                Timeframe:            Amend zoning map with Historic Overlays in 2003.
Final Plan                                     Page II-29                                       June 25, 2002
                                            City of Atascadero
                     General Plan Land Use, Open Space and Conservation Element
            2. Develop a GIS based mapping inventory and protection ordinance for the historic
                Colony homes.
                Responsibility:        CDD, Planning Commission, City Council
                Timeframe:             Adopt ordinance in 2003.
Policy 6.4: Encourage conservation and preservation of structures and houses that have
            historical and architectural significance.
            Programs:
            1. Protect historic buildings and sites. Atascadero's historic buildings and features shall
                be preserved and protected in recognition of the role the community's past plays in its
                present and future. Historic overlay zoning shall be utilized to protect appropriate
                historic districts.
            2. Utilize the State Historic Building Code to encourage rehabilitation, preservation,
                restoration or relocation of historic buildings listed or deemed on the local, State or
                Federal register.
            3. Implement the Historic Site (HS) overlay zone to help preserve and protect historic
                Colony homes.
                a) Develop and adopt a comprehensive inventory of historic resources.
                b) Identify (HS) overlay boundaries on zoning map.
            4. Utilize the Secretary of the Interior’s Standards and Guidelines for Rehabilitating
                Historic Properties to assess proposed improvements to historic properties.
            5. Update the PD (Planned Development) overlay zone to include retention and
                rehabilitation of historic resources as a primary justification for PD zoning regulation
                standards.
            6. Update the City’s Appearance Review Manual to include preservation guidelines for
                preservation, rehabilitation, and maintenance of historic properties.
            7. Develop incentives for retaining and rehabilitating Atascadero’s historic resources
                including:
                a)   Exceptions to development regulations;
                b)   Conservation districts;
                c)   Staff technical assistance;
                d)   Program to facilitate relocation instead of demolition; and
                e)   Mill’s Act contracts.
Goal LOC 7.          Tree-covered hills shall be preserved to retain the
                     distinctive scenic quality of the community.
Policy 7.1: Ensure that the native trees of Atascadero are protected from new development in
Final Plan                                     Page II-30                                       June 25, 2002

                                           City of Atascadero
                    General Plan Land Use, Open Space and Conservation Element
            order to retain the natural character of the community.
            Programs:
            1. Enforce all provisions of the Atascadero Native Tree Ordinance as a high priority.
            2. Maintain a current Geographic Information System (GIS) based inventory map of all
                native woodlands, plant communities, sensitive habitats, connective habitat and
                wildlife corridors. Require lot line adjustments, subdivision maps, and development
                permits to minimize impacts on mapped resources that are identified as sensitive,
                and provide mitigation as requirement by the Native Tree Ordinance.
                Responsibility:       Community Development Department / Environmental
                                      Consultant
                Timeframe:            2003-04.
            3. Update and maintain the Appearance Review Manual to include standards requiring
                building siting, mass and scale to be compatible with surrounding natural features.
            4. Require lot line adjustments and tentative subdivision maps on sites with 25 percent
                or greater native tree canopy cover to establish locations of building sites, driveways,
                and leach fields that will minimize native tree impacts.
Policy 7.2: Protect and replenish native tree populations, including saplings.
            Programs:
            1. Continue to implement and enforce the Native Tree Ordinance to protect and
                replenish native tree species within the City. Construction permits for both residential
                and non-residential development shall be required to preserve as many native trees
                as possible. Buildings shall be designed to utilize existing trees in the landscaping
                pattern. Any trees removed shall either (1) be replaced with like species, (2) in-lieu
                contributions made to the City's tree replacement fund or (3) have Planning
                Commission approved conservation easements created depending on the
                characteristics of the affected site.
            2. Augment the City Geographic Information System to include a native tree GIS
                database to assist decision-makers with analyzing development proposals.
            3. The City shall implement a comprehensive program for street tree planting and
                maintenance within the Urban Core and all major routes and approaches to the
                community.
            4. Require planting of large canopy shade trees in new projects, in part to provide
                shading adjacent to buildings to conserve energy use.
Goal LOC 8.         Watershed areas of Atascadero shall be protected.
Policy 8.1: Ensure that development along Atascadero Creek, Graves Creeks, the Salinas
            River, blue line creeks, and natural springs, lakes, or other riparian areas does not
            interrupt natural flows or adversely impact riparian ecosystems and water quality.
Final Plan                                    Page II-31                                       June 25, 2002
                                         City of Atascadero
                    General Plan Land Use, Open Space and Conservation Element
           Programs:
           1. Work with other agencies to implement the Erosion Control Assistance Program for
               review of development proposals to minimize sedimentation of creeks and the
               Salinas River.
           2. Update the Appearance Review Manual to include provisions for preserving,
               reclaiming and incorporating riparian features in conjunction with new development.
           3. The waterways in the City shall be maintained in a natural state and concrete
               channelization creeks shall be prohibited.
           4. The City shall strongly discourage underground piping, and unnecessary disturbance
               of creeks and streams, and encourage use of bridges and arched culverts. Any
               alterations required for public safety will be guided by this policy.
           5. Allow flood protection measures (such as selective brush cleaning), low-impact trail
               development, streambed maintenance and bank protection along streams where
               appropriate with necessary permits.
           6. Prohibit new structures or disturbance of riparian habitat along creek banks except
               for restoration purposes.
           7. Maintain a current GIS-based map of the riparian areas within Atascadero.
           8. Prior to permit approval, refer projects along blue-line creeks to the Corps of
               Engineers, Department of Fish and Game, Regional Water Quality Control, and
               Upper Salinas-Las Tablas Resource Conservation District.
           9. Creek reservations and the Salinas River shall be preserved for open space and
               recreational use, with appropriate areas left in their natural state for public enjoyment
               and habitat purposes. Any recreational use of the River and creeks shall minimize its
               impact on the habitat value and open space qualities of the creeks.
           10. Land disturbance shall be minimized in proximity to watercourses including
               necessary flood protection measures, such as selective brush clearing,and low-
               impact trail development.
           11. Areas subject to flooding, as identified through flood hazard overlay zoning and flood
               maps, shall be protected from unsound development consistent with the City's flood
               hazard ordinance requirements.
           12. Wellhead and Aquifer Recharge Area Protection Zones
               The City shall adopt and maintain an ordinance that identifies existing and potential
               well sites and aquifer recharge areas, including sufficient buffers to protect them from
               contamination. The ordinance shall define restricted and prohibited land uses within
               the wellhead/recharge protection zones and provide for the review and approval by
               both the City and the Atascadero Mutual Water Company of any project or
               development within the specified zones. The ordinance will establish a policy to
               provide for the monitoring of activities within these protection zones.
           13. Support the establishment and protection of floodable terraces, wetlands, and
               revegetation along creeks and streams.
Final Plan                                  Page II-32                                          June 25, 2002
                                          City of Atascadero
                    General Plan Land Use, Open Space and Conservation Element
Policy 8.2: Establish and maintain setbacks and development standards for creek side
            development.
            Program:
            1. Adopt and maintain a creek setback ordinance that will establish building setbacks
                and development standards along the banks of Atascadero Creek, Graves Creek,
                blue line creeks and the Salinas River to ensure the uninterrupted natural flow of the
                streams and protection of the riparian ecosystem with flexible standards for the
                downtown area.
                Responsibility:      CDD, Planning Commission, City Council
                Timeframe:           Adopt Ordinance in 2005.
            2. Prior to adoption of a creek setback ordinance an interim 35-foot creek setback shall
                be in effect along Atascadero Creek and Graves Creek until March 1, 2005. All other
                7.5 min USGS quadrangle blue line creeks shall have an interim 20-foot setback.
                The interim setbacks shall be subject to the following:
                a) On Atascadero Creek and Graves Creek setbacks shall be measured from the
                    edge of the creek reservation.
                b) All other blue line creek setbacks shall be measured from ordinary high water
                    mark.
                c) The Planning Commission may approve exceptions to the interim creek setbacks
                    in the form of a Conditional Use Permit if the finding can be made that creeks,
                    riparian areas and site improvement will not be negatively impacted by the
                    exception.
Policy 8.3: Preserve public creek reserves for public access, and ensure that recreational use
            does not impact habitat value and open space qualities.
            Programs:
            1. Develop park, trail, and recreational amenities where appropriate in public creek
                reserves.
            2. Require the dedication of trail easements and access points as part of subdivision
                maps or development permits consistent with the Circulation Element.
Policy 8.4: Review and regulate all proposed on-site wastewater disposal systems to protect
            public health and water quality.
            Programs:
            1. Update and support a Memorandum of Understanding or similar agreement between
                the City of Atascadero and Regional Water Quality Control Board regarding the
                standards for the design, approval, exception process, installation, and maintenance
                of on-site wastewater disposal systems.
            2. Require percolation testing of all proposed subdivision lots that will not be served by
                sewer.
Final Plan                                   Page II-33                                       June 25, 2002
                                           City of Atascadero
                     General Plan Land Use, Open Space and Conservation Element
            3. The City's Sewer Master Plan shall address sewering areas with a high concentration
                of existing lots below 1/2 acre and areas with extremely severe soil percolation
                constraints.
Policy 8.5: The City shall implement a storm water control program consistent with the
            requirements of the National Pollution Discharge Elimination System (NPDES)
            Permit Program (Phase II).
            Programs:
            1. Adopt and implement an Urban Storm Water Quality Management and Discharge
                Control ordinance.
            2. Include design guidelines to minimize impervious surfaces and decrease off-site
                storm flows in the Appearance Review Manual.
            3. New development shall be required to maintain historic off-site storm flows unless
                improvements are made that maintain historic downstream and upstream flows.
            4. The City will develop a storm water master plan including shared detention facilities.
            5. Require Erosion Control Plans and Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plans (SWPPP)
                for development on sites of 1-acre or more and on smaller sites with slopes over
                10%.
            6. The City will continue to notify project applicants and actively inspect sediment and
                erosion control mitigation measures from October 15 to April 15 of each year.
Final Plan                                    Page II-34                                     June 25, 2002
                                City of Atascadero
           General Plan Land Use, Open Space and Conservation Element
                Figure II-8:      Blue Line Creek Diagram
Final Plan                         Page II-35                         June 25, 2002
                                             City of Atascadero
                        General Plan Land Use, Open Space and Conservation Element
Goal LOC 9.             Designate areas where livestock can be owned and
                        maintained.
Policy 9.1.     Allow agricultural practices, including keeping livestock and farm animals, on
                parcels of appropriate size in Rural Estate, Suburban Estate, and Single Family
                Residential areas, provided that natural features and residential neighbors will not
                be adversely impacted.
Policy 9.2      Adequately regulate allowed agricultural practices and keeping of domestic
                animals on rural and agricultural lands consistent with the farm animal regulations
                of the City Zoning Ordinance.
           3. Conservation Policies
Conservation in the context of the General Plan is concerned with preservation and protection
of natural resources. For example, policies within the General Plan and within the conservation
section provide direction for environmentally sensitive development throughout the
community. Responsible stewardship to conserve our land, air, water quality, and energy
resources is at the heart of the following conservation goals and policies:
Goal LOC 10.            Conserve energy and resources by preventing or
                        correcting degradation of the environment.
Policy 10.1:    Ensure efficient and adequate solid waste disposal by reducing waste volumes
                through recycling and other methods.
                Programs:
                1. Pursuant to State law, institute a program to achieve maximum recycling of waste
                    products generated by the community to prolong the useful life of landfill.
                2. Continue to reduce solid waste through source reduction, curbside recycling, green
                    waste collection, and recovery, in cooperation with the Integrated Waste
                    Management Board (SLO IWMA).
                3. Develop effective and efficient recycling programs for multi-family developments and
                    businesses.
                4. Encourage recycling programs at City facilities, projects, and programs to the
                    maximum extent feasible.
                5. Support actions which conserve energy and encourage energy conservation.
                    Consumption of non-renewable resources should be minimized. Renewable
                    resources should be recycled or replenished.
Final Plan                                      Page II-36                                      June 25, 2002
                                            City of Atascadero
                       General Plan Land Use, Open Space and Conservation Element
Policy 10.2: Support ongoing water conservation efforts.
             Program:
             1. Coordinate water conservation programs with AMWC as required by State Water
                  Efficiency Regulations.
             2. Consider expansion of reclaimed water use.
             3. Encourage the incorporation of water conservation measures in new development.
Policy 10.3: Support regional efforts to maintain clean air.
             Programs:
             1. Require dust control and emissions limitations during project construction.
             2. Adopt circulation policies that encourage vehicle trip reductions.
             3. Concentrate new intensive development at identified nodes to help reduce vehicle
                  trips.
             4. Support regional programs to maintain clean air by adopting transportation and land
                  use policies which encourage vehicular trip reductions.
             5. Support the development of park and ride locations in appropriate locations.
Policy 10.4: Ensure that development in mineral resource areas is appropriate and compatible
             with existing uses.
             Programs:
             1. Review extraction proposals for conformity with the State Surface Mining and
                  Reclamation Act.
             2. Review the Zoning Ordinance to identify compatibility issues for uses in the vicinity of
                  mining areas, and amend the Ordinance as appropriate.
             3. Carefully evaluate proposals to extract mineral resources from the Salinas River
                  channel to ensure conformity with the State Surface Mining and Reclamation Act and
                  all other applicable resource agencies, surface mining criteria contained within the
                  Zoning Ordinance, and flood hazard zoning standards.
Policy 10.5: Encourage soil conservation by minimizing grading and preventing erosion.
             Programs:
             1. Require soil retention and erosion control as conditions of approval for development
                  projects consistent with standards of the Regional Water Quality Control Board.
             2. Amend the Municipal Code to require sediment and erosion control measures on
                  projects, consistent with National Pollution Discharge Elimination System
                  requirements.
Policy 10.6: Utilize new technologies to improve convenience for City residents, reduce
Final Plan                                     Page II-37                                      June 25, 2002
                                               City of Atascadero
                          General Plan Land Use, Open Space and Conservation Element
                dependency on nonrenewable resources, increase ecological and financial
                efficiencies, and better inform the citizenry
                Programs:
                1. Facilitate and support development of infrastructure necessary for all residents to use
                     and benefit from new communication technologies.
                2. Monitor information technology development to ensure compatibility with City
                     infrastructure.
                3. Strive to expand opportunities for all citizens to participate in City governance through
                     use of communication technologies.
                4. Continue to make essential City documents available for immediate retrieval by
                     electronic transfer technologies.
                5. Review all proposed residential subdivision maps for consistency with section 66473
                     of the Subdivision Map Act requiring lot orientation to consider passive and natural
                     heating and cooling opportunities.
           4. Park and Recreation Policies
Public parks and recreation facilities are an important part of the quality of life of a community.
Parks provide a variety of benefits to the community in the form of active recreation and
passive enjoyment. Active parks include sports fields, play areas, and gathering places that are
essential to the physical and social health of residents, both young and old. Passive parks offer
access to scenic areas and they protect sensitive environmental areas and historic sites for the
future. Atascadero has a unique variety of parklands and facilities that range from the Historic
Sunken Garden to the Lake Park and Zoo. The following goals and policies seek to maintain
and expand the City’s park and recreation facilities as the City continues to grow.
Goal LOC 11.              Provide an adequate supply of City park facilities to all
                          Atascadero residents.
Policy 11.1:    Acquire parkland needed for future development of park and recreation facilities
                and ensure that park improvements are consistent with adopted master plans to
                accommodate future growth.
                Programs:
                1. Develop an overall Parks and Recreation Master Plan to provide for the long-term
                     needs of all City residents. All planned major facilities shall be incorporated into the
                     General Plan Land Use Element.
                2. Prepare and maintain master plans for all City park facilities, including management
                     requirements.
Final Plan                                        Page II-38                                        June 25, 2002

                                              City of Atascadero
                      General Plan Land Use, Open Space and Conservation Element
             3. Provide recreation opportunities in each quadrant of the City, including multi-purpose
                 sports complexes, tennis courts, play areas for children, equestrian trails, bikeways,
                 jogging paths, and community centers.
             4. Parkland shall be acquired and /or dedicated at a ratio of 5 acres /1000 residents
                 consistent with the Quimby Act.
             5. Encourage the acquisition of open space and sensitive lands beyond the ratio of 5
                 acres /1000 residents.
             6. Pursue ownership of Paloma Creek Park, and /or execute a long-term agreement
                 with the State to acquire or lease the site, and analyze its expansion into a regional
                 sports facility.
             7. Require new subdivisions along the Salinas River to provide controlled public access
                 to the Salinas River and De Anza Trail for pedestrian and equestrian recreation.
             8. Support the development of equestrian staging areas and trail systems throughout
                 the community including a Salinas River / De Anza trailhead at the north end of town
                 and other appropriate locations.
             9. Acquire and improve a neighborhood park site in the vicinity of Del Rio Road and El
                 Camino Real.
             10. Require a pocket park to be dedicated and improved on the triangular lot west of the
                 library in conjunction with any residential development of the parcel.
             11. Future development of the Eagle Ranch property shall include a system of parks,
                 recreation facilities, trails, and equestrian facilities.
Policy 11.2: Encourage joint use of school facilities for public recreation purposes.
             Program:
             1. Work with the School District to formulate a program for joint use of facilities to attain
                 a system of school-park complexes.
Policy 11.3: Encourage park development on or adjacent to schools where appropriate.
             Program:
             1. Work with the schools to acquire and develop parks and facilities as appropriate, and
                 execute necessary agreements to allocate maintenance and operation costs for joint
                 use.
Policy 11.4: Encourage cooperative park and facility development programs.
             Program:
             1. Work with the County and other agencies to acquire and develop parks and facilities
                 as appropriate.
Final Plan                                       Page II-39                                    June 25, 2002
                                            City of Atascadero
                     General Plan Land Use, Open Space and Conservation Element
Policy 11.5: Develop a method of financing park and recreational facilities and services
             throughout the City using a variety of revenue sources.
             Programs:
             1. Acquire parkland through developer dedications (updating fee levels as necessary)
                 or other financing mechanisms.
             2. Use in-lieu fees to develop mini-parks.
             3. Finance park operations in part through user fees where appropriate.
                             Table II-6:       General Plan Park Sites
                                     Park Site                  Acreage
                         Atascadero Lake Park                      57 acres
                         Paloma Creek Park                         65 acres
                         Heilman Park                              15 acres
                         Sunken Gardens                              2 acres
                         Traffic Way Park                          11 acres
                         Chico Road Park                             6 acres
                         Stadium Park                              26 acres
                         Future Del Rio Park                         5 acres
                         Library Pocket Park                         ½ acre
                         Total                                    187 acres
Final Plan                                     Page II-40                                 June 25, 2002

                                City of Atascadero
           General Plan Land Use, Open Space and Conservation Element
             Figure II-9:     Parks and Recreation Diagram
Final Plan                         Page II-41                         June 25, 2002
                                                City of Atascadero
                        General Plan Land Use, Open Space and Conservation Element
Goal LOC 12.            Provide a wide range of recreational activities and
                        leisure experiences for all age groups, designed to foster
                        a healthy community for residents and visitors.
Policy 12.1:    Provide specialized recreation opportunities based on projected needs and
                standards identified in parks master plans.
                Program:
                1. Plan for funding on-going operations and maintenance to finance development of
                    special facilities, a multi-purpose sports complex, tennis courts, recreation centers,
                    play areas for children, equestrian trails, bike and jogging paths, and community
                    centers.
Policy 12.2:    Emphasize the importance of recreation facilities as community resources.
                Programs:
                1. Promote the Zoo, Lake Park, and other City parks as unique and valuable attractions.
                2. Establish a community/youth recreation center in the vicinity of downtown.
                3. Provide for public transportation connections to public parks and recreation facilities.
                4. Provide a comprehensive signage program for pedestrian walkways, bikeways,
                    equestrian trails, and recreation trails.
Policy 12.3:    Develop and implement a program to improve water quality in Atascadero Lake
                with specific water quality standards to be provided in the Parks and Recreation
                Master Plan.
           5. 9Economic Development Policies
Intensification of commercial uses downtown and at nodes along major corridors will help
increase economic activity while ensuring that goods and services are available at appropriate
and convenient locations. Diversifying the local economic base by attracting new businesses
will help stabilize the long-term commercial and fiscal health of the City. Streetscape, site,
landscaping and other improvements will be necessary to enhance the appearance and function
of the commercial corridors, especially El Camino Real.
Final Plan                                         Page II-42                                      June 25, 2002
                                            City of Atascadero
                      General Plan Land Use, Open Space and Conservation Element
Goal LOC 13.          Provide for a sound economic base to sustain the City’s
                      unique character by establishing a range of employment
                      and business opportunities and generate sufficient
                      revenue to support adequate levels of public services,
                      and environmental, social and educational quality.
Policy 13.1: Facilitate convenient location of goods and services needed by local residents.
             Programs:
             1.  Update and maintain the Zoning Ordinance to allow grocery stores and medical and
                 professional offices at appropriate neighborhood nodes.
             2. Update and maintain the Zoning Ordinance to allow office, business, and health care
                 services in the Commercial Park Zoning District.
Policy13.2:  Encourage planned office development in appropriate locations.
             Programs:
             1. Formulate a planned development process for office uses.
Policy 13.3: Expand tourist commercial nodes to serve the traveling public at freeway
             interchanges and develop tourist destinations based on the Atascadero's rural
             character.
             Programs:
             1. Promote tourism and travel industries.
             2. Encourage hotel, conference, and resort development and protect potential sites
                 from conversion to other uses.
             3. Update and maintain the Zoning Ordinance to allow additional uses in the Tourist
                 Commercial zoning district.
             4. Promote the community's rural character, open space and oak woodlands in
                 attracting tourist and develop tourist destinations based on these features.
Policy 13.4: The City shall continue to take a long range view of its fiscal condition, and
             specifically the possibility of enhancing revenues, in order to maintain and, where
             ever possible and desirable, enhance current levels of service.
             Programs:
             1. The City will work towards preparing a long range economic plan (often called a
                 “strategic plan”) to develop a strategy for future fiscal health so that projected levels
                 of service can be maintained and enhanced.
Final Plan                                     Page II-43                                         June 25, 2002

                                           City of Atascadero
                     General Plan Land Use, Open Space and Conservation Element
             2. The City will annually adjust its long range revenue and expenditure projections to
                 track changes in the City’s fiscal situation, so that both problems and opportunities
                 can be anticipated and planned for.
             3. New development should pay its share of the costs of providing all capital facilities
                 needed to support it; payment may be in the form of actual construction of facilities
                 where appropriate as conditions of approval and/or by the payment of fees.
             4. The City will review it developer fees on a regular basis.
             5. The City will minimize its road maintenance responsibilities by requiring private
                 funding mechanisms such as assessment districts for the maintenance of new local
                 streets.
Goal LOC 14.         Retain and expand existing businesses and attract new
                     businesses to improve the availability of goods and
                     services.
Policy 14.1: Encourage existing uses to continue providing needed products and services.
             Programs:
             1. Continue to support Chamber of Commerce efforts to market goods and services
                 available in Atascadero, including those produced locally.
             2. Identify locations with adequate land to accommodate new commercial and industrial
                 development.
Policy 14.2: Attract new development and land uses that provide jobs and services for
             residents, provided that those uses are consistent with the City’s character.
             Programs:
             1. Update the Zoning Ordinance to allow craft uses in appropriate locations, including
                 multi-tenant incubator spaces.
             2. Update the Municipal Code to adequately regulate home occupation uses.
             3. Update the Zoning Ordinance to allow commercial recreation development at the
                 northern gateway to the City.
Policy 14.3: Plan for a regional commercial center near Highway 101.
             Programs:
             1. Update the Zoning Ordinance to allow regional retail (including auto and home
                 furnishing) uses in appropriate locations.
Policy 14.4: Ensure that City regulations and processes support economic development
             opportunities.
Final Plan                                    Page II-44                                      June 25, 2002

                                               City of Atascadero
                         General Plan Land Use, Open Space and Conservation Element
                Programs:
                1. Review and Update the Zoning Ordinance to address any regulatory impediments to
                    attracting target businesses, and to facilitate desired business expansions and reuse.
           6. Public Services Policies
The City provides a variety of services, including building inspection, storm drainage, flood
control, fire protection, police, parks, recreation services, sewage disposal, and street
maintenance. Garbage collection and disposal is contracted with private firms. Most water in
the City is supplied and distributed by the Atascadero Mutual Water Company which is a
private company separate from the City. San Luis Obispo County operates the Atascadero
Branch Library, and public schools are run by the Atascadero Unified School District.
The City does not expect to be able to provide the same levels of services to all properties,
especially in lower-density hillside areas. New development is required to pay its share of costs
for services and mitigate its impacts on infrastructure, and growth should be directed to areas
where services can be provided in a cost-effective manner.
Goal LOC 15.             Provide adequate public services for high-quality,
                         orderly and sensible growth.
Policy 15.1:    Growth should be directed to areas where services can be provided in a cost-
                effective manner.
Policy 15.2:    Maintain an updated Capital Improvements Program (CIP) that forecasts needs at
                least five years into the future and conforms to General Plan policies and
                programs.
                Programs:
                1. The Planning Commission shall annually review the Capital Improvement Program
                    for consistency with the General Plan and forward its findings to the City Council
                2. Prepare and implement master storm drainage plans.
Policy 15.3:    Ensure that adequate service capacity and facilities exist prior to approving new
                development.
                Programs:
                1. Coordinate with the Atascadero Municipal Water Company to provide for adequate
                    facilities and water supplies.
Final Plan                                        Page II-45                                     June 25, 2002
                                            City of Atascadero
                      General Plan Land Use, Open Space and Conservation Element
             2. Require all new projects and new development requiring domestic water to be served
                 by the Atascadero Municipal Water Company unless a waiver is granted by the
                 Planning Commission through a Conditional Use Permit.
             3. Coordinate with other local and regional public service providers to identify and
                 ensure adequate service levels for all public services and facilities.
             4. Update the municipal code to require new single-family residential development on
                 lots within 200-feet of an existing public sewer system to be required to extend and
                 connect to the public sewer when topographically possible.
             5. Continue to support regional planning for solid and hazardous waste disposal.
             6. Continue to provide police and fire staffing and facilities as necessary to meet
                 community needs.
             7. Incorporate public safety measures in development project design.
             8. All residential projects of 100 or more dwelling units shall be required to prepare a
                 Fiscal Impact Report prior to any discretionary approvals. The Fiscal Impact Report
                 shall analyze all revenues, service costs and facilities costs associated with a project.
                 The City shall require the establishment of Facilities Districts and / or Maintenance
                 Districts to cover revenue short falls on a project.
Policy 15.4: Extend services only when the City has funding for additional improvements
             identified in the CIP.
             Programs:
             1. Include in the CIP a prioritized list of projects, timing, cost estimates, responsible
                 department, and funding sources.
Policy 15.5: Two tiers of public service will be provided within the City based on the Urban
             Services Line (USL).
             Program:
             1. The Urban Services Line defines the area that will eventually be furnished with major
                 public and quasi-public services. This area will be served by some or all of the
                 essential urban services, including :
                 a)   Creekway & Horse Trails
                 b)   Solid Waste Disposal
                 c)   Cultural Facilities
                 d)   Storm Drainage (based Master storm drainage plans for selected sub-drainage
                      basins)
                 e)   Streets and sidewalks
                 f)   Improvement Districts
                 g)   Street Sweeping
                 h)   County Library
                 i)   Street Trees
                 j)   Parks
                 k)   Public Utilities
                 l)   Emergency Services (Level of Service 1)
Final Plan                                     Page II-46                                        June 25, 2002
                                            City of Atascadero
                      General Plan Land Use, Open Space and Conservation Element
                 m) Water
                 n) Sewers
             2. The Rural Services Area is the area outside of the USL and consists of the remainder
                 of the City within the City boundaries. Services to be provided are:
                 a)   Creekway & Horse Trails
                 b)   Rural Streets
                 c)   Solid Waste Disposal
                 d)   Improvement Districts
                 e)   Public Utilities
                 f)   Water
                 g)   Emergency Services (Level of Service 2 & 3)
                 h)   Fire risk management program with backyard burning
                 i)   Sewering of areas with poor percolation and high rates of septic system failure.
Policy 15.6: Ensure that new development pays the cost of providing and/or installing all
             capital facilities needed to support it, including the infrastructure necessary to
             attract high-tech and professional support businesses.
             Programs:
             1. Continue to condition approval of new development on collection of impact fees
                 and/or construction of facilities, as appropriate, adequate to fund facilities to serve
                 new development.
Policy 15.7: Continue to support effective regional planning for solid and hazardous waste
             disposal.
             Programs:
             1. Continue to require solid waste collection within the City.
             2. Maintain on going communication with solid waste disposal service providers.
Policy 15.8: Support expansion of the County library.
             Programs:
             1. Work with the County to designate an appropriate site for an expanded County
                 library, including adequate parking.
Policy 15.9: Ensure high quality educational facilities and services are provided to the
             community.
             Programs:
             1. Work with the School District to review land use decisions involving provision of
                 educational facilities.
Final Plan                                     Page II-47                                         June 25, 2002
                                    City of Atascadero
               General Plan Land Use, Open Space and Conservation Element
           Figure II-10: Master Plan of Development Overlay Areas
Final Plan                             Page II-48                         June 25, 2002
                                                 City of Atascadero
                         General Plan Land Use, Open Space and Conservation Element
Policy 15.10: Require public agency and private utilities development projects in the City to
conform to City site improvement standards.
                 Programs:
                 1. Support expansion of Atascadero State Hospital facilities and functions only when
                     impacts can be adequately mitigated.
                 2. Require all local utilities to notify the City of projects and comply with all applicable
                     ordinances.
 F. Implementation and Adoption
Once adopted, local units of government are mandated to implement general plans
(Government Code Section 65103(c)). State law also requires local governments to have a
subdivision ordinance, building regulations and open space zoning, all of which are tools for
plan implementation. Other plan implementation measures are derived from State laws
requiring consistency of local actions with the adopted general plan including the zoning
ordinance, subdivision ordinance, specific plans and the capital improvement program.
Policy 16.1:     The General Plan shall be adopted by City Council resolution.
 G. General Plan Amendments
           1. General Plan Amendment Process
Over time, various sections of the General Plan will need to be updated or revised to respond to
changing conditions. The policies presented in the General Plan contain some degree of
flexibility, but any General Plan Amendments must be judged by relatively fixed criteria.
The following process must be followed in reviewing and approving any proposed General
Plan Amendments
           2. Amendment Applications
Applications to amend the General Plan shall be accompanied by detailed information to
document the scope and impact of the amendment request. This information should include
revised text, tables and diagrams for all affected elements. For example a change to the Land
Use Element must include an analysis of impacts to the Housing and Circulation Elements.
Pursuant to the requirements of the California Environmental Quality Act, all application
amendments shall include an environmental analysis for consistency with the certified EIR and
mitigation monitoring program.
Final Plan                                          Page II-49                                        June 25, 2002
                                                 City of Atascadero
                         General Plan Land Use, Open Space and Conservation Element
Since a significant amount of public resources has been invested in the preparation of the
General Plan and EIR any proposals to amend the General Plan must document the need for
such changes. The application will include a discussion of the environmental, economic, social,
or technical issues which justify the need to amend the General Plan.
           3. Submittal of Supplemental Studies
Any application to amend the General Plan must be accompanied by studies which analyze the
Amendment's effects, compared to the adopted General Plan and EIR. At a minimum the
following issues must be addressed:
                 General Plan Amendment Requirements
                        Conformance with the adopted General Plan Goals, Policies, and Programs and
                         the overall intent of the Plan.
                   Compatibility with existing development, neighborhoods, and the environment.
                   Analysis of traffic, infrastructure, and public service impacts.
                   Consistency with adopted EIR and mitigation monitoring program.
           4. Staff Analysis
City staff will review all of the above submitted material and provide a staff report to the
Planning Commission and the City Council. Staff may also request additional information
beyond the studies mentioned above. The staff report will analyze whether the proposed
General Plan Amendment is consistent with the General Plan and whether the need to amend
the General Plan can be supported by the conclusions of the supplemental studies.
           5. Public Hearings
Consistent with section 65358(b), no element of the General Plan shall be amended more than
four (4) times per calendar year. Two cycles of amendments shall be reserved for City use and
the remaining two cycles shall be available for other amendment applications. More than one
amendment application maybe considered during a cycle provided it is heard on the same
public hearing date. The dates for the non-reserved General Plan amendment cycles shall be as
follows, the City Council may grant exceptions to the dates prior to Planning Commission
hearing.
                 General Plan Amendment Cycles
                                                                      st
                 Cycle A                   Planning Commission       1 Tuesday of March
                                                                      th
                                           City Council              4 Tuesday of March
Final Plan                                          Page II-50                               June 25, 2002

                                               City of Atascadero
                       General Plan Land Use, Open Space and Conservation Element
                                                                      st
               Cycle B                    Planning Commission       1 Tuesday of September
                                                                      th
                                          City Council              4 Tuesday of September
               Cycle C                    Reserved for City amendments (may be heard at any meeting)
               Cycle D                    Reserved for City amendments (may be heard at any meeting)
Both the Planning Commission and the City Council shall hold a public hearing on the General
Plan Amendment application, in accordance State Law Government Code. In approving the
amendment the following findings shall be made.
               General Plan Amendment Findings
               1. The proposed amendment is in the public interest.
               2. The proposed amendment is in conformance with the adopted General Plan Goals,
                   Policies, and Programs and the overall intent of the General Plan.
               3. The proposed amendment is compatible with existing development, neighborhoods
                   and the environment.
               4. The proposed amendment will not create any new significant and unavoidable
                   impacts to traffic, infrastructure, or public services.
               5. The proposed amendment is consistent with adopted EIR and mitigation monitoring
                   program.
           6. Exceptions
Minor adjustments to General Plan boundaries and diagrams may be approved with a
simplified process that does not require additional studies. Minor adjustments would include
changes that modify boundaries to follow more logical locations without increasing density or
changing entitlements.
 H. Severability Clause
In the event that any goal, policy, or program, or portion of any element of the General Plan is
held invalid or unconstitutional by a California or Federal Court of competent jurisdiction, such
portions shall be deemed separate, distinct and independent provisions, and the invalidity of
such provisions shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions there.
Final Plan                                        Page II-51                                 June 25, 2002
                                             City of Atascadero
                        General Plan Land Use, Open Space and Conservation Element
 I. Environmental Impact Report / Mitigation Monitoring
        Program
In conjunction with the preparation of the General Plan an Environmental Impact Report
(GPEIR) #SCH 2001121027 was prepared consistent with the requirements of the California
Environmental Quality Act (CEQA). The EIR was certified with a Statement of Overriding
Considerations and Mitigation Monitoring Program. The Mitigation Monitoring Program is
incorporated into the General Plan to ensure implementation (Table II-7). The General Plan EIR
is intended to be utilized for "Tiering" consistent with Section 15152 of the CEQA Guidelines.
Projects that are determined to be consistent with the General Plan and the EIR may incorporate
the analysis, mitigation, and overriding considerations into subsequent Negative Declarations.
Final Plan                                      Page II-52                             June 25, 2002
                                                   City of Atascadero
                              General Plan Land Use, Open Space and Conservation Element
                     Table II-7         General Plan EIR Mitigation Monitoring Program
 MITIGATION MONITORING PROGRAM
 Mitigation Measures                                  Timing               Responsible   Compliance
                                                                           Person/Agency Standards
 Geology
 Cumulative Impacts.                                  Prior to Eagle       Community     Ensure that
                                                      Ranch                Development   consideration of the
                                                      development          Department    Combining
 Eagle Ranch appears to abut or include a
                                                      approvals            (CDD)         Designation is
 designated geologically sensitive area as
                                                                                         reflected in
 shown in the Salinas River Area Plan.
                                                                                         environmental
                                                                                         documentation
 Eagle Ranch. Amend the Draft Plan to include                                            prepared for any
 the following policy:                                                                   proposal on the
                                                                                         property, and in site
                                                                                         designs.
 Prior to development, the Geologically
 Sensitive Combining Designation shown in the
 Salinas River Area Plan shall be further studied
 for its application to the Eagle Ranch property.
 Hydrology and Water Quality
 Water Quality.                                       Prior to             CDD           Upon review of
                                                      discretionary                      discretionary
                                                      approval of                        entitlements, the CDD
 Implement Best Management Practices for
                                                      development                        shall assure that all
 Water Quality Improvement. Condition project         applications                       adopted measures are
 approval to include Best Management                                                     complied with for sites
 Practices in construction and operation.                                                with the potential to
 Options include, but are not limited to:                                                result in water quality
                                                                                         degradation.
 Regular inspection, maintenance and clean out
 of stormwater retention or detention structures
 Regular inspection, maintenance and clean out
 of oil and water separators
 Regular inspection maintenance and clean out
 of sediment traps.
 Promotion of self-directed removal of on-site
 trash, dead vegetation and leaf litter.
 Promotion of use of biodegradable herbicides
 and pesticides and encouragement of the use
 of biologically-sensitive landscape
 management
 Conduction of regularly scheduled creek clean-
 ups
 Conduction of regular maintenance of City
 fleets
 Provision of worker education programs
 Create guidelines for City facilities and
 discretionary projects to improve the quality of
 runoff water. Considerations may include:
Final Plan                                            Page II-53                                  June 25, 2002
                                                  City of Atascadero
                             General Plan Land Use, Open Space and Conservation Element
 MITIGATION MONITORING PROGRAM
 Mitigation Measures                                 Timing               Responsible   Compliance
                                                                          Person/Agency Standards
 Install and maintain appropriately sized
 stormwater retention or detention structures
 Install and maintain oil and water separators
 Install and maintain appropriately sized
 sediment traps
 Install and maintain drought tolerant
 landscaping
 Install and maintain landscaping which does
 not require excessive application of fertilizers
 and pesticides
 Do not permit use of sprinkler and spray
 systems in areas less than eight feet wide (City
 facilities)
 Encourage the use of drip systems
 Encourage the use of more permeable paving
 materials (not feasible for applications where
 fueling and vehicle maintenance take place.
 Drainage and Flooding.                              Prior to             CDD           Upon review of
                                                     discretionary                      discretionary
                                                     approval of                        entitlements, the CDD
 Ensure Consistency with Applicable Drainage-
                                                     development                        shall assure that
 Related Plans. All new development in or near
                                                     applications                       compliance with all
 existing drainage systems and associated                                               applicable plans and
 tributaries shall be assessed for consistency                                          regulations is attained.
 with applicable existing drainage, grading,
 erosion control, and water quality-related
 policies, standards, and programs including but
 not limited to the following:
 Water Quality Control Plan – Central Coast
 Basin including Best Management Practices
 (BMPs)
 San Luis Obispo County Master Water Plan
 Update (1998)
 Paso Robles Formation Study (in progress).
 Future recovery plans for the Salinas River and
 Atascadero Creek.
 Urban Water Management Plan (in progress).
 Stormwater Infrastructure. Prior to approval of     Prior to approval of CDD           Upon review of
 stormwater infrastructure improvements,             infrastructure                     infrastructures
 ensure that adequate environmental review has       improvements                       improvements, ensure
 been completed.                                                                        that adequate
                                                                                        environmental review
                                                                                        is provided.
 Compliance with SB 221. All applicable              Prior to             CDD           Upon review of
 development projects under the General Plan         discretionary                      discretionary
Final Plan                                           Page II-54                                  June 25, 2002

                                                   City of Atascadero
                              General Plan Land Use, Open Space and Conservation Element
 MITIGATION MONITORING PROGRAM
 Mitigation Measures                                  Timing               Responsible   Compliance
                                                                           Person/Agency Standards
 shall comply with the recent legislation             approval of                        entitlements meeting
 governing water supplies and development             development                        specific size and
 approval. Any subdivision proposing 400 or           applications                       service connection
 more units shall be subject to the provisions of     meeting criteria                   criteria, the CDD shall
 this legislation.                                                                       assure compliance
                                                                                         with applicable
                                                                                         regulations
 Compliance with SB 610. Incorporate the              Upon completion      CDD           Upon completion of the
 recommendations of the Urban Water                   of the Urban Water                 Urban Water
 Management Plan and amend the General                Management Plan                    Management Plan,
 Plan as necessary.                                                                      make necessary
                                                                                         amendments to the
                                                                                         General Plan to
                                                                                         comply with
                                                                                         recommendations.
 Biological Resources
 Sensitive and/or Special Status Species.             Prior to             CDD           Upon review of
                                                      discretionary                      discretionary
                                                      approval of                        entitlements meeting
 Impacts to Sensitive Species. The City shall         development                        criteria for biological
 condition project approval, where it has             applications                       sensitivity, the CDD
 jurisdiction, and recommend conditioning of                                             shall assure
 project approval, in areas outside its                                                  compliance with
 jurisdiction, with the following measures:                                              mitigation measures
 Implement sediment reduction measures.
 Implement drainage measures recommended
 in Section V.III to reduce downstream impacts
 of sediment.
 Plant/Animal Survey procedures. Until such
 time that a city ordinance is adopted, surveys
 for endangered and sensitive plant and animal
 species shall be conducted during proper
 seasons and in accordance with standard
 methodologies. Surveys will be prepared on
 sites with established vegetation, relatively
 undisturbed character and/or proximity to
 known occurrences of sensitive species.
 Appropriate mitigation measures in accordance
 with California Department of Fish and Game
 guidelines shall be developed where necessary
 to reduce impacts to sensitive species to a
 level of insignificance.
 Construction Activity Timing. Where sensitive
 species are known to occur within a proposed
 project area, construction activities shall occur
 outside of species breeding and/or migration
 seasons in order to minimize impacts. These
 limitations are often included as provisions
 within associated permits. For example,
 construction occurring in or directly adjacent to
Final Plan                                            Page II-55                                  June 25, 2002
                                                     City of Atascadero
                              General Plan Land Use, Open Space and Conservation Element
 MITIGATION MONITORING PROGRAM
 Mitigation Measures                                    Timing             Responsible   Compliance
                                                                           Person/Agency Standards
 a perennial stream may be limited to the
 summer months in order to minimize
 disturbance of steelhead spawning activities as
 part of a Section 1601 or 1603 DFG streambed
 alteration agreement.
 Prepare and Submit a Revegetation Plan. For
 all development expected to result in removal
 or significant disturbance of native vegetation,
 the applicant shall contact the City to determine
 their responsibilities in terms of revegetation
 and restoration. The plans shall be prepared
 by a qualified botanist, restoration specialist, or
 other qualified firm. The plan shall address all
 natural communities impacted by all phases of
 the proposed project including chaparral,
 annual grassland, and oak woodland. The plan
 shall provide detailed specifications for
 replacement and restoration of all affected
 natural communities, including appropriate
 replacement ratios for disturbed native plants,
 and shall specify the duration and frequency of
 monitoring associated with
 restoration/revegetation efforts.
 Implement the Pre-approved Revegetation
 Plan. Upon completion of construction for all
 new development, the applicant shall
 implement the pre-approved Revegetation and
 restoration plan described above. Following
 completion of construction, immediately
 revegetate all areas previously containing
 natural vegetation and disturbed because of
 project implementation. Revegetate only with
 appropriate native and indigenous vegetation.
 At a minimum, the structure and composition of
 habitats restored shall reflect pre-project site
 conditions or better. The health and
 maintenance of all replacement vegetation
 shall be monitored and/or otherwise supported
 for a sufficient duration and frequency to
 ensure successful establishment of the
 vegetation.
 Control Further Introduction of Invasive Exotic
 Plants at New Development Sites. During and
 upon completion of construction, the proponent
 shall be required to control further introduction
 of invasive exotic plants. The project
 proponent shall implement the following
 measures:
 Use only clean fill material within all
 construction zones.
 Prohibit planting or seeding of disturbed
Final Plan                                              Page II-56                             June 25, 2002
                                                    City of Atascadero
                             General Plan Land Use, Open Space and Conservation Element
 MITIGATION MONITORING PROGRAM
 Mitigation Measures                                   Timing             Responsible   Compliance
                                                                          Person/Agency Standards
 portions of natural communities with non-native
 plant species.
 Avoid Disturbance of Special-status Plants at
 New Development Sites. During construction
 associated with all new development, avoid or
 minimize disturbance of special-status plants.
 Implement the measures identified below to
 avoid or minimize unnecessary disturbance of
 special-status plants either known of having
 potential to occur in the project area.
 Retain a qualified biologist and/or botanist to
 conduct focused surveys for special-status
 plant species during the appropriate flowering
 periods for various species having potential to
 occur in the project area.
 Clearly map and identify each individual or
 group of special-status plants observed during
 the surveys with highly visible flagging, and
 then completely avoid during construction
 In the event rare plants cannot be avoided
 during construction, applicable resource
 agencies should be contacted to determine
 appropriate avoidance measures before
 construction. Various measures may include
 relocation and transplanting of individual plants,
 and/or stockpiling of existing soils to retain the
 seedbank.
 Invasive Exotics. The City shall develop and
 revise current landscaping plan guidelines to
 include prohibition of the planting of invasive
 exotics designated by CNPS
 Riparian, Wetland and other Sensitive                 Prior to           CDD           Upon review of
 Communities.                                          discretionary                    discretionary
                                                       approval of                      entitlements proximate
                                                       development                      to riparian areas, the
 Riparian/wetland habitat avoidance. Until such
                                                       applications                     CDD shall assure
 time as a creek setback and mitigation program                                         compliance with
 is adopted by the City, condition approval of                                          mitigation measures
 development proposed to be located within 100
 feet of a riparian or wetland area, and
 implement the following:
 Adjacent riparian or wetland resources shall be
 evaluated by a qualified biologist
 Development shall be sited at an adequate
 distance from riparian or wetland areas as
 determined necessary by a qualified biologist.
Final Plan                                             Page II-57                                June 25, 2002
                                                   City of Atascadero
                              General Plan Land Use, Open Space and Conservation Element
 MITIGATION MONITORING PROGRAM
 Mitigation Measures                                  Timing               Responsible   Compliance
                                                                           Person/Agency Standards
 Setbacks for non-significant riparian or wetland
 areas shall be determined based on
 recommendations of the qualified biologist.
 Construction and development activities shall
 employ measures designed to reduce impacts
 to riparian areas, in addition to respecting
 specified setbacks. Measures include, but are
 not limited to:
 Clearly delineate construction areas through
 physical and/or visual barriers.
 Do not allow location of fueling or staging areas
 proximate to waterways when feasible. When
 no other options exist, protect waterways by
 berming or otherwise creating barriers to soil
 and fuel movement.
 Do not allow washwater from construction to
 enter waterways.
 The City should develop a preferred set of Best
 Management Practices to be implemented by
 developers.
 Implement Erosion and Spill Control Measures
 during Construction. To reduce the potential
 for inadvertent release of sediment or fuel from
 construction areas to adjacent drainage and
 wetland areas, the following measures shall be
 implemented as part of all development
 projects.
 During construction, avoid all cleaning and
 refueling of equipment and vehicles near
 existing drainages and associated seasonal
 wetland habitat.
 Following completion of construction-related
 activities, revegetate all disturbed and barren
 areas with appropriate native vegetation to
 reduce the risk of erosion and sedimentation in
 adjacent drainage areas.
 Movement and Migration Corridors. Condition          Prior to             CDD           Upon review of
 project approval in rural areas based on an          discretionary                      discretionary
 assessment of the project’s impacts on               approval of                        entitlements the CDD
 migration and movement corridors, including          development                        shall assure
 but not limited to, waterways, intact woodland       applications                       compliance with
 areas, and fringe areas that abut intact habitat.                                       mitigation measures
 The City should identify important corridor
 areas and aim for their preservation through
Final Plan                                            Page II-58                                 June 25, 2002

                                                    City of Atascadero
                               General Plan Land Use, Open Space and Conservation Element
 MITIGATION MONITORING PROGRAM
 Mitigation Measures                                   Timing               Responsible   Compliance
                                                                            Person/Agency Standards
 conservation easements, where feasible, and
 through site design.
 Consistency with Regional, Species Specific           Prior to             CDD           Upon review of
 Recovery Plans and Other Habitat                      discretionary                      discretionary
 Conservation Efforts. Project approval shall be       approval of                        entitlements the CDD
 conditioned on consideration of consistency           development                        shall assure
 with regional conservation plans, including           applications                       compliance with
 critical habitat designations and recovery plans,                                        mitigation measures
 where applicable.
 Agriculture
 Evaluation and Mitigation. Prior to approval          Prior to             CDD           Upon review of
 of development on parcels listed with potential       discretionary                      discretionary
 for supporting important farmland, evaluate the       approval of                        entitlements the CDD
 following criteria:                                   development                        shall assure
                                                       applications                       compliance with
                                                                                          mitigation measures
 Do the on-site soils exhibit the necessary
 characteristics for farmland of local potential?
 Is the parcel large enough to support
 agriculture (refer to the County minimums)?
 If the parcel meets all of the above criteria,
 condition development approval with offsets of
 at least 1:1 offsite.
 Circulation
 Implement Recommended Intersection                    Prior to             CDD           Upon review of
 Mitigation. The following policy will be included     discretionary                      discretionary
 in the Draft Plan: Incorporate the                    approval of                        entitlements the CDD
 recommendations of the traffic engineers to           development                        shall assure
 remedy existing intersection deficiencies.            applications                       compliance with
                                                                                          mitigation measures
 Air Quality
 Short-Term (Construction-related) Impacts.            Prior to             CDD           Upon review of
 Construction. The City shall incorporate APCD         discretionary                      discretionary
 recommendations for all construction in the           approval of                        entitlements the CDD
 City. Measures include the use of catalyzed           development                        shall assure
 particulate filters for both off- and on-road         applications                       compliance with
 vehicles.                                                                                mitigation measures
 Noise
 Vibration. When reviewing project-specific            Prior to             CDD           Upon review of
 applications for vibration-sensitive construction     discretionary                      discretionary
 within 100 feet of the centerline of the railroad     approval of                        entitlements the CDD
 tracks, project approval will be conditioned          development                        shall assure
 pending results of vibration studies. Mitigation      applications                       compliance with
 such as setback or vibration reduction                                                   mitigation measures
 treatments shall be included in the project
 design and specifications.
Final Plan                                             Page II-59                                 June 25, 2002
                                                     City of Atascadero
                             General Plan Land Use, Open Space and Conservation Element
 MITIGATION MONITORING PROGRAM
 Mitigation Measures                                    Timing            Responsible   Compliance
                                                                          Person/Agency Standards
 Public Services.
 Fiscal Analysis. The City shall prepare a              Adoption of       CDD           Amend policies to
 citywide fiscal analysis outlining funding             General Plan                    reflect language
 required to support staffing for police and fire
 throughout buildout of the Draft Plan. The
 analysis will identify methods to fund staffing,
 milestones for new hires based on projected
 growth, and specific policies for implementation
 of funding methods.
 Aesthetics
 Light and Glare. Additional recommended                Adoption of       CDD           Amend policies to
 General Plan policies:                                 General Plan                    reflect suggested
                                                                                        language
 Glare. The City shall assess the potential glare
 impacts of a proposed project and apply the
 following:
 Do not allow large expanses of reflective glass
 or reflective metal roofing in locations visible to
 residents and/or traffic.
 The City shall consider establishing minimum
 and maximum light levels for each of the
 proposed land uses.
Final Plan                                              Page II-60                               June 25, 2002
                                                City of Atascadero
                                               Circulation Element
III.      Circulation Element
      A. Introduction
                1. Purpose
     The Circulation Element provides a long-range plan for the City of Atascadero to accommodate
     the transportation of people and goods within the City using a structured network of highways,
     streets, pathways, and trails. This includes all modes of transportation including transit,
     bicycles, pedestrians, and equestrians in addition to motorized vehicles. Circulation policies
     and programs have been developed to achieve consistency with the other elements of the
     General Plan, to reflect current community desires, and to provide a safe and efficient
     circulation system. The Circulation Element has been developed to be consistent with policies
     of the APCD, SLOCOG, SLORTA, Caltrans, and other regional agencies.
     Although the plan recognizes that the automobile will continue to be the primary means of
     transportation during the timeframe of this plan (2025), it emphasizes policies and programs to
     reduce vehicle use by promoting alternative modes of travel. The Circulation Element also
     reflects the importance of neighborhood quality as well as vehicle, bicyclist, and pedestrian
     safety.
     The Land Use Element identifies locations of future development, and the Circulation Element
     accommodates the project traffic generation that will result from future land use activities. The
     Land Use Element, in turn, is shaped by the location and capacity of transportation facilities.
     The Land Use Element and Downtown Plan contain policies aimed at reducing auto use by
     encouraging pedestrian-scale development.
                2. Circulation System History
     Laid out as part of the 1913 Atascadero Colony plan, the circulation system was designed for
     turn of the century automobile use and low-intensity land uses. Unfortunately, the circulation
     system did not anticipate today’s level of automobile traffic. The network consists of radial
     routes emanating from the City Hall area supported by a series of arterial rings meant to convey
     traffic to outlying areas. Only a few blocks in the City center display the grid system common
     to most cities. Not all planned streets have been built, and some minor streets are privately
     maintained and not part of the City's adopted maintenance system.
     The radial street pattern was interrupted in 1954 with construction of US Highway 101, and
     commercial development has since spread along El Camino Real. The freeway has limited east-
     west travel to the eight crossings. Most significantly, it cuts off access from Atascadero Mall to
     El Camino Real and the Downtown.
     Final Plan                                    Page III-1                                  June 25, 2002

                                                          City of Atascadero
                                                        Circulation Element
 Since most routes were laid out with the Colony formation in 1913, a key objective is optimal
 use of these streets to meet current and future needs while addressing safety and air quality
 concerns. Few streets within Atascadero are designed to carry high traffic volumes; freeway
 interchanges create existing and potential bottlenecks; many roadways are not wide enough to
 safely accommodate automobiles, bicyclists and pedestrians; and the street patterns and
 topography constrain transit operations and access. One of the goals of the Circulation Element
 and the associated circulation improvements is to improve this situation.
  B. Street Classifications
 In developing policies and programs for the Circulation Element, existing and potential future
 transportation conditions were analyzed comprehensively for the planning area. This analysis
 included reviewing existing transportation services, surveying existing traffic volumes and
 travel patterns, modeling future traffic volumes and patterns, and assessing existing and
 potential future transportation improvement needs and opportunities.
 The Circulation Plan classifies roadways based on their intended function and projected traffic
 levels, which determine the appropriate type of design and number of lanes for the route. Table
 III-1 describes the different classes of roads recognized by the General Plan.
                              Table III-1:          General Plan Roadway Classifications
              These are high speed; high capacity limited access facilities serving intercity and regional travel. US 101 is classified
Freeway       as a freeway.
             Arterials provide for circulation between major activity centers and residential areas in the City and beyond; they also
             provide access to freeways. They are further subdivided into two categories:
              Major arterial usually carry the highest volumes and/or longest trip in the City. Major arterials are high-capacity,
              moderately high-speed routes, typically two or four lanes wide (with up to six lanes where warranted by traffic
              volumes). Arterials also include regional highways. For high capacity, major arterials in the urban areas should have
              medians between intersections and additional lanes at intersections. Service to abutting properties may be provided
              but should be subordinate to through-travel needs; access points should be consolidated where possible. El Camino
Arterials     Real and Route 41 (Morro Road) are classified as major arterials.
              Minor arterial typically interconnect with and augment the major arterial system, and serve trips of moderate length.
              Minor arterials permit access to abutting properties, but traffic capacity needs are equally important. Minor arterials
              are typically two lanes wide and their design is similar to that of collectors except for additional space for separating
              bicycles from other traffic. To minimize roadway width and right-of-way, minor arterials are usually undivided (no
              median). Left-turn lanes should be provided at intersections, and a continuous two-way left turn lane may be
              provided mid-block to improve traffic flow. Traffic Way is an example of a minor arterial
              Collectors channel traffic from residential or commercial areas to arterials. Residences, commercial or public
              activities, typically front on to them. They are usually two-lane streets, and maximum acceptable volumes are often
Collectors    dictated by resident concerns about intrusion rather than traffic capacity considerations. Collectors are further
              classified as urban, rural or hillside, depending upon the area, and type of topography and vegetation.
Local         Local streets have the sole function of providing access to adjoining land uses. All streets not otherwise depicted on
              the circulation plan are local streets. Local streets are further classified as urban, rural, or hillside, depending upon
Streets       the area and type of topography and vegetation.
 Final Plan                                                   Page III-2                                                    June 25, 2002
                                                            City of Atascadero
                                                          Circulation Element
                                    Figure III-1:           Typical Road Cross Sections
                                                                                                                  7’
    7’                                                                                                  4’     7’
              7’ 4’
Notes:
          1)     Additional right-of-way may be required at intersections to accommodate turning lanes
          2)     Arterial parking lanes may be utilized for landscaping when on street parking is not required.
          3)     Road sections may be modified to minimize native tree impacts or to reduce grading impacts.
          4)     Road sections shall be modified as necessary to accommodate street trees and landscaping
Final Plan                                                      Page III-3                                           June 25, 2002

                                            City of Atascadero
                                           Circulation Element
El Camino Real and State Route 41 (Morro Road) are the major arterials in Atascadero. Portions
of both these roads will need to be improved to four lanes in the future. Minor arterials include
Traffic Way, Atascadero Avenue, Santa Barbara Road, Halcon Road, Portola Road and Santa
Rosa Road. Portion of San Anselmo Road, Del Rio Road, Santa Cruz, Curbaril Avenue, and
Santa Lucia Avenue are also designated as minor arterials. These routes can accommodate
future traffic as two-lane streets, but should be upgraded to the City standard widths to safely
accommodate transit vehicles, bicyclists, pedestrians and turning vehicles.
Certain arterial streets and US 101 are designated as truck routes. Trucks will still use other
streets for access to local destinations but should be restricted through signage and by
ordinance to use only designated truck routes.
Policies and programs also address collectors, which funnel traffic from local streets to
arterials and local streets. Standards for collector and local roadways consider the maximum
amount of traffic that is typically acceptable to people living along such streets.
 C.                Alternate Transportation
Successful Travel Demand Management (TDM) can reduce or postpone the need for roadway
improvements, particularly on commute routes such as US 101. TDM measures are designed to
reduce peak-period traffic by increasing use of transit, bicycling, and walking, (particularly for
work and school trips), and by promoting flexible working hours, ridesharing, and land use and
circulation management programs.
TDM also supports regional air quality mandates. The 1998 County Clean Air Plan, which
classifies the county as a moderate non-attainment area, includes measures to reduce emissions
from vehicles through ridesharing, transit improvements, bikeway enhancements, park-and-
ride lots, and traffic control improvements.
Atascadero Transit provides fixed route service on El Camino Real from Paloma Park to Twin
Cities Hospital in Templeton and door-to-door, demand-responsive service in the City. Central
Coast Area Transit (CCAT) operates fixed-route bus service between Paso Robles and San Luis
Obispo via Atascadero, with four southbound trips in the morning and four northbound trips in
the evening.
Atascadero has a limited bikeway system confined mainly to portions of El Camino Real and
Traffic Way. The General Plan seeks to expand this system into a comprehensive bikeway and
trail system (shown schematically shown on the General Plan Land Use Plan). The system will
utilize a combination of Class I, Class II, Class III, and multi-purpose trails to provide for both
the bicycle commuting and recreation needs of the community. Trailhead and staging areas
that provide for controlled access to the Salinas River and historic De Anza Trail will be part of
the system.
Final Plan                                     Page III-4                                   June 25, 2002
                                           City of Atascadero
                                         Circulation Element
Sidewalks are generally limited to fully developed portions of El Camino Real, commercial
streets in the city center, and some higher density residential areas. In rural areas, bicyclists,
pedestrians and equestrians use the roadway or the unpaved shoulders. Many streets are too
narrow to safely accommodate bicycles or pedestrians, and hilly terrain can be a limiting factor.
 D. Railroads
Union Pacific (UPRR) operates mainline rail freight service between the San Francisco Bay Area
and Southern California along the Coast Line. Through Atascadero, the Coast Line runs
generally north-south, parallel to and west of the Salinas River. There are three at grade railway
crossings and two grade-separated undercrossing at Atascadero Creek and State Route 41. A
third grade separated crossing is proposed at the north end of El Camino Real.
According to the Rail Improvement Feasibility Study (SLOCOG, 1992) two through-freight trains
operate daily in each direction, and this level of operation has remained stable in the recent
past. Local freight train service through Atascadero has decreased to a tri-weekly local train
operating between Salinas and Santa Margarita. Amtrak also operates the Coast Starlight
passenger train along the SPTC track from Los Angeles to Seattle, with one daily train in each
direction and no passenger stops in Atascadero. There are no expectations for significantly
increased through-freight operations in the future, although local freight levels could expand
depending on the local need. The Rail Improvement Feasibility Study recommended improved
service on the Coast Starlight run, including a new passenger station in Paso Robles, but no near
term expansion of the number of trains operated.
        US 101 Freeway
As shown in Table III-2, US 101 through Atascadero has six interchanges with overcrossings,
two with undercrossing (SR 41 and Traffic Way). An additional ramp at San Diego Road has a
northbound off-ramp and southbound on-ramp with low traffic volumes and no crossing.
Final Plan                                    Page III-5                                   June 25, 2002
                                       City of Atascadero
                                      Circulation Element
                       Table III-2:   US 101 Freeway Interchanges
  Cross Street  Lanes   Sidewalk    Shoulder      Bikeway  Year  Width  Length    Min. Ft.
                                                           Built  (ft.)  (ft.)   Clearance
 Santa         2/over  South        None         None     1962   32     199     16
 Barbara               side
 Santa Rosa    2/over  South        None         None     1956   28     210     15
                       side
 Curbaril      2/over  South        None         None     1962   32     192     15
                       side
 SR 41         3/under Both         None         None     1956   28     139
                       sides
 Traffic Way   2/over  Both         None         None     1956   28     131
                       sides
 San Anselmo   2/over  South        None         None     1966   30     169     16
                       side
 Del Rio       2/over  South        None         None     1967   30     160     16
                       side
 San Ramon     2/over  North        None         None     1967   30     166     16
                       side
Final Plan                                Page III-6                           June 25, 2002
                                                  City of Atascadero
                                                Circulation Element
                             Table III-3:      US 101 Improvement Priorities
The 1999 Route 101 North Corridor Study (prepared by the San Luis Obispo Council of
Governments, the County, the Cities of Atascadero and Paso Robles and Caltrans) and 2001
RTP calls for widening 101 and improving all of the interchanges through the city to increase
capacity and enhance safety. These improvements are expected to bring 2025 levels of service at
the freeway interchanges into compliance with the City’s adopted standard of LOS C or better.
   Timeframe       Milepost                Location                  Need          Improvement         Estimated
                                                                                                           Cost
                                   Santa Barbara Road to                        Install Thrie Beam
 Within 5 Years    41.3/45.9       Traffic Way                   Safety         Barrier               $3 million
                                   El Camino Real (Del Rio                      Construct Class II
 Within 5 Years    N/A             to Santa Cruz)                Bicycle Access Bikeway               50,000
                                   Santa Rosa Road /             Improvement    Construct NB & SB
 Within 10 Years   44.1/44.8       Curbaril Road                 Operations     Aux. Lanes            800,00
                                   Curbaril Road / State         Improvement    Construct NB & SB
 Within 10 Years   44.8/45.6       Route 41 Sep.                 Operations     Aux. Lanes            900,000
                                   Traffic Way / San             Improvement    Construct NB Aux.
 Within 10 Years   46.0/46.8       Anselmo Road                  Operations     Lanes                 600,000
                                   Santa Rosa Road               Reduce         Construct Park & Ride
 Within 10 Years   44.0            Interchange                   Demand         Lot                   150,000
                                                                 Improvement    Reconstruct
 Within 10 Years   45.9            Traffic Way                   Operations     Interchange           10 million
                                   San Ramon Road /              Local Through  Construct Frontage
 Within 10 Years   49.3/50.7       Vineyard Drive                Routing        Road                  3.6–5.4 million
                                                                 Increase       Reconstruct
 Within 20 Years   44.8            Curbaril Avenue               Capacity       Interchange           3.7 million
                                                                 Increase       Reconstruct
 Within 20 Years   46.9            San Anselmo Road              Capacity       Interchange           3.4 million
                                   Santa Barbara Road /          Increase
 Beyond 20 Years   42.3/49.3       San Ramon Road                Capacity       Widen to 6 Lanes      22.1 million
                                                                 Increase       Reconstruct
 Beyond 20 Years   42.3            Santa Barbara Road            Capacity       Interchange           3.6 million
                                                                 Increase       Reconstruct
 Beyond 20 Years   44.0            Santa Rosa Road               Capacity       Interchange           3.7 million
                                                                 Increase       Reconstruct
 Beyond 20 Years   48.3            Del Rio Road                  Capacity       Interchange           3.2 million
                                                                 Increase       Reconstruct
 Beyond 20 Years   49.3            San Ramon Road                Capacity       Interchange           4.8 million
Some of these projects have been completed or are approaching construction. The SR-41/US 101
interchange is scheduled for complete reconfiguration and reconstruction to start in the spring
of 2004. State Transportation Improvement Program (STIP) funds and the City of Atascadero
Final Plan                                           Page III-7                                       June 25, 2002

                                            City of Atascadero
                                           Circulation Element
transportation impact funds fund the project. The project is expected to move the location of
the northbound on ramp, improve the southbound ramps and increase clearance and capacity
of SR 41 under US 101.
 F. Level of Service
Traffic operations are evaluated by determining level of service (LOS), a qualitative measure of
traffic operating conditions, whereby a letter grade of A through F is assigned to an intersection
or roadway segment representing progressively worsening traffic conditions. Levels of Service
were calculated for critical, controlled intersections using the methods documented in the 1997
Updated Highway Capacity Manual. Table III-4 defines intersection LOS criteria.
Because the City of Atascadero has designated LOS “C” as the minimum acceptable LOS
standard for City facilities, a peak hour LOS C is assumed to be the threshold for acceptable
traffic operations studied intersections. For unsignalized intersections where projected levels of
service fall below C, a supplemental traffic signal warrant analysis was performed. The signal
warrant criteria employed for this study are presented in the Caltrans’ Traffic Manual (Peak
Hour Volume Warrant 11 – Urban Areas) for unsignalized intersections. Though utilization of
this warrant may indicate that signalization would be required, the final decision to install
signals should be based on further studies using additional warrants presented in the Traffic
Manual.
Final Plan                                     Page III-8                                June 25, 2002

                                                                 City of Atascadero
                                                               Circulation Element
              Table III-4:        General Plan Level of Service Criteria for Controlled Intersections
                                                                                                                 Stopped Delay/Vehicle (sec)
  LOS         Type of Flow                      Delay                        Maneuverability                                                   All-Way
                                                                                                      Signalized          Unsignalized
                                                                                                                                                  Stop
A              Stable           Very slight delay. Progression is        Turning movements are          < 10.0             < 10.0               < 10.0
                                very favorable, with most vehicles       easily made, and nearly
                                arriving during the green phase          all drivers find freedom
                                not stopping at all.                     of operation.
B              Stable           Good progression and/or short            Vehicle platoons are           >10 and <          >10 and < 15.0       >10 and
                                cycle lengths. More vehicles stop        formed. Many drivers           20.0                                    < 15.0
                                than for LOS A, causing higher           begin to feel somewhat
                                levels of average delay.                 restricted within groups
                                                                         of vehicles.
C              Stable           Higher delays resulting from fair        Back-ups may develop           >20 and <          >15 and < 25.0       >15 and
                                progression and/or longer cycle          behind turning vehicles.       35.0                                    < 25.0
                                lengths. Individual cycle failures       Most drivers feel
                                may begin to appear at this level.       somewhat restricted
                                The number of vehicles stopping
                                is significant, although many still
                                pass through the intersection
                                without stopping.
D              Approaching      The influence of congestion              Maneuverability is             >35 and <          >25 and < 35.0       >25 and
               Unstable         becomes more noticeable.                 severely limited during        55.0                                    < 35.0
                                Longer delays may result from            short periods due to
                                some combination of unfavorable          temporary back-ups.
                                progression, long cycle lengths,
                                or high volume-to-capacity ratios.
                                Many vehicles stop, and the
                                proportion of vehicles not
                                stopping declines. Individual
                                cycle failures are noticeable.
E              Unstable         Generally considered to be the           There are typically long       >55 and <          >35 and < 50.0       >35 and
                                limit of acceptable delay.               queues of vehicles             80.0                                    < 50.0
                                Indicative of poor progression,          waiting upstream of the
                                long cycle lengths, and high             intersection.
                                volume-to-capacity ratios.
                                Individual cycle failures are
                                frequent occurrences.
F              Forced           Generally considered to be               Jammed conditions.             > 80.0             > 50.0               > 50.0
                                unacceptable to most drivers.            Back-ups from other
                                Often occurs with over saturation.       locations restrict or
                                May also occur at high volume-to-        prevent movement.
                                capacity ratios. There are many          Volumes may vary
                                individual cycle failures. Poor          widely, depending
                                progression and long cycle               principally on the
                                lengths may also be major                downstream back-up
                                contributing factors.                    conditions.
      References:  Highway Capacity Manual, Special Report No. 209, Transportation Research Board, Third Edition, Updated December 1997.
    Final Plan                                                      Page III-9                                                      June 25, 2002

                                                                City of Atascadero
                                                             Circulation Element
            Table III-5:           LOS Threshold Volumes for Urban/Suburban Roadway Types
                                                                 Total Daily Vehicles in Both Directions (ADT)
                                                 Level of             Level of              Level of             Level of              Level of
                                                 Service               Service               Service              Service              Service
    Roadway Type                                    A                      B                     C                    D                    E
     4-Lane Divided Freeway                         28,000                 43,200                61,600              74,400              80,000
     6-Lane Divided Arterial
                                                    32,000                 38,000                43,000              49,000              54,000
     (with left-turn lane)
     4-Lane Divided Arterial
                                                    22,000                 25,000                29,000              32,500              36,000
     (with left-turn lane)
     4-Lane Undivided Arterial
                                                    18,000                 21,000                24,000              27,000              30,000
     (no left-turn lane)
     2-Lane Collector
                                                    11,000                 12,500                14,500              16,000              18,000
     (with left-turn lane)
     2-Lane Collector
                                                      8,000                  9,500               10,500              12,000              13,500
     (no left-turn lane)
              ADT = Average Daily Traffic
              1. Based on "Highway Capacity Manual", Transportation Research Board, 1997.
              2. All volumes are approximate and assume ideal roadway characteristics. Actual threshold volumes for each Level of Service
               listed above may vary depending on a number of factors including curvature and grade, intersection or interchange spacing,
               percentage of trucks and other heavy vehicles, lane widths, signal timing, on-street parking, amount of cross traffic and
               pedestrians, driveway spacing, etc.
Table III-5 defines accepted levels of service for roadway segments between intersections, and
Table III-6 shows 2001 roadways levels of service in Atascadero.
           1.      2001 Traffic Volumes
In order to validate the citywide traffic model under “Existing Conditions,” a database was
established of daily and peak hour current traffic counts at critical locations across the city,
(which are analyzed in the Environmental Impact Report that accompanies the General Plan).
Table II-7 indicates average daily traffic volumes in 2001 along roadways throughout the city.
Final Plan                                                         Page III-10                                                           June 25, 2002

                                                              City of Atascadero
                                                            Circulation Element
                                      Table III-6:         2001 Roadway Levels of Service
          Roadway                         From                               To                      Roadway                AADT              AADT –
                                                                                                        Type                                   Based
                                                                                                                                                LOS
1    US 101                   Santa Barbara Road                Santa Rosa Road                   Freeway                        40,000          B
2    US 101                   Santa Rosa Road                   Curbaril Avenue                   Freeway                        41,000          B
3    US 101                   Curbaril Avenue                   SR 41                             Freeway                        41,000          B
4    US 101                   SR 41                             Traffic Way                       Freeway                        44,000          C
5    US 101                   Traffic Way                       San Anselmo Road                  Freeway                        46,500          C
6    US 101                   San Anselmo Road                  Del Rio Road                      Freeway                        41,500          B
7    US 101                   Del Rio Road                      San Ramon Road                    Freeway                        41,500          B
8    SR 41                    Cerro Alto Road                   Santa Rosa Road                   Major Arterial                  8,500          A
9    SR 41                    Santa Rosa Road                   Curbaril Avenue                   Major Arterial                  9,000          A
10   SR 41                    Curbaril Avenue                   US 101                            Major Arterial                 16,800          D
11   SR 41                    US 101                            Santa Ysabel Ave                  Major Arterial                 23,800          B
12   SR 41                    Santa Ysabel Ave                  Salinas River Bridge              Major Arterial                  2,700          A
13   Traffic Way              US 101                            El Camino Real                    Minor Arterial                  7,770          A
14   Traffic Way              East of El Camino Real                                              Minor Arterial                  6,830          A
15   Traffic Way              Ardilla Avenue                    US 101                            Minor Arterial                  8,970          A
16   Traffic Way              Portero Road                      Dolores Avenue                    Minor Arterial                  2,950          A
17   El Camino Real           Santa Barbara Road                Viejo Camino                      Major Arterial                  6,080          A
18   El Camino Real           SR 41                             Curbaril Avenue                   Major Arterial                 16,450          A
19   El Camino Real           Del Rio Road                      San Anselmo                       Major Arterial                 13,520          A
20   El Camino Real           Del Rio Road                      Santa Cruz Road                   Major Arterial                  1,510          A
21   Del Rio Road             US 101                            El Camino Real                    Collector                       7,850          B
22   Del Rio Road             San Ramon Road                    US 101                            Collector                       3,500          A
     Atascadero
23   Avenue                   La Paz Road                       Ortega Road                       Minor Arterial                  1,120          A
     Atascadero
24   Avenue                   SR 41                             Curbaril Avenue                   Minor Arterial                  2,680          A
     Santa Lucia
25   Avenue                   Santa Ana                         Portola Road                      Collector                       3,010          A
26   San Lucia Avenue         Portola Road                      Atascadero Avenue                 Minor Arterial                  4,330          A
27   Rosario Avenue           East of El Camino Real                                              Local                           1,260          A
28   West Mall                East of El Camino Real                                              Collector                       3,630          A
29   Santa Ynez               North of Morro Road                                                 Local                           1,500          A
30   Portola Road             Carmelita Avenue                  SR 41                             Minor Arterial                  3,100          A
     San Anselmo
31   Road                     Ardilla Road                      Monterey Road                     Minor Arterial                  2,990          A
32   Monterey Road            San Anselmo Road                  Del Rio Road                      Minor Arterial                  1,750          A
33   San Ramon Road           Del Rio Road                      Northern City Limits              Collector                         240          A
34   Potrero Road             Traffic Way                       Del Rio Road                      Local                             700          A
35   Dolores Avenue           San Anselmo Road                  Traffic Way                       Local                             730          A
36   Curbaril Avenue          US 101                            Sycamore Road                     Minor Arterial                  5,880          A
             The Roadway Type is the General Plan Roadway Classification. The LOS is calculated based AADT and the existing roadway
              configuration.
   Final Plan                                                     Page III-11                                                      June 25, 2002

                                                                 City of Atascadero
                                                                Circulation Element
  Table III-7 summarizes existing AM and PM peak hour traffic operations at the critical intersections
  throughout the City.
                  Table III-7:          Existing Traffic Operations: Intersection Levels of Service
                                                                           AM Peak Hour                 PM Peak Hour
                                                           Control           Delay              Warrant   Delay           Warrant
No       Intersection                                        Type          (sec/veh)     LOS     Met?   (sec/veh) LOS       Met?
          San Anselmo Rd / US 101 SB
 1                                                         TWSC           36.2          E       YES     53.5      F       YES
          ramps
          San Anselmo Rd / US 101 NB
 2                                                         TWSC           33.2          D       YES     45.0      E       YES
          ramps
          San Anselmo Rd / El Camino
 3                                                         Signal         14.8          B       --      13.6      B       --
          Real
 4        Rosario Ave / El Camino Real                     TWSC           19.5          C       NO      42.1      E       NO
 5        Traffic Way / Ardilla Ave                        TWSC           13.4          B       NO      12.5      B       NO
 6        Traffic Way / US 101 SB ramps                    TWSC           72.0          F       YES     76.8      F       YES
 7        Traffic Way / US 101 NB off                      TWSC           17.6          C       NO      28.9      D       YES
 8        Traffic Way / El Camino Real                     Signal         29.3          C       --      29.4      C       --
 9        Entrada Ave / El Camino Real                     TWSC           17.3          C       NO      25.7      D       NO
 10       West Mall / El Camino Real                       Signal         9.7           A       --      13.6      B       --
 13       Morro Rd / US 101 SB ramps                       TWSC           OVRFL         F       YES     OVRFL     F       YES
 14       Morro Rd / US 101 NB on                          None           13.8          B       --      15.0      C       --
 15       Morro Rd / El Camino Real                        Signal         36.4          D       --      40.9      D       --
 16       El Camino Real / US 101 NB off                   TWSC           OVRFL         F       YES     OVRFL     F       YES
 17       Curbaril Ave / SR 41                             Signal         9.1           A       --      53.1      D       --
 18       Curbaril Ave / US 101 SB ramps                   TWSC           47.8          E       NO      60.7      F       NO
 19       Curbaril Ave / US 101 NB ramps                   TWSC           19.1          C       NO      35.1      E       YES
 20       Curbaril Ave / El Camino Real                    Signal         15.2          B       --      26.3      C       --
 21       Santa Rosa Rd / US 101 SB on                     AWSC           15.2          C       NO      28.0      D       YES
 22       Santa Rosa Rd / US 101 NB on                     AWSC           24.8          C       NO      67.6      F       YES
 23       Santa Rosa Rd / El Camino Real                   Signal         13.6          B       --      13.8      B       --
  Legend:
            TWSC = Two-Way-Stop Control. AWSC = All-Way-Stop Control.
            Average Delay = Average Intersection Delay for Signalized and AWSC Intersections.
            Average Delay = Worst-Case Intersection Movement Delay for TWSC Intersections.
            LOS = Average Intersection Level-of-Service for Signalized and AWSC Intersections.
            LOS = Worst-Case Movement’s Level-of-Service for TWSC Intersections.
            Warrant = Caltrans Peak-Hour Volume Warrant-11 (Urban Areas).
            OVRFL = Overflow Conditions.
  As indicated in Table III-7, there are several intersections that operate at unacceptable levels of
  service under the existing conditions scenario. Of the 13 two-way stop controlled intersections
  and two (2) all-way stop controlled intersections that were analyzed, only one (1) operates at
  LOS “C” conditions or better while twelve (12) intersections operate at LOS “D” conditions or
  worse during the existing conditions scenario for the AM and/or PM peak hour. Several of the
  intersections currently meet Caltrans Peak-Hour-Volume Warrant-11 (Urban Areas) under
  “Existing” AM and/or PM peak hour traffic volumes. This typically indicates that the peak
  Final Plan                                                         Page III-12                                    June 25, 2002

                                           City of Atascadero
                                         Circulation Element
hour traffic on the “major street” causes long delays on the “minor street” movements that are
stop controlled. These intersections will need improvements to correct existing deficiencies.
This finding indicates that the number of vehicles experiencing unacceptable levels of side-
street delays is significant enough to warrant installation of a traffic signal under “Existing”
conditions. It should be noted, however, that there is not a direct correlation between poor LOS
conditions and meeting Warrant 11. Warrant 11 is based upon delay of the minor street in
relation to the number of vehicles on the major street. One condition of Warrant 11 is that the
minor street must have more than 100 vehicles per hour (VPH) to initiate installation of a traffic
signal. If the number of VPH on the minor street does not exceed 100 trips, Warrant 11 will not
be met.
Of the seven (7) signalized intersections analyzed, only the intersections at Curbaril Avenue /
Morro Road (State Route 41) and El Camino Real / Morro Road (State Route 41) operates at
LOS “D” conditions or worse during the existing conditions scenario for the PM peak hour.
Final Plan                                   Page III-13                                   June 25, 2002

                                                                 City of Atascadero
                                                                Circulation Element
       Table III-8:          Existing Traffic Operations: Intersection LOS with Mitigation Measures
                                                                              AM Peak Hour               PM Peak Hour
                                                                               Delay            Warrant   Delay           Warrant
No       Intersection                                     Control Type       (sec/veh)     LOS   Met?   (sec/veh) LOS      Met?
          San Anselmo Rd / US 101 SB
 1                                                         AWSC               17.0        C     YES      21.6     C       YES
          ramps
          San Anselmo Rd / US 101 NB
 2                                                         TWSC               21.0        C     YES      20.2     C       YES
          ramps
          San Anselmo Rd / El Camino
 3                                                         Signal             14.8        B     --       13.6     B       --
          Real
 4        Rosario Ave / El Camino Real                     Signal             18.0        B     --       15.6     B       --
 5        Traffic Way / Ardilla Ave                        TWSC               13.4        B     NO       12.5     B       NO
 6        Traffic Way / US 101 SB ramps                    AWSC               15.2        C     YES      15.7     C       YES
 7        Traffic Way / US 101 NB off                      TWSC               14.6        B     NO       15.0     B       YES
 8        Traffic Way / El Camino Real                     Signal             29.3        C     --       29.4     C       --
 9        Entrada Ave / El Camino Real                     TWSC               16.6        C     NO       24.7     C       NO
 10       West Mall / El Camino Real                       Signal             9.7         A     --       13.6     B       --
 13       Morro Rd / US 101 SB ramps                       Signal             24.2        C     --       14.4     B       --
 14       Morro Rd / US 101 NB on                          None               13.8        B     --       15.0     C       --
 15       Morro Rd / El Camino Real                        Signal             29.6        C     --       33.4     C       --
 16       El Camino Real / US 101 NB off                   Signal             11.8        B     --       12.6     B       --
 17       Curbaril Ave / SR 41                             Signal             12.0        B     --       28.7     C       --
 18       Curbaril Ave / US 101 SB ramps                   AWSC               13.1        B     NO       14.2     B       NO
 19       Curbaril Ave / US 101 NB ramps                   TWSC               16.6        C     NO       17.9     C       YES
 20       Curbaril Ave / El Camino Real                    Signal             15.2        B     --       26.3     C       --
 21       Santa Rosa Rd / US 101 SB on                     AWSC               13.8        B     NO       22.3     C       YES
 22       Santa Rosa Rd / US 101 NB on                     Signal             13.6        B     --       21.0     C       --
 23       Santa Rosa Rd / El Camino Real                   Signal             13.6        B     --       13.8     B       --
  Legend:
            TWSC = Two-Way-Stop Control.               AWSC = All-Way-Stop Control.
            Average Delay = Average Intersection Delay for Signalized and AWSC Intersections.
            Average Delay = Worst-Case Intersection Movement Delay for TWSC Intersections.
            LOS = Average Intersection Level-of-Service for Signalized and AWSC Intersections.
            LOS = Worst-Case Movement’s Level-of-Service for TWSC Intersections.
            Warrant = Caltrans Peak-Hour Volume Warrant-11 (Urban Areas).
  Final Plan                                                         Page III-14                                    June 25, 2002

                                                                City of Atascadero
                                                              Circulation Element
                         Table III-9:            Mitigation Measures for Existing Intersections
 No.                       Intersection                                                          Mitigation Measure
             San Anselmo Rd / US 101 SB
 1                                                             4-way stop control
             ramps
             San Anselmo Rd / US 101 NB
 2                                                             Northbound movement, dedicated left, shared through and right
             ramps
 4           Rosario Ave / El Camino Real                      Install traffic signal*
 6           Traffic Way / US 101 SB ramps                     4-way stop control
                                                               Install traffic signal, south bound movement, dedicated left,
 13          Morro Rd / US 101 SB ramps
                                                               dedicated right
                                                               Eastbound and westbound movements, dedicated left, shared
 15          Morro Rd / El Camino Real
                                                               through and right
 16          El Camino Real / US 101 NB off                    Install traffic signal
 17          Curbaril Ave / SR 41                              Eastbound movement, dedicated left, shared through and right
 18          Curbaril Ave / US 101 SB ramps                    4-way stop control
 19          Curbaril Ave / US 101 NB ramps                    Northbound movement, dedicated left, shared through and right
 21          Santa Rosa Road / US 101 SB on                    Southbound movement, dedicated left, shared through and right
 22          Santa Rosa Rd / US 101 NB on                      Install traffic signal
          * Due to high traffic volumes on El Camino Real, installation of traffic signals is the only way to mitigate the intersection LOS; however,
           low minor street traffic volumes do not warrant signalization.
Table III-9 identifies mitigation measures to improve existing intersection service levels as
shown on Table III-8. Based upon Table III-8, all intersections would operate at LOS “C”
conditions or better following implementation of the mitigation measures provided in Table III-
9.
Final Plan                                                         Page III-15                                                             June 25, 2002

                                                                 City of Atascadero
                                                               Circulation Element
   Table III-10:          2025 Roadway Levels of Service without additional Improvements
                                                                                         Roadway                           AADT - B
        Roadway                           From                             To               Type      AADT       LOS
1  US 101                       Santa Barbara Road               Santa Rosa Road       Freeway         66,5500      D
2  US 101                       Santa Rosa Road                  Curbaril Avenue       Freeway          67,220      D
3  US 101                       Curbaril Avenue                  SR 41                 Freeway          64,600      D
4  US 101                       SR 41                            Traffic Way           Freeway          69,910      D
5  US 101                       Traffic Way                      San Anselmo Road      Freeway          73,820      D
6  US 101                       San Anselmo Road                 Del Rio Road          Freeway          69,340      D
7  US 101                       Del Rio Road                     San Ramon Road        Freeway          67,480      D
8  SR 41                        Cerro Alto Road                  Santa Rosa Road       Major Arterial   11,910      B
9  SR 41                        Santa Rosa Road                  Curbaril Avenue       Major Arterial   16,120      F
10 SR 41                        Curbaril Avenue                  US 101                Major Arterial   28,810      F
11 SR 41                        US 101                           Santa Ysabel Ave      Major Arterial   27,730      C
12 SR 41                        Santa Ysabel Ave                 Salinas River Bridge  Major Arterial    8,960      A
13 Traffic Way                  US 101                           El Camino Real        Minor Arterial   11,050      D
14 Traffic Way                  East of El Camino Real                                 Minor Arterial    7,760      A
15 Traffic Way                  Ardilla Avenue                   US 101                Minor Arterial   11,330      D
16 Traffic Way                  Portero Road                     Dolores Avenue        Minor Arterial    7,610      A
17 El Camino Real               Santa Barbara Road               Viejo Camino          Major Arterial   15,140      F
18 El Camino Real               SR 41                            Curbaril Avenue       Major Arterial   26,460      C
19 El Camino Real               Del Rio Road                     San Anselmo           Major Arterial   15,520      D
20 El Camino Real               Del Rio Road                     Santa Cruz Road       Major Arterial    6,050      A
21 Del Rio Road                 US 101                           El Camino Real        Collector        12,240      B
22 Del Rio Road                 San Ramon Road                   US 101                Collector         7,410      A
23 Atascadero                   La Paz Road                      Ortega Road           Minor Arterial    6,130      A
   Avenue
24 Atascadero                   SR 41                            Curbaril Avenue       Minor Arterial    3,850      A
   Avenue
25 Santa Lucia                  Santa Ana                        Portola Road          Collector         3,670      A
   Avenue
26 Santa Lucia                  Portola Road                     Atascadero Avenue     Minor Arterial    6,040      A
   Avenue
27 Rosario Avenue               East of El Camino Real                                 Local             3,410      A
28 West Mall                    East of El Camino Real                                 Collector         5,190      A
29 Santa Ynez                   North of Morro Road                                    Local             2,750      A
30 Portola Road                 Carmelita Avenue                 SR 41                 Minor Arterial    3,780      A
31 San Anselmo                  Ardilla Road                     Monterey Road         Minor Arterial    9,040      B
   Road
32 Monterey Road                San Anselmo Road                 Del Rio Road          Minor Arterial    7,060      A
33 San Ramon Road               Del Rio Road                     Northern City Limits  Collector         4,610      A
34 Potrero Road                 Traffic Way                      Del Rio Road          Local             7,610      A
35 Dolores Avenue               San Anselmo Road                 Traffic Way           Local             3,000      A
36 Curbaril Avenue              US 101                           Sycamore Road         Minor Arterial    9,750      C
             The Roadway Type is the General Plan Roadway Classification.
             The LOS is calculated based AADT and the existing roadway configuration.
   Final Plan                                                       Page III-16                              June 25, 2002

                                            City of Atascadero
                                          Circulation Element
           2. Circulation Plan and Traffic Projections
Figure III-2 shows the City’s Circulation Plan for the period extending through 2025. Table III-6
shows projected 2025 traffic volumes and roadway levels of service. Potential sources of
increased traffic in the planning area include about 3,200 new dwelling units, and about 2.2
million square feet of new retail, service, offices and industrial development (half of it occurring
by 2010).
Although Table III-9 indicates that most roadways would comply with the City’s adopted
standard of LOS C or better, the primary future circulation issue is the feasibility of constructing
improvements needed to achieve acceptable levels of service on all roadways. Other than US
101, the only roadway segments that will need future improvement to achieve LOS C or better
are El Camino Real from San Anselmo Avenue to Del Rio Road and Morro Road from 101 to
Santa Rosa Road, both of which will require widening to four lanes.
Final Plan                                    Page III-17                                  June 25, 2002

                           City of Atascadero
                          Circulation Element
           Figure III-2: General Plan Circulation Diagram
Final Plan                    Page III-18                 June 25, 2002
                           City of Atascadero
                          Circulation Element
           Figure III-3: Circulation Facilities and Signals
Final Plan                    Page III-19                   June 25, 2002
                       City of Atascadero
                      Circulation Element
           Figure III-4:   Freeway Interchanges
Final Plan                Page III-20           June 25, 2002
                       City of Atascadero
                      Circulation Element
           Figure III-5:   Truck Route Diagram
Final Plan                Page III-21          June 25, 2002
                          City of Atascadero
                         Circulation Element
           Figure III-6:  Bikeway And Trail Diagram
Final Plan                   Page III-22            June 25, 2002
                               City of Atascadero
                              Circulation Element
           Figure III-7: Typical Bikeway and Trail Cross Sections
                                                     Multi modal trails are similar to Class I
Final Plan                        Page III-23                                  June 25, 2002
                                                         City of Atascadero
                                                        Circulation Element
                Table III-11: Summary of Circulation Element Capital Improvements
 Key   Road Class              Street/Location                             Improvement Type                           Comments
A-1   Roadway       San Anselmo: US 101 – Monterey          Circulation/access improvements
                    Road
A-2   Roadway       Via Road: Ensenada – Mercedes –         Widen lanes, replace bridge, bike & pedestrian
                    Traffic Way                             facilities
A-3   Roadway       Curbaril: ECR to US 101                 Circulation/access improvements
A-4   Roadway       Santa Barbara: ECR to US 101            Widen to 4-lanes
A-5   Roadway       Santa Cruz: ECR – Carrizo Road
A-6   Roadway       ECR: Santa Barbara – Via Camino         Widen to 4 lanes; bikeway; Sidewalks
A-7   Roadway       ECR: Via Camino – Santa Rosa            Raised median; channelization; bikeway
A-8   Roadway       ECR: Santa Rosa – Curbaril              Raised median; channelization; bikeway
A-9   Roadway       ECR: Curbaril – SR 41                   Raised median; channelization; bikeway
A-10  Roadway       ECR: SR 41 – Rosario                    Raised median; bulb-outs; channelization; bikeway
A-11  Roadway       ECR: Rosario – San Anselmo              Raised median; channelization; bikeway
A-12  Roadway       ECR: San Anselmo – Del Rio              Raised median; channelization; bikeway
A-13  Roadway       ECR: Del Rio – Santa Cruz               Widen to 4 Lanes; raised median; channelization;
                                                            bikeway
A-14  Roadway       Santa Ysabel: Curbaril – SR 41          Widening; bikeway; sidewalks
A-15  Roadway       Traffic Way / Olmeda - San Jacinto      Frontage improvements
A-16  Roadway       Carmelita/Morro Road                    Extend as 2-lane collector south to Morro Road (SR
                                                            41)
A-17  Roadway       Halcon Road: Via Camino – Santa         Intersection improvements / roadway improvements
                    Barbara                                 to arterial
A-18  Roadway       Traffic Way / Ardilla / Santa Lucia     Roadway / intersection improvements
B-1   Intersection  ECR/Santa Barbara                       Intersection Improvements / signal
B-2   Intersection  ECR/Santa Rosa                          Intersection improvements
B-3   Intersection  ECR/Junipero                            Signal
B-4   Intersection  ECR/Curbaril                            Intersection improvements
B-5   Intersection  ECR/Traffic Way                         Intersection improvements
B-6   Intersection  ECR/W. San Anselmo                      Intersection improvements
B-8   Intersection  ECR/E. San Anselmo                      Intersection improvements / signal
B-9   Intersection  ECR/Del Rio                             Intersection improvements
B-10  Intersection  ECR/San Ramon                           Signal
B-11  Intersection  ECR/Pueblo Avenue                       Signal
C-1   Bridge        Santa Lucia at Graves Creek             Reconstruct bridge
C-2   Bridge        Garcia Road at Graves Creek             Reconstruct Bridge
C-3   Bridge        Lewis Avenue                            Construct bridge across Atascadero Creek           PSR completed; $2
                                                                                                               million
C-4   Bridge        Santa Cruz west of San Ramon            Bridge across Graves Creek/ extend road
C-7   Bridge        Llano at Graves Creek                   Construct Bridge
D-1   US 101 / SR   ECR/SR 41/ US 101                       Reconstruct Interchange; ramp relocation; signals; Part of SR 41 funded
      41                                                    widening                                           project
D-2   SR 41         State Route 41: US 101 – San Gabriel Widen to 4-lanes
D-3   US 101        Santa Barbara/US 101                    Interchange Improvement
D-4   US 101        Santa Rosa/US 101                       Interchange Improvement
     Final Plan                                             Page III-24                                             June 25, 2002

                                                City of Atascadero
                                               Circulation Element
 Key  Road Class           Street/Location                        Improvement Type                  Comments
D-5   US 101     Curbaril/US 101                   Interchange Improvement
D-6   US 101     Traffic Way/US 101                Interchange Improvement
D-7   US 101     San Anselmo/US 101                Interchange Improvement
D-8   US 101     Del Rio/US 101                    Interchange Improvement
D-9   US 101     Route US 101 within URL           Operational Improvements
      Misc.      Citywide                          Safety improvement program
      Misc.      Citywide                          Traffic calming projects
      Misc.      Citywide                          Dial-A-Ride improvements
      Misc.      Citywide                          Regional transit improvements
      Misc.      Citywide                          Park-and-Ride expansion
      Misc.      Citywide                          Safe routes to school
      Misc.      Citywide                          Miscellaneous arterial and collector road
                                                   maintenance
      Misc.      Citywide                          Intersection improvements
      Misc.      Citywide                          Miscellaneous walkways
      Misc.      Lewis/Santa Ysabel                Bike route
C-6   Misc.      Curbaril/Salinas River Bridge     Bike route
      Misc.      Atascadero to Templeton           Bike route                                Multi-jurisdictional
                                                                                             project
     Final Plan                                    Page III-25                                   June 25, 2002
                           City of Atascadero
                          Circulation Element
           Figure III-10: Circulation Mitigation Projects
Final Plan                    Page III-26                 June 25, 2002
                                           City of Atascadero
                                          Circulation Element
 G. Circulation Goals, Policies, and Programs
Goal CIR 1:          Provide a balanced, safe, and efficient circulation
                     system that serves all segments of the community, and
                     is designed and constructed to preserve rural character.
Policy 1.1: Plan, fund and implement circulation improvements necessary to comply with
            adopted City safety and level of service standards, and the General Plan
            Circulation Diagram.
            Programs:
            1. Maintain an updated Capital Improvement Plan and pursue construction of the
                circulation system improvements listed in the Table III-11:        Summary of Circulation
                Element Capital Improvements of the Circulation Element.
            2. Require dedications and new development to be consistent with the Circulation
                Diagram and the Circulation Facilities Diagram.
            3. Enhance vehicular, bicycle, pedestrian access and travel within the Downtown.
            4. Preserve options for future transportation facilities in advance of development by
                such means as identifying routes, reserving rights-of-way, establishing setbacks to
                accommodate future road width, and limiting access along arterials.
            5. Design future roadway extensions and connections to allow travelers to choose
                reasonably direct paths to destinations.
            6. Maintain an equitable funding and capital expenditure system for roadway
                improvement that includes requiring developers to provide for construction of their
                fair-share portion of arterial, collector, and local streets at the time of development.
Policy 1.2: Provide regional facilities to minimize through-traffic intrusion on local streets and
            to avoid barriers to local traffic.
            Programs:
            1. Cooperate with Caltrans and SLOCOG to prepare a US 101 North Corridor Study
                and the Atascadero Route 101/El Camino Real Corridor Study.
            2. Coordinate transportation planning efforts with local, regional, State and federal
                agencies, to maintain and upgrade State roadways, where appropriate, including the
                elimination of existing substandard conditions at freeway interchanges.
            3. Provide sufficient capacity on arterial and collector streets to discourage through
                traffic on local roadways.
            4. Restrict truck traffic by ordinance to designated routes identified in the Truck Route
                Diagram, Figure III-5, except for access to local destinations.
            5.       Trucks routes shall be clearly mark with a comprehensive signage program.
Final Plan                                    Page III-27                                         June 25, 2002
                                           City of Atascadero
                                          Circulation Element
            6. Establish a Memorandum of Understanding between the City of Atascadero and
                Caltrans that identifies the City's responsibility for collecting fees and funding
                improvements for US 101.
            7. Update the City's Capital Facilities Fees consistent with the requirements of AB 1600
                and include funding for Caltrans facilities.
Policy 1.3: Maintain LOS C or better as the standard at all intersections and on all arterial and
            collector roads. Upon City Council approval, accept LOS D where residences are
            not directly impacted and improvements to meet the City’s standard would be
            prohibitively costly or disruptive.
            Programs:
            1. Require new commercial development design to avoid diverting traffic through
                existing residential neighborhoods.
            2. Require traffic studies and updating of the City traffic model for all projects involving
                amendments to the zoning map or General Plan land use diagram or circulation
                element.
            3. Locate high traffic generating uses along arterial streets with a minimum number of
                driveways. Driveways and access points should be shared whenever possible.
            4. Encourage mixed-use development with residential and commercial densities high
                enough to increase the rider base for local and regional transit systems.
Policy 1.4: Preserve the winding, tree-lined nature of the city street system in hillside areas.
            Programs:
            1. Continue to allow flexible street design standards to allow roads to curve around
                hillsides to preserve rural character and help limit vehicle speed.
            2. Develop a program and development standards for planting street trees and
                landscaping on arterial streets and at major intersections.
Policy 1.5: Maintain an adequate and well-designed supply of off-street parking, particularly in
            commercial, industrial, and higher- density residential areas.
            Programs:
            1. Require all development to provide sufficient and convenient parking areas with
                minimal conflict with street traffic.
            2. Require shared parking via reciprocal easement in commercial and industrial areas
                whenever possible.
            3. Require off-street parking areas to include landscaping, screening, lighting and
                shade trees to mitigate adverse visual impacts and provide comfort for users.
            4. Update and maintain the Parking Ordinance to reflect current parking trends and
                uses.
Final Plan                                    Page III-28                                        June 25, 2002

                                           City of Atascadero
                                          Circulation Element
Goal CIR 2:          Provide for walkways, horse trails, and bikeways
                     without curbs and sidewalks in rural areas. Provide a
                     comprehensive system of routes to schools and parks
                     which include creekside trails.
Policy 2.1: Provide for a comprehensive system of creekside trails, roadside pathways,
            equestrian trails, multi-use trails and bikeways to connect neighborhoods,
            schools, commercial, and recreation areas, in accordance with the Bikeway and
            Trail Plan.
            Programs:
            1. Require all subdivisions and developments to provide bikeway and trail alignments
                and facilities consistent with the Bikeway and Trail Diagram and any applicable
                Bicycle Transportation Plans.
            2. The Bikeway and Trail system shall be comprised of Class I, Class II, Class III and
                multi-use trails that are appropriate the location and projected use as defined in
                Table III-12.
                      Table III-12: Bikeway and Trail Classifications.
                     Classification                          Description
                Class I                      Dedicated and paved pathway right-of-way
                                             separated from vehicle traffic
                Class II                     Shares street and separated from traffic by
                                             pavement markings
                Class III                    Shares street indicated with signs only
                Multi-Use Trail              Dedicated pathway with minimal
                                             improvements.
            3. Adopt and maintain a Bicycle Transportation Plan that will provide development
                standards and classifications for all trail corridors.
            4. Road abandonment request shall be reviewed for potential trail locations. Where
                roads are not desirable but pedestrian access would provide a public benefit a trail
                right-of-way shall be provided.
            5. Access, protection, and expansion of the historic De Anza Trail is a high priority.
            6. Local bikeway and trail projects shall be coordinated with regional projects whenever
                possible.
            7. Develop a trail master plan for Atascadero Creek between Camelita Road and the
                Salinas River.
            8. A pedestrian and bicycle connection between Atascadero and Templeton shall be
                coordinated with SLOCOG, San Luis Obispo County and Caltrans.
Final Plan                                    Page III-29                                     June 25, 2002
                                          City of Atascadero
                                         Circulation Element
            9. Provide a system of pedestrian and equestrian trailhead access points to the Salinas
                River corridor that prevent motor vehicle access.
            10. Require that all major subdivisions and lot line adjustments involving 20 or more lots
                to provide a bikeway and trail plan.
            11. Work with private property owners on the westside of town to establish formal trails
                and maintain access to existing trails.
            12. Plan for a pedestrian and equestrian bridge across the Salinas River at Curbaril
                Avenue.
Policy 2.2: Accommodate bicycles at major destinations including downtown, bus stops,
            schools, and other public facilities.
            Programs:
            1. Encourage the use of bicycles by designing bicycle facilities and access points into
                all new development projects.
            2. Require adequate and safe bicycle access and bicycle parking in conjunction with
                new development.
Policy 2.3: Promote walking as an alternative to vehicle travel in retail district and multi-family
            areas.
            Programs:
            1. Develop pedestrian-friendly design standards that apply to all residential and
                commercial projects and require construction of adequate sidewalks and/or
                pedestrian trails in new development.
            2. In conjunction with the Safe-Routes to School Program, adopt and maintain a
                sidewalk system map identifying the locations of required sidewalks. The system will
                consist of continuous routes that connect higher density neighborhoods, schools,
                parks, shopping areas, and work places.
            3. Sidewalks shall not be required in single-family areas with lot sizes of ½ acre and
                greater, but walkable shoulders and / or trails will be required.
            4. Enhance the Downtown streetscape so that it is an enjoyable experience for
                pedestrians.
Goal CIR 3:          Provide and promote alternative modes of travel to
                     reduce traffic congestion and improve air quality by
                     providing viable transit alternatives.
Final Plan                                   Page III-30                                     June 25, 2002

                                                   City of Atascadero
                                                  Circulation Element
    Policy 3.1:     Promote alternatives to single-occupancy vehicle travel, particularly for commute
                    trips.
                    Programs:
                    1. Seek funding for programs that promote transit, ridesharing, bicycling and walking.
                    2. Support efforts to improve shuttle service to downtown and major shopping and
                         employment centers.
    Policy 3.2:     Encourage expansion of public transit as needed to meet the changing needs of
                    the area for local and regional access, including fixed route and demand response
                    where appropriate.
                    Programs:
                    1. Work with Central Coast Area Transit and SLORTA to encourage use of local and
                         regional public transit.
                    2. Provide fixed routed transit with bus shelters along El Camino Real.
                    3. Support and encourage the use and expansion of Park & Ride facilities.
    Policy 3.3:     Comply with the Transportation Demand Management program requirements of
                    the San Luis Obispo County Clean Air Plan to reduce peak period trip generation.
                    Program:
                    1. Support programs to encourage employers to promote transit use, such as flexible
                         work schedules.
IV.      Safety & Noise Element
     A. Safety Element Goals and Policies
    The City participated in the 2000 update of the County General Plan Safety Element.
    Information about safety in Atascadero appears in the Technical Background Report for that
    update. The goals and policies below, which address issues detailed in the Background Report,
    are generally adapted from the County Safety Element. However, a number of the policies are
    unique to Atascadero.
               1. Emergency preparedness
    Emergency preparedness is necessary to avoid or minimize the loss of life and property due to
    natural and technological disasters; to reduce the social, cultural, environmental, and economic
    costs of disasters; and to assist and encourage rapid recovery from catastrophic events. An
    important part of preparedness is careful assessment of risks before an emergency occurs.
    Response activities focus on saving lives, preventing injury, and reducing property damage.
    Final Plan                                        Page IV-31                                   June 25, 2002
                                                   City of Atascadero
                                                  Circulation Element
    Policy 3.1:     Promote alternatives to single-occupancy vehicle travel, particularly for commute
                    trips.
                    Programs:
                    1. Seek funding for programs that promote transit, ridesharing, bicycling and walking.
                    2. Support efforts to improve shuttle service to downtown and major shopping and
                         employment centers.
    Policy 3.2:     Encourage expansion of public transit as needed to meet the changing needs of
                    the area for local and regional access, including fixed route and demand response
                    where appropriate.
                    Programs:
                    1. Work with Central Coast Area Transit and SLORTA to encourage use of local and
                         regional public transit.
                    2. Provide fixed routed transit with bus shelters along El Camino Real.
                    3. Support and encourage the use and expansion of Park & Ride facilities.
    Policy 3.3:     Comply with the Transportation Demand Management program requirements of
                    the San Luis Obispo County Clean Air Plan to reduce peak period trip generation.
                    Program:
                    1. Support programs to encourage employers to promote transit use, such as flexible
                         work schedules.
IV.      Safety & Noise Element
     A. Safety Element Goals and Policies
    The City participated in the 2000 update of the County General Plan Safety Element.
    Information about safety in Atascadero appears in the Technical Background Report for that
    update. The goals and policies below, which address issues detailed in the Background Report,
    are generally adapted from the County Safety Element. However, a number of the policies are
    unique to Atascadero.
               1. Emergency preparedness
    Emergency preparedness is necessary to avoid or minimize the loss of life and property due to
    natural and technological disasters; to reduce the social, cultural, environmental, and economic
    costs of disasters; and to assist and encourage rapid recovery from catastrophic events. An
    important part of preparedness is careful assessment of risks before an emergency occurs.
    Response activities focus on saving lives, preventing injury, and reducing property damage.
    Final Plan                                        Page IV-31                                   June 25, 2002
                                                 City of Atascadero
                                              Safety & Noise Element
Critical facilities, which provide emergency assistance after a major disaster, include police and
fire stations, schools, hospitals, and roadways designated as evacuation routes.
Goal SFN 1.                Attain a High Level of Emergency Preparedness
Policy 1.1:       Support response programs that provide emergency and other services to the
                  public when a disaster occurs.
                  Programs:
                  1. Provide required training to ensure the readiness of response teams.
                  2. Follow statewide Standardized Emergency Management System procedures.
                  3. Reduce the time and effort required to obtain permits for emergency repair work,
                      including coordinating with State and Federal agencies prior to any event.
                  4. Maintain and upgrade critical facilities.
                  5. Adopt and maintain a Local Hazard Mitigation Plan (LHMP) consistent with the
                      Disaster Mitigation Act of 2000 (DMA 2000).
Policy 1.2:       Help prepare and organize residents to respond appropriately to disasters.
                  Programs:
                  1. Support education in the schools that teaches children how to avoid dangers and
                      behave during an emergency.
                  2. Support the efforts of many organizations – government, radio, newspapers and TV
                      stations, utilities, emergency response providers, the Office of Emergency Services,
                      and our health community – that provide outreach and education to the community.
                  3. Support the efforts and education of people with disabilities to respond appropriately
                      to emergencies.
                  4. Develop an emergency evacuation program for the neighborhoods in the west hills
                      that are subject to high fire hazards.
                  5. Coordinate circulation element street designations and road improvement projects
                      with evacuation routes.
                  6. Support disaster education and preparedness programs geared towards residents
                      through programs such as Community Emergency Response Team (CERT) or other
                      community based efforts.
Policy 1.3:       Coordinate with County and State agencies, news media, and others working to
                  reduce the risks of disasters through effective preparedness, response and
                  recovery.
Final Plan                                           Page IV-2                                    June 25, 2002

                                                City of Atascadero
                                           Safety & Noise Element
                Program:
                1. Establish a Point of Information (PIO) to meet with agency and media
                    representatives.
Policy 1.4:     Expand and update the database of safety related information, including
                Geographic Information System (GIS) data, and convey that information to the
                public and decision makers.
                Programs:
                1. Maintain an updated City GIS hazard map with information on fire hazard areas,
                    native plant fuel loads, flood zones, un-reinforced masonry buildings, underground
                    storage tanks, landslide areas, earthquake faults, pipelines, high voltage electrical
                    transmission lines, railroads, state highways, underground storage tanks, and
                    evacuation routes.
                2. Seek from other government, academic and private organizations new data that can
                    be used for emergency preparedness and response.
                3. Share hazard information with nearby jurisdictions, private and public organizations,
                    and the general public.
Policy 1.5:     Perform assessments aimed at reducing or eliminating long-term risks to improve
                the efficiency and decrease the cost of disaster response and recovery.
                Programs:
                1. Provide ongoing emergency preparedness training for all City staff.
                2. Ensure the building code and other City regulations applicable to structural safety are
                    updated current with State Law.
Policy 1.6:     Facilitate long-term recovery following a disaster.
                Programs:
                1. Assist with public and private rebuilding efforts, provision of housing for displaced
                    residents, and resumption of service, business and government functions.
                2. Provide assistance to agencies and organizations involved in disaster recovery.
                3. Identify agencies needed to participate in assessing damage, providing citizens with
                    care and shelter, and repairing critical infrastructure.
                4. Ensure duplicate storage of essential City records.
           2. Flooding and Dam Inundation
Flooding and its effects generally occur when heavy rainfall causes watercourses to overtop
their banks. Winter storms bring large amounts of runoff to areas not accustomed to high flows,
including areas damaged by fire. Runoff can carry debris and sediment that can clog drainage
systems and block creek channels. Flooding may also occur in low-lying areas with poor
Final Plan                                         Page IV-3                                      June 25, 2002
                                              City of Atascadero
                                           Safety & Noise Element
drainage, even during moderately sized storms. Flooding can harm structures, infrastructure
and crops, and can create health hazards by rupturing sewer lines and damaging septic
systems.
Many factors contribute to the severity of floods, including fires in watershed areas, structures
and fill in flood-prone areas, and increased runoff from impervious surfaces such as roadways
and rooftops. The primary measure used to delineate areas subject to flooding is the "100-year
flood".
Dam failure can result from a number of causes. Earthquakes, fast-rising flood waters, and
structural flaws can contribute to dam breach and release of impounded water. Flooding also
can occur when landslides displace large volumes of reservoir water. Dam failure can cause
flooding, erosion, and debris and sediment deposition.
Sudden failure of the Salinas Dam at Santa Margarita Lake could inundate an area in the City
within about 1,000 feet of the Salinas River. Failure of the Atascadero Lake Dam with the lake at
capacity could produce flooding about two feet deep in the Morro Flats/Tecorida area and
affect about 100 residents. The State conducts periodic reviews to evaluate dam safety.
Goal SFN 2.             Reduce damage to structures and danger to life caused
                        by flooding and dam inundation.
Policy 2.1:     Enforce federal regulations regarding placement of structures in floodplains, and
                maintain appropriate standards for development in flood-prone and poorly drained
                areas (refer to Figure II-8).
                Programs:
                1. Require an engineered floodplain and hydrologic analysis to be prepared for new
                    development project within or directly adjacent to known 100-year flood plains.
                2. Prohibit development within floodways and areas of high flood hazard potential to the
                    extent practicable.
                3. Required the lowest finished floor of new construction in low-lying or other areas with
                    serious drainage or flooding potential to be contracted a minimum of 1-foot above the
                    100-year water surface elevation.
                4. Prohibit development that will create new upstream or downstream flooding or
                    drainage problems.
Policy 2.2:     Reduce flood damage in areas known to be prone to flooding.
                Programs:
                1. Augment existing GIS and other data regarding low-lying areas with information
                    obtained during storms.
                2. Develop a prioritized list of proposed capital improvement projects for low-lying,
                    flood-prone areas, and seek funding for those projects.
Final Plan                                        Page IV-4                                      June 25, 2002
                                          City of Atascadero
                                       Safety & Noise Element
            3. Perform flood-related preventive maintenance and repair, and ensure that all flood-
                related work in riparian areas minimizes impacts to biological resources.
Policy 2.3: Prepare the City to respond to flood emergencies.
            Program:
            1. Train City personnel to a level appropriate to their positions and responsibilities to
                respond to flood emergencies.
            2. Require new subdivisions to construct a system of all weather emergency access
                connections consistent with the City's Emergency Evacuation Plan.
            3. Identify and map appropriate evacuation routes for neighborhoods along the Salinas
                River.
Policy 2.4: Minimize the risk of dam failure.
            Programs:
            1. Work with State and Federal agencies to assist with inspection and maintenance of
                the Salinas and Atascadero Lake Dams.
            2. Maintain a dam failure evacuation plan to guide public officials that includes use of
                the emergency alert system to notify the public.
Final Plan                                    Page IV-5                                       June 25, 2002
                    City of Atascadero
                 Safety & Noise Element
           Figure IV-1:     Flood Plain Map
Final Plan              Page IV-6           June 25, 2002
                           City of Atascadero
                        Safety & Noise Element
           Figure IV-2:   Dam Failure Inundation Map
Final Plan                     Page IV-7             June 25, 2002
                                              City of Atascadero
                                           Safety & Noise Element
           3. Wildland Fires
Fires are an important component of the local ecosystem. Wildlands must burn or otherwise be
controlled periodically to maintain ecological viability. Fuel maintenance (controlled burns,
mowing, cattle grazing, fire goats and other means) has replaced uncontrolled wildfire because
of threats to human habitation, and development in inappropriate locations often requires fuel
modification that results in environmental damage.
Fires can cause significant life, property and environmental loss. Fire hazards can be influenced
by a variety of factors, including building location and construction, access, storage of
flammable and hazardous materials, inadequate water supply, and response time for fire
suppression personnel.
Wildfire and urban fire hazards are closely related in Atascadero due to extensive residential
development in hillside areas with flammable chaparral, grassland and oak woodland
(especially where vegetation has not burned recently). Chaparral vegetation burns intensely at
extremely high temperatures, making fires in this habitat difficult to extinguish.
Northwest afternoon winds common in the western part of the City (associated with inland
valley heating and cooler air currents flowing from the ocean) can cause fires to spread and shift
direction quickly and unpredictably. Steep slopes also are subject to rapid flame spread and
often have poor access for fire suppression equipment. The Fire Department Master Plan
identifies areas of the City at higher risk for wildfires.
Goal SFN 3.             Reduce the threat to life, structures, and the
                        environment caused by fire.
Policy 3.1:     Carefully site and configure new development in higher fire risk areas
                Programs:
                1. Encourage the clustering of lots and buildings in higher fire hazard areas to reduce
                    the need for multiple response teams during fires.
                2. Require Fire Department and Atascadero Mutual Water Company review of
                    subdivision design to ensure adequate fire flows and access for emergency vehicles,
                    and compliance of structures with Fire and Building Codes.
                3. Require fire resistant material in building construction in fire hazard areas.
                4. Require defensible space around all structures, especially in higher fire hazard areas.
Policy 3.2:     Plan for adequate facilities, equipment, and personnel to meet fire fighting
                demands.
Final Plan                                        Page IV-8                                       June 25, 2002
                                            City of Atascadero
                                        Safety & Noise Element
             Programs:
             1. Update the Fire Department Master Plan every five years.
             2. Continue to plan for future facility, equipment, communication system, and personnel
                 requirements.
             3. Coordinate with the County to obtain information generated during the update of the
                 Salinas River Area Plan relevant to improving fire suppression capabilities.
Policy 3.3:. Sustain the ability of the Fire Department to respond to emergencies.
             Programs:
             1. Prepare, adopt, and maintain standards of coverage for the Fire Department specific
                 to the geography of Atascadero.
             2. Maintain mutual aid agreements with other fire and emergency service agencies in
                 rural areas of the community
             3. Train Fire Department personnel in wildfire risk assessment.
             4. Maintain a fire-related GIS database to assist decision-makers with analyzing
                 development proposals, and update the database when new CDF/County Fire
                 Department fire hazard severity maps become available.
             5. Develop GIS based fuel load mapping in conjunction with the native tree mapping
                 program.
             6. Provide ongoing fire prevention public education programs.
             7. Develop and codify uniform standards for maximum slope of streets, driveways, and
                 fire access roads for all new development.
             8. Continue to cooperate with the Atascadero Mutual Water Company to improve and
                 expand fire flows and hydrant locations.
Policy 3.4:  Adopt programs to reduce the impacts of fires.
             Programs:
             1. Develop regulations that balance the need for defensible area around homes with the
                 preservation of Native Trees and habitats.
             2. Inform homeowners of fire dangers, appropriate responses to fire, and ways to
                 prevent loss.
             3. Continue to promote the efforts of the Fire Safe Council.
             4. Train fire fighters to educate property owners and the public.
             5. Require Fire Department review of development plans to assure adequacy of access
                 for equipment, water supplies, construction standards, and vegetation clearance.
Final Plan                                     Page IV-9                                      June 25, 2002
                                        City of Atascadero
                                     Safety & Noise Element
           6. Ensure that sufficient water supplies are available for protection of structures and
              encourage built-in fire protection systems such as sprinklers.
           7. Require the installation of residential fire sprinklers on new construction throughout
              the City.
           8. Amend to Municipal code to require the installation of fire sprinkler systems of all
              commercial and industrial buildings regardless of size.
           9. Support the Memorandum of Understanding between the Atascadero City Fire
              Department and the Air Pollution Control District that allows burning within the Urban
              Reserve Line of Atascadero where a fire hazard is present and the vegetation can
              not be abated by any other means or other alternatives.
Final Plan                                 Page IV-10                                        June 25, 2002
                      City of Atascadero
                   Safety & Noise Element
             Figure IV-3:     Fire Hazard Map
           `
Final Plan               Page IV-11           June 25, 2002
                                            City of Atascadero
                                         Safety & Noise Element
           4. Geologic and Seismic Hazards
Geologic conditions define the stability of the ground and how a site will respond to natural
forces such as erosion and earthquakes. The frequency and strength of earthquakes depend on
the activity, number, and type of faults that pass through or influence a particular region.
Mapped lateral faults in the vicinity of Atascadero include the potentially active Rinconada
fault and the Nacimiento fault zone. The Rinconada fault (and associated Jolon fault) is mapped
east of the Salinas River trending northwest. The six-mile-wide Nacimiento fault zone (trending
northwest in the Santa Lucia Range southwest of the City) is classified as inactive but appears to
coincide with an historic earthquake epicenter. A subsurface thrust fault (Black Mountain) lies
three (3) miles east of the City. Additional potential seismic hazards that are in proximity to the
City are shown in Table IV-1.
Seismic (earthquake-related) hazards can result in significant public safety risks and property
damage. Direct effects of earthquakes include fault rupture and groundshaking. Associated
processes include liquefaction, seismic settlement, and landsliding. (Other earthquake-related
hazards, such as dam inundation, fires, and unsafe structures are evaluated in separate sections
of this Safety Element.)
Fault rupture (displacement of the ground surface along a fault trace) typically occurs during
earthquakes of magnitude 5 or greater in a linear zone around previous ruptures, and as
sympathetic movement on adjacent or intersecting faults. The potentially active Rinconada
Fault presents a moderate fault rupture hazard to the City.
Groundshaking is motion that occurs in response to local and regional earthquakes. Table 1 lists
nearby faults considered to be potential sources of relatively strong groundshaking, which
development projects must consider in order to comply with standard practices regarding
seismic safety. California Building Code requirements (CBC; adopted as Municipal Code Title
8) establish design and construction standards intended to enable structures to withstand
groundshaking.
Final Plan                                     Page IV-12                                 June 25, 2002
                                                   City of Atascadero
                                                Safety & Noise Element
                                 Table IV-1:   Potential Groundshaking Sources
        Fault                  Distance*       Maximum                Maximum    Anticipated
                                               Earthquake             Probable   Acceleration
                                (miles)
                                                                     Earthquake    Range (g)
 Rinconada and             2                 7.5                   7.0          0.4-0.6
 Jolon
 Black Mountain            3                 7.5                   5.75         0.1-0.5
 La Panza                  9                 7.5                   Unknown, but 0.1-04
                                                                   assumes 5
 Los Osos                  14                7                     Unknown, but 0.1-0.2
                                                                   assumes 5
 Hosgri                    22                7.5                   6.5-7.5      0.1-0.2
 San Andreas               27                8.25                  8            0.1-0.2
 San Simeon                35                unknown               6.5          unknown
          *from El Camino Real/Traffic Way
Liquefaction is the sudden loss of soil strength due to rapid increase in pore water pressure
during groundshaking, while seismic settlement is the reduction of soil volume (which may
occur simultaneously or independent of liquefaction). Liquefaction potential increases with
earthquake magnitude and groundshaking duration. Low-lying areas adjacent to Atascadero
and Graves Creeks, and the Salinas River underlain by unconsolidated alluvial soil, are mapped
as having high liquefaction potential. Much of the City is underlain by older alluvium,
considered to possess moderate liquefaction potential.
The CBC requires the assessment of liquefaction potential in the design of all structures. If
buildings can’t be located away from potentially liquefiable soils, the hazard typically can be
mitigated by constructing deep foundations, compacting granular soils, and/or employing
engineering techniques during construction.
Landslides and slope instability can result from rainfall and runoff, weak soils, grading,
inadequate drainage, steep slopes, adverse geologic structure, and/or earthquake activity. Slope
instability can occur in the form of creep, slumping, large progressive translation or rotational
failure, rockfall, debris flow, or erosion. Slope instability potential in the City generally
increases with steepness and distance from the Salinas River. Some steeper areas are mapped
as having very high slope failure potential.
Landslides can result in damage to property and cause buildings to become unsafe due to
distress or collapse during sudden or gradual slope movement. Even structures on stable
ground may be exposed to hazards if they lie in the path of slope activity.
The CBC requires site-specific slope stability studies for hillside development. Any grading on
slopes 10 percent or steeper also is subject to CEQA environmental review. Hillside
developments often require nonstandard, heavily engineered designs. Building in a landslide
Final Plan                                            Page IV-13                              June 25, 2002

                                                 City of Atascadero
                                              Safety & Noise Element
hazard area means a property owner must accept a relatively high degree of risk. (Future
occupants or owners are not represented when cost or risk-management decisions are made
that facilitate site development.)
Goal SFN 4.                Minimize the potential for loss of life and property
                           resulting from geologic and seismic hazards.
Policy 4.1:      Ensure that developments, structures, and public facilities adequately address
                 geologic and seismic hazards.
                 Programs:
             1. Disseminate information to the public to improve awareness of geologic hazards and
                 seismic safety.
             2. Continually update information about faults and geologic hazards (including GIS data and
                 geologic and fault mapping), and encourage the California Division of Mines and Geology
                 to provide new and updated geologic hazard data for inclusion in the database.
             3. Conduct studies to assess seismic activity within the Nacimiento fault zone in the
                 southwestern part of the City and SOI prior to approving construction of new structures in
                 the mapped fault traces.
             4. When projects are proposed in geologically hazardous areas, require development
                 applicants to submit reports, technical documents, and plans reviewed by a State-
                 licensed independent geologist or geotechnical engineer, and that include that expert’s
                 opinion as to whether documents were prepared in accordance with standard practices,
                 applicable codes, and regulations pertaining to geologic hazards.
Policy 4.2:      Ensure that structures are designed and located to withstand strong
                 groundshaking, liquefaction, and seismic settlement.
                 Programs:
                 1. Enforce adopted Building Code provisions pertaining to grading and construction
                      relative to seismic hazards.
                 2. Update the Title 8 of the Municipal Code as necessary to promote seismic safety in
                      structural designs.
                 3. Enforce building code requirements for addressing liquefaction potential in the design
                      of structures.
                 4. Require geotechnical studies for development in areas with moderate to high
                      liquefaction potential that include analysis of seismic settlement potential and specify
                      appropriate mitigation.
Policy 4.3:      Avoid development in areas at risk for slope failure when possible, and ensure that
                 hillside developments employ appropriate design and construction techniques.
Final Plan                                          Page IV-14                                       June 25, 2002

                                            City of Atascadero
                                         Safety & Noise Element
             Programs:
             1. Continue to require slope stability assessments by appropriate registered
                 professionals for developments in areas of known slope instability, landslides, or
                 slopes steeper than 10 percent.
             2. Require slope stability studies for subdivisions prior to delineating lot lines and
                 building envelopes.
             3. Prohibit new development in areas of high risk landslide activity, unless plans
                 demonstrate prior to development that the hazard can be reduced to a less than
                 significant level.
             4. Prohibit expansion of existing structures or developments in areas of high risk
                 landslide activity, except when it will reduce the potential for loss of life and property.
             5. Require development proposals to mitigate landslide and slope stability impacts on
                 neighboring property, structures, and infrastructure.
             6. Enforce building code provisions and other applicable ordinances regulating
                 development on sloping ground.
Policy 4.4:. Improve the ability of City personnel and residents to respond to seismic
             emergencies.
             Program:
             1. Train City personnel to a level appropriate to their position and responsibilities to
                 adequately and safely respond to seismic emergencies.
             2. Encourage residents to participate in Community Emergency Response Team
                 (CERT) training or other types of programs to improve community wide response to
                 seismic emergencies.
Final Plan                                     Page IV-15                                          June 25, 2002
                              City of Atascadero
                           Safety & Noise Element
              Figure IV-4:  Fault Line and Geohazard map
           5.
Final Plan                       Page IV-16              June 25, 2002
                                           City of Atascadero
                                        Safety & Noise Element
           5. Hazardous Materials, Radiation, Electromagnetic Fields, Unsafe
              Trees and Structures
Transport along Highway 101 and the Union Pacific Railroad poses the most significant
hazardous material risk in Atascadero. A hazardous material release from the highway or
railroad could expose residents to significant health and safety hazards and cause substantial
environmental damage.
Hazardous material use by City businesses is limited and not concentrated in any specific area.
Commercial hazardous material use and storage occurs at industrial operations, manufacturing
businesses (such as cabinet shops), and a propane distribution terminal.
Transportation, storage, and use of pesticides in agricultural and commercial settings also pose
potential hazards to the public. Pesticides are regulated by the County Agricultural
Commissioner’s Office.
Chevron USA, Inc. and US Navy
Chevron and the US Navy oil pipelines extend from Estero Bay through Atascadero easterly to
the San Joaquin Valley. The Chevron pipeline transports crude oil; use of the Navy pipeline has
been abandoned. The two pipelines follow the same route through Atascadero, extending east-
west from the Paradise Valley north of Route 41, crossing US 101 just north of Morro Road and
then continuing easterly across Pine Mountain to the Salinas River. East of the Salinas River,
the pipelines continue northeasterly through the El Pomar area to Shandon, generally
paralleling Route 41. The nearest pumping station to Atascadero is several miles east of the
Salinas River. The California Public Utilities Commission administers Federal regulations for
the pipelines. There are no known plans for constructing new oil pipelines within the
Atascadero area.
Southern California Gas Company
Southern California Gas Company (SCGC) natural gas lines extend north-south and east-west
from Atascadero. The north-south line follows El Camino Real and US 101, connecting
southerly to San Luis Obispo and Santa Maria, and northerly to Paso Robles and beyond. The
east-west line generally follows Route 41 east to Shandon. Natural gas is generally available
throughout Atascadero through a local distribution system. The California Public Utilities
Commission administers Federal regulations for the pipelines. There are no active plans for
construction of new natural gas transmission lines (SLOCOG, 1992).
Final Plan                                    Page IV-17                                June 25, 2002

                           City of Atascadero
                        Safety & Noise Element
           Figure IV-5: Major Power Line and Pipelines
Final Plan                    Page IV-18               June 25, 2002
                                             City of Atascadero
                                          Safety & Noise Element
Pacific Gas & Electric
Pacific Gas & Electric (PG&E) has a 70 KV electrical transmission line that extends north-south
from San Luis Obispo through Atascadero and on to Paso Robles and beyond. A substation is
located near Atascadero Lake. Two transmission lines also branch out from the substation
westerly to Cayucos and to Harmony. Electricity is generally available throughout Atascadero
through a local distribution system of mostly overhead wires (See Public Utilities section of the
Land Use Element).
The PG&E Diablo Canyon Power Plant is the primary radiation risk in the region. Extensive
warning, reporting, and response plans have been developed to prepare for potential
emergency situations at the plant. Updated information regarding the Emergency Response
Plan is distributed to the public each year.
Accumulations of radon (a naturally occurring gas produced by the breakdown of uranium in
soil, rock, and water) inside structures can pose a significant health hazard because radon is
known to cause lung cancer. The threat of radon is very low in well-ventilated structures;
basements (rare in the City) are common problem areas.
Any tree, especially one already damaged by disease, may pose a hazard if it (or one or more
limbs) falls, which commonly happens during storms. Hazardous trees near residential
dwellings should be removed consistent with the Tree Ordinance.
Any building may be damaged during an earthquake, but some construction materials
generally perform better than others do. Modern structures with wooden and steel framing or
reinforced concrete generally withstand groundshaking with little threat of failure or major
damage. Conversely, buildings made of unreinforced masonry typically provide little
earthquake resistance. The City has required 20 buildings to be demolished or retrofitted to
meet earthquake resistance standards.
Goal SFN 5.             Reduce the potential for harm to individuals and
                        damage to the environment from hazardous materials,
                        radiation, electromagnetic fields, radon, and unsafe
                        trees and structures.
Policy 5.1:     Reduce the potential for exposure to humans and the environment from hazardous
                substances.
                Programs:
             1. Require businesses that use, store, or transport hazardous materials to ensure that
                adequate measures are taken to protect public health and safety.
             2. Work with Caltrans to require all transport of hazardous materials to follow approved
                routes.
Final Plan                                      Page IV-19                                       June 25, 2002
                                             City of Atascadero
                                          Safety & Noise Element
            3. Work with Union Pacific to ensure adequate precaution and preparedness regarding rail
               transport of hazardous materials.
            4. Coordinate with AMWC to protect well fields from hazardous materials.
Policy 5.2:    Reduce the potential for pesticide exposure to humans and the environment.
               Programs:
               1. Ensure that emergency first responders and dispatch operators know to contact the
                   County Agricultural Commissioner’s Office for technical assistance in the event of a
                   pesticide-related emergency.
               2. Work with pesticide applicators (including commercial users and homeowners) to
                   ensure necessary measures are taken to protect public health and safety.
               3. Provide information and technical guidance to encourage implementation of
                   Integrated Pest Management strategies.
Policy 5.3:    Minimize potential hazards and spills from oil and gas pipelines and underground
               storage tanks.
               Program:
               1. Work with pipeline owners and operators and appropriate County and State agencies
                   to develop adequate prevention and cleanup strategies.
               2. Work with property owners, AMWC and County Environmental Health to abate
                   Leaking underground storage tanks and monitor existing tanks for leakage.
Policy 5.4:    Support County efforts to maintain a high level of radiation emergency
               preparedness and ensure that the public receives necessary information about the
               Diablo Canyon Power Plant.
               Program:
               1. Coordinate with County and PG&E to review and update information about
                   emergency preparedness and evacuations.
Policy 5.5:    Address unreinforced masonry buildings consistent with State Law.
               Program:
               1. Continue to require reinforcement necessary to meet adopted structural standards of
                   buildings identified pursuant to State law.
               2. Work with property owners and the redevelopment agency to develop programs to
                   reinforce and preserve historic masonry structures within the downtown district.
               3. Utilize GIS to map the location of all unreinforced masonry buildings in the City.
Final Plan                                      Page IV-20                                     June 25, 2002

                                           City of Atascadero
                                        Safety & Noise Element
 B. Noise Element
The City of Atascadero Noise Element of the General Plan provides a policy framework for
addressing potential noise impacts in the planning process. Its purpose is to minimize future
noise conflicts. The Noise Element consists of a Policy Document, Technical Reference
Document, and Acoustical Design Manual. The Policy Document includes maps showing the
extent of noise exposure from the major noise sources in the City (roadways and railways)
along with the goals, policies, and implementation programs adopted by the City to reduce
future noise impacts. Among the most significant polices of the Noise Element are numerical
noise standards that limit noise exposure within noise-sensitive land uses, and performance
standards for new commercial and industrial uses that might adversely impact noise-sensitive
land uses.
When the potential for adverse noise impacts is identified, mitigation is required to carry out
the specific recommendations of an expert in acoustics or, under some circumstances, by
implementing standard noise mitigation packages. When mitigation is required, highest
priority is given to avoiding or reducing noise impacts through site planning and project
design, and lowest priority given to structural mitigation measures such as construction of
sound walls and acoustical treatment of buildings.
The Technical Reference Document contains background information on the data and methods
used to prepare noise exposure information and an inventory of the major noise sources in the
City. Information about the measurement and effects of noise is also included in the document.
The Technical Reference Document is intended to be a resource when evaluating the noise-
related implications of a project.
The purpose of the Acoustical Design Manual is to provide City staff, developers, builders, and
homeowners with a guide for reducing outdoor and indoor noise in relatively simple situations.
The Manual contains standard noise mitigation packages which in some situations may be used
in lieu of an acoustical analysis prepared by a professional.
           1. Introduction
Purpose and Scope
The Noise Element of the General Plan is a planning document which provides a policy
framework within which potential noise impacts may be addressed during project review and
long range planning. This element has been adopted by Atascadero in conformance with
Section 65302 (f) of the California Government Code. The Noise Element consists of this Policy
Document, a Technical Reference Document and an Acoustical Design Manual. The Technical
Reference Document provides detailed information concerning the methods used to define
existing and future noise exposure within Atascadero. The Acoustical Design Manual provides
standard noise mitigation packages which may be used under some circumstances to comply
with the policies of the Noise Element. It also contains background information to assist staff
and the general public in evaluating the effectiveness of proposed noise mitigation measures.
Final Plan                                    Page IV-21                                 June 25, 2002
                                                City of Atascadero
                                             Safety & Noise Element
The Noise Element is directed at minimizing future noise conflicts, whereas a noise ordinance
focuses at resolving existing noise conflicts. A noise ordinance may be used to address noise
levels generated by existing industrial, commercial, and residential uses which are not
regulated by federal or state noise level standards. The regulation of noise sources such as
traffic on public roadways, railroad line operations, and aircraft in flight is preempted by
existing federal and/or state regulations, meaning that such sources
generally may not be addressed by a noise ordinance. The Noise Element addresses the
prevention of noise conflicts from all of these sources. The noise level standards of a noise
ordinance should be consistent with the adopted policies of the Noise Element to achieve
consistency in the implementation of noise control programs, and to provide industry with
design criteria for future development or expansion.
                According to the Government Code requirements, noise exposure information should be
                included in the Noise Element for the following major noise sources:
                a)  Highways and freeways
                b)  Primary arterials and major local streets
                c)  Railroad operations
                d)  Aircraft and airport operations
                e)  Local industrial facilities
                f)  Other stationary sources
                Noise Sensitive uses that have been identified by the City are the following:
                a)  Residential development
                b)  Schools
                c)  Hospitals, nursing homes
                d)  Churches
                e)  Meeting halls, auditoriums, music halls, theaters, libraries
                f)  Transit lodging – motels and hotels
                g)  Playgrounds, parks
                h)  Offices
Authority
The contents of the Noise Element and the methods used in its preparation have been
determined by the requirements of Section 65302 (f) of the California Government Code and by
the Guidelines for the Preparation and Content of Noise Elements of the General Plan prepared
by the California Department of Health Services and included in the 1990 State of California
General Plan Guidelines, published by the State Office of Planning and Research. The
Guidelines require that major noise sources and areas containing noise-sensitive land uses be
identified and quantified by preparing generalized noise exposure contours for current and
projected conditions. Contours may be prepared in terms of either the Community Noise
Equivalent Level (CNEL) or the Day-Night Average Level (Ldn) which are descriptors of total
noise exposure at a given location for an annual average day. The CNEL and Ldn are generally
Final Plan                                         Page IV-22                                 June 25, 2002

                                           City of Atascadero
                                        Safety & Noise Element
considered to be equivalent descriptors of the community noise environment within plus or
minus 1.0 dB (see Section 1.5 for definitions of the terminology used in this document).
           2. Relationship to Other Elements of the General Plan
The Noise Element is related to the Land Use, Housing, Circulation and Open Space Elements
of the General Plan. Recognition of the interrelationship of noise and these four mandated
elements is necessary to prepare an internally consistent general plan and to initiate changes
which will reduce noise exposure to acceptable levels in areas where noise presently exceeds
the levels set forth by the adopted policies of the Noise Element. The relationship between
these elements is briefly discussed below:
Land Use
An objective of the Noise Element is to provide noise exposure information for use in the Land
Use Element. The noise contours in the Noise Element should be used to help determine
appropriate land use patterns in the Land Use Element.
Housing
The Housing Element addresses sites and standards for new housing. Since residential land
uses are noise-sensitive, the noise exposure information of the Noise Element must be
considered when planning the locations of new housing.
Circulation
The circulation system must be correlated with the Land Use element. This is especially true for
roadways which carry significant numbers of trucks. Noise exposure will thus be a decisive
factor in the location and design of new transportation facilities, and in the mitigation of noise
produced by existing facilities upon existing and planned land
uses.
Open Space
Excessive noise adversely affects the enjoyment of recreational pursuits in designated open
space, particularly in areas where quiet is a valued part of the recreational experience. Thus,
noise exposure should be considered in planning for this kind of open space use. Conversely ,
open space can be used to buffer noise-sensitive uses from noise sources by providing setbacks
and visual screening.
           3. Noise and Its Effects On People
The Technical Reference Document provides discussions of the fundamentals of noise
assessment, the effects of noise on people and criteria for acceptable noise exposure. It is
intended that the Technical Reference Document serve as a reference for staff during the review
of documents or proposals which refer to the measurement and effects of noise.
Final Plan                                    Page IV-23                                   June 25, 2002
                                           City of Atascadero
                                        Safety & Noise Element
           4. Noise Element Definitions
A-Weighted Sound Level (dB)
The sound level obtained by using the A-weighting filter of a sound level meter, expressed in
decibels (dB). All sound levels referred to in this policy document are in A-weighted decibels.
A-weighting de-emphasizes the very low and very high frequencies of sound in a manner
similar to the human ear. Most community noise standards utilize A-weighting, as it provides a
high degree of correlation with human annoyance and health effects.
Community Noise Equivalent Level (CNEL)
The equivalent energy (or energy average) sound level during a 24-hour day, obtained after the
addition of approximately five decibels to sound levels in the evening from 7:00 p.m. to 9:00
p.m. and ten decibels to sound levels in the night before 7:00 a.m. and after 9:00 p.m. The CNEL
is generally computed for annual average conditions.
Day/Night Average Sound Level (Ldn)
The equivalent energy (or energy average) sound level during a 24-hour day, obtained after the
addition of ten decibels to sound levels in the night after 9:00 p.m. and before 7:00 a.m. The Ldn
is generally computed for annual average conditions.
Equivalent Sound Level (Leq)
The sound level containing the same total energy as a time varying signal over a given sample
period. Thus, the Leq is a single-valued level that expresses the time-averaged total energy of a
fluctuating sound level. For example, if 64 dB is measured for 10 minutes, 68 dB is measured
for 20 minutes and 73 dB is measured for 30 minutes, the 1-hour Leq is about 71 dB. The Leq is
typically computed over 1, 8, and 24-hour sample periods.
Impulsive Noise
Noise of short duration, usually less than one second, with an abrupt onset and rapid decay.
New Development
Projects requiring land use or building permits, excluding remodels or additions to existing
structures.
Noise level reduction (NLR)
The arithmetic difference between the level of sound outside and inside a structure measured in
decibels.
Noise-Sensitive Land Use
           a.   Churches
           b.   Meeting halls, auditoriums, music halls, theaters, libraries ~
Final Plan                                    Page IV-24                                   June 25, 2002
                                           City of Atascadero
                                        Safety & Noise Element
           c.   Transient lodging -motels and hotels
           d.   Playgrounds, parks
           e.   Offices
Outdoor Activity Areas
Patios, decks, balconies, outdoor eating areas, swimming pool areas, yards of dwelling units,
and other areas which have been designated for outdoor activities and recreation.
Stationary Noise Source
Any fixed or mobile source not preempted from local control by existing federal or state
regulations. Examples of such sources include industrial and commercial facilities and vehicle
movements on private property {e.g., parking lots, truck terminals, auto race tracks, etc.)
Transportation Noise Source
Traffic on public roadways, railroad line operations and aircraft in flight. Control of noise from
these sources is preempted by existing federal or state regulations. However, the effects of noise
from transportation sources may be controlled by regulating the location and design of land
uses affected by transportation noise sources.
           5. The Noise Environment
Overview of Sources
Based on discussions with City staff and field studies conducted during the preparation of the
Noise Element, it was determined that there are a number of potentially significant sources of
community noise within Atascadero, including traffic on state highways and other major
roadways, railroad operations, and stationary noise sources. The Technical Reference
Document includes detailed discussions of the noise levels produced by these sources.
Methods Used to Develop Noise Exposure Information
Analytical noise modeling techniques in conjunction with actual field noise level measurements
were used to develop generalized Ldn or CNEL contours for major sources of noise within
Atascadero for existing and future conditions.
Analytical noise modeling techniques generally make use of source-specific data, including
average levels of activity, hours of operation, seasonal fluctuations, and average levels of noise
from source operations. Analytical methods have been developed for many environmental
noise sources, including roadways, railroad line operations, railroad yard operations, industrial
plants, and aircraft/airport operations. Such methods will produce reliable results as long as
data inputs and assumptions are valid for the sources being studied. The analytical methods
used in the preparation of this Noise Element closely follow recommendations made by the
State Office of Noise Control. Methods included the Federal Highway Administration (FHWA)
Highway Traffic Noise Prediction Model for roadway sources, the Wyle Laboratories method
for determining railroad noise exposure, and the Federal Aviation Administration (FM)
Final Plan                                    Page IV-25                                  June 25, 2002
                                            City of Atascadero
                                         Safety & Noise Element
Integrated Noise Model (INM) for the assessment of aircraft/airport noise sources. For
industrial, commercial, and other stationary sources identified for study, a combination of
source-specific noise level data and accepted calculation procedures was used to characterize
noise emissions based upon operational data obtained from source operators.
Determining Noise Exposure and Mitigation for Specific Locations
The chart shown in Figure IV-7 illustrates where noise exposure information for a particular
location may be found. Note that Table IV-2 should be consulted to adjust traffic noise exposure
in areas with varying topography. Noise exposure information may be used to determine if a
particular land use is consistent with the policies of the Noise Element, and whether or not
noise mitigation should be required as apart of the project development process. Figure IV-8 is
a flow chart that illustrates the process that should be followed to determine noise exposure and
appropriate mitigation for specific locations.
Final Plan                                     Page IV-26                                June 25, 2002
                                City of Atascadero
                             Safety & Noise Element
           Table IV-2: Adjustments to Traffic Noise Exposure for Topography
Final Plan                         Page IV-27                             June 25, 2002
                                  City of Atascadero
                               Safety & Noise Element
           Figure IV-6: Chart for Locating Noise Exposure Information
Final Plan                           Page IV-28                       June 25, 2002
                                        City of Atascadero
                                     Safety & Noise Element
           Figure IV-7: Flow Chart for Determining Noise Exposure and Mitigation
Final Plan                                 Page IV-29                            June 25, 2002
                                            City of Atascadero
                                         Safety & Noise Element
Community Noise Survey
A community noise survey was conducted in Atascadero to document background noise levels
in areas where noise-sensitive land uses are located. Results of the community noise survey
indicate that existing background noise levels in many areas of the City that contain noise-
sensitive land uses are relatively quiet. To preserve quiet conditions, noise level standards and
policies have been adopted which will prevent degradation of the existing noise environment as
much as possible. A more detailed discussion of the community noise survey may be found in
the Technical Reference Document.
 C. Noise Element Goals and Policies
The goals of the Atascadero Noise Element are:
Goal SFN 6.             Protect the citizens of Atascadero from the harmful and
                        annoying effects of exposure to excessive noise.
Goal SFN 7.             Protect the economic base of Atascadero by preventing
                        incompatible land uses from encroaching upon existing
                        or planned noise-producing uses.
Goal SFN 8.             Preserve the tranquility of residential areas by preventing
                        the encroachment of noise-producing uses.
Goal SFN 9.             Educate the residents of Atascadero concerning the
                        effects of exposure to excessive noise and the methods
                        available for minimizing such exposure.
Goal SFN 10.            Avoid or reduce noise impacts through site planning and
                        project design, giving second preference to the use of noise
                        barriers and/or structural modifications to buildings
                        containing noise-sensitive land uses.
Final Plan                                     Page IV-30                                 June 25, 2002
                                       City of Atascadero
                                    Safety & Noise Element
    Figure IV-8: Compatibility for New Development Near Transportation Noise Sources
Final Plan                                Page IV-31                          June 25, 2002
                                            City of Atascadero
                                         Safety & Noise Element
           1. Land Use Compatibility-Transportation Policies
Figure IV-8 shows the ranges of noise exposure from transportation noise sources which are
considered to be acceptable, conditionally acceptable, or unacceptable for the development of
different land uses. Figure IV-8 is used to determine whether mitigation is needed for
development of land uses near major transportation noise sources. In areas where the noise
environment is acceptable, new development may be permitted without requiring noise
mitigation. For areas where the noise environment is conditionally acceptable, new
development should be allowed only after noise mitigation has been incorporated into the
design of the project to reduce noise exposure to the levels specified by the policies listed in
Section IV.C.1. For areas where the noise environment is unacceptable, new development in
compliance with the policies of Section IV.C.1 is usually not appropriate.
The following specific policies are adopted by Atascadero to accomplish the goals of the Noise
Element:
Policy 1.      The noise standards in this chapter represent maximum acceptable noise levels.
               New development should minimize noise exposure and noise generation.
               The City shall maintain a Noise Ordinance that implements the requirements of the
               Noise Element.
Transportation Noise Sources:
Policy 2.      New development of noise-sensitive land uses shall not be permitted in areas
               exposed to existing or projected future levels of noise from transportation noise
               sources which exceed 60 dBn or CNEL (70 Ld,/CNEL for playgrounds and
               neighborhood parks) unless the project design includes effective mitigation
               measures to reduce noise in outdoor activity areas and interior spaces to or below
               the levels specified for the given land use in Table IV-3.
Policy 3.      Noise created by new transportation noise sources, including roadway
               improvement projects, shall be mitigated so as not to exceed the levels specified
               in Table IV-3 within the outdoor activity areas and interior spaces of existing noise
               sensitive land uses.
Stationary Noise Sources:
Policy 4.      New development of noise-sensitive land uses shall not be permitted where the
               noise level due to existing stationary noise sources will exceed the noise level
               standards of Table IV-4 unless effective noise mitigation measures have been
               incorporated into the design of the development to reduce noise exposure to or
               below the levels specified in Table IV-4.
Policy 5.      Noise created by new proposed stationary noise sources or existing stationary
               noise sources which undergo modifications that may increase noise levels shall be
               mitigated so as not to exceed the noise level standards of Table IV-4 on lands
Final Plan                                     Page IV-32                                   June 25, 2002
                                          City of Atascadero
                                       Safety & Noise Element
              designated for noise-sensitive uses. This policy does not apply to noise levels
              associated with agricultural operations.
Existing and Cumulative Noise Impacts:
Policy 6.     The City shall consider implementing mitigation measures where existing noise
              levels produce significant noise impacts to noise-sensitive land uses or where new
              development may result in cumulative increases of noise upon noise-sensitive
              land uses.
  Table IV-3:          Maximum Allowable Noise Exposure – Transportation Noise Sources
Final Plan                                   Page IV-33                                  June 25, 2002

                                           City of Atascadero
                                        Safety & Noise Element
     Table IV-4:            Maximum Allowable Noise Exposure – Stationary Noise Sources
           2. Implementation Programs
To achieve compliance with the policies of the Noise Element, Atascadero shall undertake the
following implementation program. The implementation program focuses on the prevention of
new noise-related land use conflicts by requiring that new development be reviewed to
determine whether it complies with the policies in Chapter 3. If mitigation of noise impacts is
necessary it shall be achieved by a) carrying out an acoustical analysis meeting the requirements
of Table IV-4 or b) implementing the standard noise mitigation packages contained in the
Acoustical Design Manual where conditions in the following Section are met.
The noise exposure maps in this document and the information concerning the effects of noise
on people and techniques available for noise control in the Technical Reference Document and
Acoustical Design Manual are used in reviewing the noise affects of new development. The
Acoustical Design Manual describes standard noise mitigation packages which may be used to
reduce noise exposure inside buildings and within outdoor activity areas by specified amounts.
The noise exposure maps are intended as a screening device to determine when a proposed
development may be exposed to excessive noise levels which require mitigation and to provide
guidance in the long range planning processes. Generally, the noise exposure maps provide a
conservative (worst-case) assessment of noise exposure for the major noise sources identified
for study. It is probable that other major noise sources, especially stationary sources, will be
identified during the project review process, since only a representative sample of such sources
was evaluated during the preparation of this document.
The Technical Reference Document and Acoustical Design Manual should be used to guide
determinations of whether or not proposed noise mitigation measures are a reasonable and
Final Plan                                    Page IV-34                                  June 25, 2002

                                                City of Atascadero
                                             Safety & Noise Element
effective application of the techniques available, and likely to achieve the desired results.
Control of noise at the source and through the thoughtful location and orientation of receiving
uses should be given preference over the control of noise along the path of transmission
through the use of noise barriers or the acoustical treatment of buildings.
                Acoustical Mitigation Programs
                1. The City shall review new public and private development proposals to determine
                    conformance with the policies of this Noise Element.
                2. Allow noise barriers and modifications to buildings containing noise-sensitive uses
                    only when site planning alone cannot adequately accomplish noise reduction.
                3. Require all noise barriers and sound attenuation walls to be constructed of
                    architecturally attractive materials and buffered with landscaping.
                4. Amend the zoning ordinance to require masonry sound attenuation barriers between
                    commercial and residential districts.
                5. When mitigation must be applied to satisfy the policies in Chapter 3.3, the following
                    priorities for mitigation shall be observed, where feasible:
                    a)        First: Setbacks/open space separation
                    b)        Second: Site layout/orientation/shielding of noise-sensitive uses with non-
                              noise-sensitive uses
                    c)        Third: Construction of earthen berms
                    d)        Fourth: Structural measures: acoustical treatment of buildings and noise
                              barriers constructed of concrete, wood, or materials other than earth
                6. Where the development of a project subject to discretionary approval may result in
                    land uses being exposed to existing or projected future noise levels exceeding the
                    levels specified by the policies, the City shall require an acoustical analysis at the
                    time the application is accepted for processing. For development not subject to
                    discretionary approval and/or environmental review, the requirements for an
                    acoustical analysis shall be implemented prior to the issuance of a building permit.
                    The requirements for the content of an acoustical analysis are given in the following
                    section.
                    At the discretion of the City, the requirement for an acoustical analysis may be waived
                    provided that all of the following conditions are met:
                    Outdoor Activity Areas Programs
                         a) The development is for less than five single-family dwellings or for office
                              buildings, churches or meeting halls having a total gross floor area less than
                              10,000 square feet.
                         b) The noise source in question consists of a single roadway or railway for
                              which up-to-date noise exposure information is available. An acoustical
                              analysis will be required when the noise source in question is a stationary
                              noise source or airport, or when the noise source consists of multiple
                              transportation noise sources.
                         c) The existing or projected future noise exposure at the exterior of buildings
                              which will contain noise-sensitive uses or within proposed outdoor activity
Final Plan                                         Page IV-35                                       June 25, 2002
                                          City of Atascadero
                                       Safety & Noise Element
                        areas (other than playgrounds and neighborhood parks) does not exceed 65
                        dB ~n(or CNEL) prior to mitigation.
                    d) The topography in the project area is flat, and the noise source and receiving
                        land use are at the same grade.
               Interior Spaces
                    a) Required Noise Level Reduction (NLR) is equal to or less than 30 dB.
                    b) The development is for less than five single-family dwellings or offices,
                        churches, or meeting halls with less than 10,000 sq. ft. floor area.
                    c) Noise source in question consists of a single roadway, railway, or airport for
                        which up-to-date noise exposure information is available. An acoustical
                        analysis will be required when the noise source is a stationary noise source
                        or consists of multiple transportation noise sources.
                    d) Effective noise mitigation, as determined by the City, is incorporated into the
                        project design to reduce noise exposure to the levels specified in Table 3-1
                        or 3-2. Such measures may include the use of building setbacks, building
                        orientation, noise barriers, and the standard noise mitigation packages
                        contained in the Acoustical Design Manual. If closed windows are required
                        in compliance with interior noise level standards, air conditioning or a
                        mechanical ventilation system is required.
                    e) If the Community Development Director determines that a noise-sensitive
                        land use may be exposed to noise levels that exceed the standards in
                        Chapter 3.3, notwithstanding the noise contour information in this Noise
                        Element, an acoustical analysis meeting the requirements in Table 4-1 may
                        be required. An example of where this policy may apply is in areas not shown
                        on the noise contour maps of this Noise Element where the combined impact
                        of two or more noise sources may exceed the standards in Chapter 3.3
           7. The City shall develop and employ procedures to ensure that noise mitigation
               measures required pursuant to an acoustical analysis are implemented in the
               development review and building permit processes.
           8. The City shall develop and employ procedures to monitor compliance with the
               policies of the Noise Element after completion of projects requiring noise mitigation.
           9. The City shall enforce the State Noise Insulation Standards (California Code of
               Regulations, Title 24) and Chapter 35 of the Uniform Building Code (UBC).
           10. The City shall request the California Highway Patrol, the County Sheriff, and local
               police departments to actively enforce the California Vehicle Code sections relating to
               adequate vehicle mufflers.
           11. The City shall purchase new equipment and vehicles only if they comply with noise
               level performance standards based upon the best available noise reduction
               technology. Alternatives to the use of existing noisy equipment, such as leaf blowers,
               shall be pursued.
           12. The City shall periodically review and update the Noise Element to ensure that noise
               exposure information and specific policies are consistent with changing conditions
               within the City and with noise control regulations or policies enacted after the
               adoption of this element.
Final Plan                                   Page IV-36                                       June 25, 2002
                                          City of Atascadero
                                       Safety & Noise Element
           13. The City shall make the Acoustical Design Manual available to the public so that the
               public can incorporate noise reduction measures into private projects consistent with
               the goals and policies of this Noise Element.
           14. The City shall consider one or more of the following mitigation measures where
               existing noise levels significantly impact existing noise-sensitive land uses or where
               cumulative increase in noise levels resulting from new development significantly
               impact noise-sensitive land uses:
                    a) Rerouting traffic onto streets that have low traffic volume onto streets that do
                        not adjoin noise-sensitive land uses.
                    b) Rerouting trucks onto streets that do not adjoin noise-sensitive land uses.
                    c) Construction of noise barriers.
                    d) Lowering speed limits
                    e) Acoustical treatment of buildings
                    f) Programs to pay for noise mitigation such as low cost loans to owners of
                        noise-impacted property or establishment by developer fees.
           Requirements for an Acoustical Analysis
           An acoustical analysis prepared pursuant to the Noise Element shall:
           15. Be the financial responsibility of the applicant.
           16. Be prepared by a qualified person experienced in the fields of environmental noise
               assessment and architectural acoustics.
           17. Include representative noise level measurements with sufficient sampling periods and
               locations to adequately describe local conditions. Where actual field measurements
               cannot be conducted, all sources of information used for calculation purposes shall be
               fully described. When the use being studied is a commercial or industrial use, all noise
               sources related to the service and maintenance of the facility shall be considered,
               including but not limited to parking lot and landscape maintenance, refuse collection and
               truck loading/unloading activities, amplified sound, outdoor sales and activities, and aIl
               other noise sources associated with operation, maintenance, and service.
           18. Estimate existing and projected (20 years) noise levels in terms of the descriptors used
               in Table IV-2 and Table IV-3, and compare those levels to the adopted policies of the
               Noise Element. Projected future noise levels shall take into account noise from planned
               streets, highways, and road connections.
           19. Recommend appropriate mitigation to meet or exceed the policies and standards of the
               Noise Element, giving preference to proper site planning and design over mitigation
               measures which require the construction of noise barriers or structural modifications to
               buildings which contain noise-sensitive land uses.
           20. Estimate noise exposure after the prescribed mitigation measures have been
               implemented.
           21. Describe a post assessment program which could be used to evaluate the
               effectiveness of the proposed mitigation measures.
Final Plan                                   Page IV-37                                      June 25, 2002
                      City of Atascadero
                   Safety & Noise Element
           Figure IV-9:    Noise Contour Map
Final Plan               Page IV-38          June 25, 2002
               City of Atascadero
               Housing Element
           City of Atascadero
           Housing
           Element
           2014-2019
           Adopted: January 27, 2015
                                           City of Atascadero
                                         6500 Palma Avenue
                                       Atascadero, CA 93422
                                        www.atascadero.org
                                                 Prepared by:
                                   Lisa Wise Consulting, Inc.
                                              983 Osos Street
                                  San Luis Obispo, CA 93401
Final Plan         Page V-3                         January 27, 2015
                                                                          City of Atascadero
                                                                           Housing Element
                                                                Table of Contents
A.         Introduction V-7
   1.    OVERVIEW ................................................................................................................................................... V-7
   2.    PUBLIC PARTICIPATION ................................................................................................................................ V-8
   3.    CONSISTENCY WITH OTHER GENERAL PLAN ELEMENTS ............................................................................ V-12
B.         Evaluation of Previous Housing Element                                                V-13
C.         Population and Employment Trends V-26
   1.    POPULATION .............................................................................................................................................. V-26
   2.    EMPLOYMENT ............................................................................................................................................ V-27
D.         Housing Characteristics                                V-30
   1.    HOUSEHOLDS ............................................................................................................................................. V-30
   2.    HOUSING UNITS ......................................................................................................................................... V-32
   3.    HOUSING CONDITIONS ............................................................................................................................... V-33
   4.    HOUSING COSTS ......................................................................................................................................... V-33
   5.    HOUSING AFFORDABILITY ......................................................................................................................... V-35
   6.    AT-RISK UNITS .......................................................................................................................................... V-37
E.         Special Housing Needs                                  V-38
   1.    SENIOR HOUSEHOLDS ................................................................................................................................ V-38
   2.    PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES ...................................................................................................................... V-40
   3.    LARGE FAMILIES AND OVERCROWDING ..................................................................................................... V-42
   4.    SINGLE-PARENT HOUSEHOLDS .................................................................................................................. V-43
   5.    PERSONS IN NEED OF EMERGENCY SHELTER ............................................................................................. V-44
   6.    FARMWORKERS .......................................................................................................................................... V-45
F.         Housing Resources                      V-47
   1.    REGIONAL HOUSING NEEDS ALLOCATION ................................................................................................. V-47
         2014 – 2019 Regional Housing Needs Allocation ........................................................................................................ V-47
   2.    SITE INVENTORY AND ANALYSIS ............................................................................................................... V-48
         Vacant Sites.................................................................................................................................................................. V-48
   3.    INFRASTRUCTURE RESOURCES ................................................................................................................... V-49
   4.    ADMINISTRATIVE RESOURCES ................................................................................................................... V-50
   5.    FINANCIAL RESOURCES.............................................................................................................................. V-54
   6.    OTHER RESOURCES .................................................................................................................................... V-55
G.         Constraints on Housing Production V-58
   1.    GOVERNMENTAL CONSTRAINTS................................................................................................................. V-58
   2.    NON-GOVERNMENTAL CONSTRAINTS ........................................................................................................ V-83
H.         Housing Element Goals, Policies, and Programs                                                         V-86
I.         References             V-100
         Appendix I.................................................................................................................................................................. V-102
         Appendix II ................................................................................................................................................................ V-116
Final Plan                                                                       Page V-4                                                                              January 27, 2015

                                   City of Atascadero
                                   Housing Element
                                 List of Tables
TABLE V-1.      PROGRESS DURING PREVIOUS PLANNING PERIOD, 2007-2014     V-13
TABLE V-2.      EVALUATION OF PREVIOUS HOUSING ELEMENT     V-14
TABLE V-3.      TRENDS IN POPULATION GROWTH           V-26
TABLE V-4.      TRENDS IN POPULATION AGE V-26
TABLE V-5.      TRENDS IN RACE AND ETHNICITY          V-27
TABLE V-6.      INDUSTRY TRENDS IN ATASCADERO V-28
TABLE V-7.      TRENDS IN OCCUPATIONS            V-29
TABLE V-8.      CLASS OF WORKER TRENDS           V-29
TABLE V-9.      TRENDS IN HOUSEHOLDS             V-30
TABLE V-10. TRENDS IN HOUSEHOLD INCOME GROUPS V-31
TABLE V-11. TRENDS IN HOUSING TENURE V-31
TABLE V-12. TRENDS IN HOUSING TYPE               V-32
TABLE V-13. HOUSING UNITS BY AGE V-32
TABLE V-14. HOUSING PROBLEMS FOR ALL LOWER INCOME HOUSEHOLDS V-34
TABLE V-15. GROSS RENT AS A PERCENT OF INCOME 2012         V-35
TABLE V-16. MONTHLY OWNER COSTS AS A PERCENTAGE OF HOUSEHOLD
INCOME          V-35
TABLE V-17. SAN LUIS OBISPO COUNTY INCOME LIMITS V-36
TABLE V-18. SAN LUIS OBISPO COUNTY MAXIMUM SALES AND RENTAL PRICES
           V-36
TABLE V-19. SPECIAL NEEDS POPULATIONS, 2000 AND 2010       V-38
TABLE V-20. SENIOR HOUSEHOLDS, 2010              V-38
TABLE V-21. HOUSEHOLDS BY INCOME LEVEL, 2006-2010 V-39
TABLE V-22. SENIOR HOUSING FACILITIES, 2014           V-40
TABLE V-23. PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES BY TYPE V-41
TABLE V-24. NUMBER OF PERSONS WITH DEVELOPMENTAL DISABILITIES, 2014
           V-42
TABLE V-25. HOUSEHOLD SIZE BY TENURE IN ATASCADERO         V-42
TABLE V-26. OVERCROWDED HOUSEHOLDS IN ATASCADERO, 2010          V-43
TABLE V-27. SINGLE PARENT HOUSEHOLDS, 2010            V-44
TABLE V-28. FEMALE HEADED HOUSEHOLDS, 2010 V-44
Final Plan                             Page V-5                    January 27, 2015
                                City of Atascadero
                                Housing Element
TABLE V-29. CITY SHARE OF REGIONAL HOUSING NEED, 2014-2019          V-48
TABLE V-30. SUMMARY OF VACANT PARCELS, ATASCADERO 2014              V-48
TABLE V-31. RHNA SUMMARY, 2014-2019           V-49
TABLE V-32. GENERAL PLAN LAND USE DESIGNATIONS AND ZONING DISTRICT
COMPARISON        V-62
TABLE V-33. ZONING DISTRICT’S PERMITTED LAND USES IN 2014A          V-63
TABLE V-34. RESIDENTIAL ZONES DEVELOPMENT STANDARDSA                V-64
TABLE V-35. DOWNTOWN ZONES DEVELOPMENT STANDARDSA                   V-65
TABLE V-36. PARKING REQUIREMENTS A            V-71
TABLE V-37. PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT FEESA                V-72
TABLE V-38. DEVELOPMENT FEES FOR NEW HOUSING, 2014A            V-73
TABLE V-39. PROPORTION OF FEE IN OVERALL DEVELOPMENT COST FOR A
TYPICAL RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT               V-74
TABLE V-40. PERMIT PROCESSING PROCEDURESA V-75
TABLE V-41. TIMELINES FOR PERMIT PROCEDURESA              V-75
TABLE V-42. CONSTRAINTS ON HOUSING FOR PERSONS WITH DISABILITIESV-79
TABLE V-43. STRATEGIES TO ADDRESS ENERGY CONSERVATION AND GLOBAL
CLIMATE CHANGE V-83
TABLE V-44. SUMMARY OF QUANTIFIED OBJECTIVES, 2014-2019 V-99
TABLE V-45. VACANT LAND INVENTORY             V-102
                              List of Figures
FIGURE V-1. MEDIAN HOME PRICE, 2003-2013 ATASCADERO AND SLO COUNTY
           V-33
FIGURE V-2. VACANT LAND INVENTORY MAP               V-116
Final Plan                          Page V-6                          January 27, 2015

                                           City of Atascadero
                                           Housing Element
 A. Introduction
 1.        Overview
California planning law provides more detailed requirements for the housing element than for
any other element of the General Plan. The State Legislature has found that "the availability of
housing is of vital statewide importance and that the early attainment of decent housing and a
suitable living environment for every California family is a priority of the highest order." The
housing element establishes policies for the community to ensure safe, decent housing for its
current and future residents.
Article 10.6 of the California Government Code requires each city and county to analyze
housing needs and establish goals, policies, programs, and quantified objectives to meet the
identified needs. The analysis must address all economic segments (extremely low-, very low-,
low-, moderate- and above moderate-incomes) of the community, the City’s share of the
regional housing need, and the housing needs of special groups such as the elderly, disabled,
homeless, large families, and single parents. The City must either identify vacant or re-
developable sites that can provide sufficient housing to meet these needs or include programs
in the housing element to identify additional residential sites. In addition, housing elements are
subject to State review and certification.
This Housing Element includes the following information as required by State law:
           1. Analysis of Atascadero’s housing needs.
Final Plan                                     Page V-7                                 January 27, 2015

                                              City of Atascadero
                                              Housing Element
           2. Information on the existing housing stock, including the number, type, cost, tenure,
              and structural condition of the units.
           3. Analysis of land available to accommodate unmet housing needs.
           4. Analysis of potential barriers to housing development, including governmental and
              non-governmental constraints.
           5. Information on existing subsidized or below market-rate housing units.
           6. Information on energy conservation opportunities for housing construction or
              rehabilitation.
           7. Specific goals, measurable objectives, policies, and programs to address the housing
              allocation, as required by the County Regional Housing Needs Plan.
Major housing issues and opportunities identified in Atascadero include:
           1.     Adequate sites for the development of housing for all economic segments of the
                  community.
           2.     Incentives to encourage private market and non-profit development of
                  affordable housing.
           3.     Integration of affordable housing into new above-moderate income residential
                  projects or payment of fees in-lieu of affordable housing inclusion.
           4.     Special needs of seniors and families.
           5.     Maintenance of existing housing, rehabilitation of substandard units, and
                  removal and replacement of substandard housing that cannot feasibly be
                  rehabilitated.
           6.     Financial resources and programs to help subsidize development, maintenance,
                  and rehabilitation of extremely low, very-low, low-, and moderate-income
                  housing.
           7.     Local governmental constraints on the production or rehabilitation of housing.
           8.     Housing and services for the homeless population.
 2.        Public Participation
Government Code §65583(c)(6)(B) requires the City to “make a diligent effort to achieve public
participation of all economic segments of the community in the development of the housing
element.” Accordingly, this document incorporates input received from the general public, City
Council, Planning Commission, and other stakeholders.
Final Plan                                        Page V-8                              January 27, 2015

                                           City of Atascadero
                                           Housing Element
Public Workshops
The City facilitated a stakeholder workshop on April 29, 2014, to solicit input by citizens from
different geographic areas and economic segments in the City, non-profit associations, financial
and real estate professionals, decision-makers, and others to provide policy guidance.
Comments brought up during public meeting included:
               Housing options for extremely low and very low-income households, including
                housing for the homeless, transitional housing, and group housing.
               Explore use of using hotel facilities for housing
               What are the penalties of not having a certified Housing Element?
               Coordination of homeless services, such as warming shelters
               Overnight camping in City parks and/or permanent camping site(s)
               San Luis Obispo County Homeless Services Oversight Council policy
                recommendations
               Is there any City owned land for use for affordable housing?
               Use of City’s Low-Moderate Housing Fund
               Zoning allowing alternative housing types for group housing facilities.
Final Plan                                     Page V-9                                 January 27, 2015

                                              City of Atascadero
                                               Housing Element
April 20, 2014 Stakeholder Workshop
On May 20, 2014 the City held a Planning Commission workshop. The purpose of the meeting
was to provide an overview of the Housing Element update process, present the results of the
April 29, 2014 stakeholder workshop, and solicit Planning Commission feedback and direction
on policy recommendations. Policies presented for consideration and Commission direction
included:
     1. Review and consider modifying the City’s Inclusionary Housing Policy
     2. Establish a program to work with additional non-profit groups to facilitate
           establishment of transitional housing
     3. Encourage the ability to construct ‘micro homes’ consistent with the California Building
           Code
     4. Adjust development impact fees for second units based on size of the second unit
     5. Other Planning Commission policy recommendations
The community and Planning Commission were given the opportunity to ask questions about
each policy recommendation. Comments included:
          Ensure the City’s current Inclusionary Housing Policy complies with State law with
           regard to rent control
          There are different types of ‘affordable housing’, not only emergency shelters
          Recognize the growing trend in micro-homes, especially for aging baby boomers
          How to address density and sewer requirements for micro homes, should it be different?
          Second units are a great way to provide housing on large single family lots
          Supportive of reducing fees based on actual impact- smaller units have less impact
          Consider other incentives to encourage affordable housing/second units
          Need for senior housing, all levels of care
Organizations Contacted
To ensure that the interests of all economic segments of the community, including low- and
moderate-income households, were represented in the Housing Element update, the City
specifically contacted and sought participation by representatives from the following
organizations:
      Atascadero Association of Realtors
      Atascadero Chamber of Commerce
      Atascadero Community Link
      Atascadero Unified School District
      California Department of Housing and Community Development
      Caltrans
      Central Coast Commission for Senior Citizens
      Community Action Partnership, San Luis Obispo (CAPSLO)
      Cooperation for Better Housing
      El Camino Homeless Organization (ECHO)
      Habitat for Humanity
Final Plan                                       Page V-10                               January 27, 2015

                                           City of Atascadero
                                            Housing Element
          Housing Authority San Luis Obispo (HASLO)
          Homeless Services Oversight Council (HSOC)
          Local Agency Formation Commission (LAFCO)
          North County Connection
          North County Women’s Shelter
          People’s Self Help Housing
          Salvation Army
          San Luis Obispo Council of Governments (SLOCOG)
          San Luis Obispo County Air Pollution Control District (APCD)
          San Luis Obispo County Housing Trust Fund (SLOHTF)
          San Luis Obispo County Planning and Building
          Transitions Mental Health Association (THMA)
          Transitional Food and Shelter
          Tri-Counties Regional Center (TCRC)
Public Hearings
The public and stakeholders were notified of the availability of the Public Review Draft
Housing Element on June 4, 2014.
On October 7, 2014, a public hearing was held before the Planning Commission. City staff and
Lisa Wise Consulting, Inc. gave a joint presentation to the Commission regarding the Housing
Element Update. Two members of the public commented on the draft element. Following
questions and comments from the Commission, which were addressed by the City Staff and the
LWC team, the Commission unanimously voted to recommend the City Council adopt the
2014-2019 Housing Element.
On January 27, 2015, a public hearing was held before the City Council. City staff gave a
presentation to the Council about the Housing Element Update. The discussion following this
presentation included a question from the Council about a new program, which reduces
constraints on multi-family development projects as well as a comment about the status of the
motel voucher program and the need for County cooperation in use and distribution of CDBG
funds, particularly due to the recent reduction of these funds.
Speakers included a representative from the Homeless Services Oversight Council (HSOC) who
thanked the City and the consultant for their work on the housing element, and for including
most of HSOC's policy recommendations in the draft element. Additionally, a representative
from North County Connection mentioned the need for homeless services within North
County, while describing the current work the organization does to assist the homeless
population in the region.
Following the questions and comments from the Council and speakers, the City Council
unanimously voted to adopt the 2014-2019 Housing Element.
Final Plan                                    Page V-11                              January 27, 2015

                                          City of Atascadero
                                          Housing Element
The Housing Element is posted on the City’s web site (www.atascadero.org).
 3.        Consistency with Other General Plan Elements
State law requires that the General Plan and all of its elements comprise an "integrated,
internally consistent, and compatible statement of policies." The goals, policies, and programs
of this Housing Element are consistent with the goals, policies, and programs contained in other
elements of the General Plan. The Housing Element is Chapter V of the existing General Plan.
As other elements of the General Plan are updated or amended, the City will review the
Housing Element to ensure General Plan consistency is maintained.
Final Plan                                   Page V-12                                 January 27, 2015

                                                   City of Atascadero
                                                    Housing Element
 B. Evaluation of Previous Housing Element
The previous 2007-2014 Housing Element brought the City’s Housing Element into compliance
with State law, including an amendment to the City’s Zoning Ordinance to provide adequate
sites at a minimum density of 20 dwelling units per acre and an emergency shelter overlay zone
to satisfy the requirements of Senate Bill 2, which addresses emergency and transitional
shelters, as well policies for reasonable accommodation, density bonus, and single room
occupancies. Another priority of the previous Housing Element was conservation and
rehabilitation of existing homes.
Table V-1 summarizes the City’s previous RHNA for the period from January 2007 through
December 2014 and the number of housing units built or approved during that planning period.
As the City did not have a certified Housing Element for the 2001-2006 period, the City needed
to account for the 769 units during the 2007-2014 period. From January 2007 through December
31, 2013, the City constructed or approved 480 units, including 31 second units. Additionally,
the City worked with People’s Self Help Housing on the construction and permitting of 24
homes for ownership, available to very-low and low-income residents. the City met the above
moderate income housing needs for the 2007-2014 planning period.
                                          Table V-1.Progress During Previous Planning Period,
                                                                         2007-2014
                                                                                        Above
                                                Very Low       Low         Moderate                     Total
                                                                                        Moderate
         Unaccommodated 2001-2006 RHNA          312            193         264          0               769
         2007 - 2014 RHNA                       106            74          88           194             462
         2007 – 2014 Total                      418            267         352          194             1,231
         Units constructed/approved             28             22          134          265             449
         Second units constructed/approved*     0              12          12           7               31
         2007 - 2014 Remaining RHNA             390            233         206          0               829
         *Second units constructed and approved were classified by income category based on square
         footage. According to the San Luis Obispo Multi-Family Housing Rental Survey Summary, typical
         rent in Atascadero is approximately $1.09/sf. Affordability was determined by multiplying the cost
         per square foot by the square footage of a second unit.
         Source: CA Dept. of Housing and Community Development, SLOCOG, City of Atascadero
The goals and policies contained in the previous Housing Element were generally appropriate
to meet the housing needs of the City. This updated Element builds on that foundation, while
focusing on in-fill development along the El Camino Real corridor to increase housing
opportunities.         Table V-2 indicates what has been achieved and which programs should be
carried forward or deleted. However, to improve on the implementation and usability of the
document some of the policies and programs have been reworded or combined with other
programs.
Final Plan                                            Page V-13                                          January 27, 2015

                                                 City of Atascadero
                                                  Housing Element
                                          Table V-2.Evaluation of Previous Housing Element
            Program Summary                   Quantified               Achievement             Further Progress
                                               Objective                                            Needed
Goal     1: Promote diverse and high quality housing opportunities to meet
the needs of all segments of the community.
Policy 1.1 – Encourage new housing, including mixed-use projects in commercial land use areas, to meet the needs of
all household types in the City.
Program 1.1 - 1. To address the 2001 -     505 units            The City amended the        None. Program
2006 RHNA, the City shall amend the        (Programs 1 and General Plan and the             Complete.
General Plan and the Zoning Ordinance,     2 total 651 units) Zoning Ordinance to
as necessary, to provide adequate sites                         provide adequate sites
for 505 very low and low-income units at                        for 505 very low and low-
a minimum of 20 dwelling units per acre                         income units at a
“by right” (without a Conditional Use                           minimum of 20 dwelling
Permit or other discretionary action) on
                                                                units per acre “by right”
certain sites or in certain zones
                                                                (without a Conditional
                                                                Use Permit or other
                                                                discretionary action) on
                                                                certain sites or in certain
                                                                zones. At least half (50
                                                                percent) of these sites
                                                                were zoned for
                                                                residential uses only as a
                                                                part of the housing
                                                                element adoption.
Program 1.1 - 2. To address the 2007 –     146 units            City Council amended        None. Program
2017 RHNA, the City shall amend the        (Programs 1 and      the Zoning Code and         Complete.
General Plan and the Zoning Ordinance,     2 total 651 units    General Plan to provide
as necessary, to provide adequate sites                         adequate sites.
for 146 very low and low-income units at
a minimum of 20 dwelling units per acre
“by right” (without a Conditional Use
Permit or other discretionary action) on
certain sites or in certain zones.
Program 1.1 - 3. Continue street and        N/A                 On-going on a per project   Continue program into
infrastructure improvement projects to                          basis.                      next Housing Element.
benefit existing high density residential
areas.
Program 1.1 - 4. Continue to require the    N/A                 Only one project (Eagle     Continue program into
use of specific plans for residential                           Ranch) meets this criteria  next Housing Element.
projects of 100 or more units.                                  at this time. Applicants
                                                                are completing a Specific
                                                                Plan.
Program 1.1 - 5. Continue to allow         20 units             Since 2007, 11              Continue program into
manufactured housing and group                                  manufactured units have     next Housing Element.
housing in accordance with State law.                           been issued.
Final Plan                                           Page V-14                                       January 27, 2015

                                                 City of Atascadero
                                                  Housing Element
            Program Summary                   Quantified               Achievement             Further Progress
                                              Objective                                              Needed
Program 1.1 - 6. Support the extension     100 affordable       The City is currently       Continue program into
and expansion of sewer service for the     units                working with the            next Housing Element
Eagle Ranch annexation area by                                  developers of the Eagle     and clarify the Eagle
allocating the funding necessary                                Ranch Specific Plan to      Ranch project will
                                                                identify location for       include affordable
                                                                affordable housing units    housing units.
                                                                within the project area.
Program 1.1 - 7. Continue to allow mixed   20 units             Staff will continue to      Continue program into
residential and commercial development                          work with developers of     next Housing Element.
and promote second- and third-story                             the Colony Square           Replace ‘fee deferrals’
residential development in the City’s                           project for redesign of the with ‘flexible
downtown zoning districts. Taking into                          residential units. This     development
account market conditions and                                   component of the project    standards.’
development costs, the City will provide,                       remains undeveloped.
when possible, developer incentives such                        Additional interest in
as expedited permit processing and fee                          residential development
deferrals for units that are affordable to                      downtown remains.
lower income households. The City will
publicize these incentives on the City’s
website (www.atascadero.org) within
one week of a confirmed decision to
make them available in a timely fashion.
Program 1.1 - 8. Continue to encourage,    75 units             Staff continues to          Continue program into
where suitable, Planned Unit                                    encourage use of PDs for    next Housing Element.
Development (PD) Overlay Zones,                                 high quality design.
particularly the PD-25 zone of small lot
subdivisions, for higher density attached
or row-house style housing in the RMF-
10 and RMF-16 zoning districts.
Program 1.1 - 9. Adopt a Rural             N/A                  Staff has yet to begin      Continue program into
Residential Zone in the Zoning                                  work on this ordinance.     next Housing Element.
Ordinance consistent with its designation
on the Zoning Map and standards that
distinguish it from the Residential
Suburban zone (to facilitate the
development of a variety of housing
types
Program 1.1 - 10.Adopt an affordable       25 units             Completed in 2013.          None. Program
housing density bonus ordinance that                                                        Complete.
establishes procedures for obtaining and
monitoring density bonuses in
compliance with State law. Following
adoption the City shall regularly update
the ordinance to be in compliance with
Government Code §65915 and develop
an outreach program to ensure its
successful implementation. The City
should consider exceeding State
requirements if projects meet City
housing goals, such as compact high
density housing, architectural quality, or
Final Plan                                          Page V-15                                          January 27, 2015

                                                 City of Atascadero
                                                 Housing Element
            Program Summary                   Quantified              Achievement              Further Progress
                                              Objective                                             Needed
green building.
Program 1.1 - 11.Update feasibility        N/A                  City staff has reviewed    Consider program
analysis of inclusionary housing policy to                      work from consultant.      modifications to direct
reflect current market conditions. As                           Based on market trends     review to City Council.
part of the feasibility study explore                           and the uptick on older
options to streamline and clarify the                           projects, the affordable
various options available to a                                  housing policy in place is
developer. The City will also evaluate                          working. Additional
impacts to market rate housing related to                       work may be directed by
current market conditions, project                              the City Council.
applications, estimated affordable
housing requirements, fee collection, and
actual construction of affordable housing
units. If the policy presents an obstacle
to the development of the City's fair
share of regional housing needs, the City
will revise the policy accordingly.
Program 1.1 - 12. Adopt an inclusionary    70 units             At this time, Staff feels  Continue to consider
housing ordinance that requires                                 the inclusionary policy    adoption of an
residential and commercial                                      provides the flexibility   inclusionary housing
developments to provide deed-restricted,                        necessary to provide       ordinance.
affordable units or an in-lieu fee.                             affordable units. Council
                                                                may direct staff to        Remove linkage
                                                                continue to explore        requirement for
                                                                adoption of an             commercial
                                                                inclusionary housing       development.
                                                                policy.
Program 1.1 - 13.To encourage the          40 units             City did not evaluate      2nd Unit ordinance will
development of second units, the City                           second unit ordinance.     need to be reviewed as a
will evaluate the development standards                                                    part of the 2014 housing
and update the Zoning Ordinance for                                                        element.
second units (secondary residential
units). For example, the City will explore                                                 Consider splitting
incentives such as reducing fees and                                                       program into two
eliminating the covered parking                                                            separate programs, one
requirement for a secondary residential                                                    to evaluate
unit.                                                                                      development standards
                                                                                           and another to evaluate
The City will also work with Atascadero                                                    impact fees for second
Mutual Water Company to investigate                                                        units as part of an
the possibility of reductions to water                                                     AB1600 study process.
connection fees for second units and
consider an amnesty program that would
reduce or eliminate fees for unpermitted
second units.
Final Plan                                          Page V-16                                         January 27, 2015
                                                  City of Atascadero
                                                  Housing Element
            Program Summary                    Quantified               Achievement           Further Progress
                                               Objective                                           Needed
Program 1.1 - 14. Continue to maintain      N/A                  The City plans to        Continue program into
Chapter 12 of the Zoning Ordinance                               maintain this ordinance. next Housing Element
(Condo Conversion Ordinance) in order                                                     to ensure no changes to
to reduce the impacts of condo                                                            Condo Conversion
conversions on lower cost rental housing.                                                 Ordinance.
Program 1.1 - 15. Adopt an ordinance to     N/A                  Completed in 2013.       None. Program
allow vertical multi-family residential on                                                Complete.
the second floor in General Commercial
land use designations with a Conditional
Use Permit and horizontal mixed-use
subject to a PD and General Plan
Amendment
Program 1.1 - 16. Continue to work with     50 units             Staff is working with    Continue program into
non-profit agencies, such as the County                          these organizations and  next Housing Element.
Housing Authority, Habitat for                                   providing support,
Humanity, the San Luis Obispo County                             where necessary.
Housing Trust Fund and Peoples’ Self-
Help Housing, to preserve existing
affordable housing and to pursue
funding for new units for extremely low-,
very low-, low-, and moderate-income
families.
Program 1.1 - 17. Continue to encourage     N/A                  Staff provides necessary Continue program into
developers to work with agencies such as                         assistance in completing next Housing Element.
the California Housing Finance                                   applications for funds.
Authority (CHFA) and the Department
of Housing and Urban Development
(HUD) to obtain loans for development
of new multifamily rental housing for
low income households. This will be
accomplished by working with
appropriate non-profit organizations,
such as People’s Self Help Housing and
the San Luis Obispo County Housing
Trust Fund to identify opportunities.
Program 1.1 - 18. Continue to contract      N/A                  The City continues its   Continue program into
with the San Luis Obispo Housing                                 contract with the San    next Housing Element.
Authority for administration of the                              Luis Obispo Housing
Section 8 housing voucher program. The                           Agency.
City utilizes this relationship for program
implementation and income verifications,
and will apply for additional Section 8
vouchers, as appropriate.
Program 1.1 - 19. Amend the Zoning          N/A                  Completed in 2013.       None. Program
Ordinance to establish minimum                                                            Complete.
required densities in the medium and
high density residential zones to preserve
the limited supply of multi-family zoned
land for multi-family uses.
Final Plan                                           Page V-17                                      January 27, 2015

                                                      City of Atascadero
                                                      Housing Element
            Program Summary                        Quantified               Achievement             Further Progress
                                                   Objective                                             Needed
 Program 1.1 - 20. Amend the Zoning            N/A                   Staff has yet to            Continue program into
Ordinance to allow a waiver of the two                               commence this               next Housing Element.
story height limit in the RMF Zone                                   ordinance. This will be
through the Minor Use Permit process.                                reviewed and carry over
This option applies to projects that are                             into next housing
not using the Planned Development                                    element cycle.
option.
Goal 2: Protect and conserve the existing housing stock and neighborhoods.
Policy 2.1 – Encourage conservation and preservation of neighborhoods and sound housing.
Program 2.1 – 1. As new projects, code         30 units              While this is on-going,     Modify program and
enforcement actions, and other                                       the City has lost its       continue program into
opportunities arise, the City will                                   primary funding tool        next Housing Element.
investigate ways to meet its housing                                 when the RDA was
needs through rehabilitation and                                     dissolved. The City will
preservation of existing units (see also                             continue to find ways to
Program 4.3.3 for potential rehabilitation                           rehabilitate structures.
funding).
Utilize code enforcement to identify
housing maintenance issues and expedite
rehabilitation of substandard and
deteriorating housing by offering
technical assistance to homeowners and
occupants.
Program 2.1 – 2. Continue to participate       25 units              The City will continue to   Continue program into
in federal grant programs, such as                                   participate in grant        next Housing Element.
Community Development Block Grants                                   programs and will seek
(CDBG), to obtain loans and/or grants                                opportunities for
for housing rehabilitation. Apply an                                 additional grant funds to
appropriate amount of the City’s annual                              supplement the loss of
share of CDBG funds toward                                           the RDA.
rehabilitation of existing housing units
Program 2.1 – 3. Continue to maintain the      N/A                   The City will continue to   Continue program into
sliding density scale for sloped lots in the                         maintain its sliding scale  next Housing Element.
Zoning Ordinance.                                                    of density for sloped lots.
Program 2.1 – 4. Allocate funds in the         40 units              The City's RDA was          RDA dissolved, Remove
RDA housing set aside to rehabilitate                                dissolved on 2/1/2012       Program.
existing housing stock within                                        because of State
Redevelopment Project Areas with                                     legislation.
special emphasis on the Downtown
Commercial zone.
Final Plan                                               Page V-18                                         January 27, 2015

                                                       City of Atascadero
                                                        Housing Element
            Program Summary                         Quantified               Achievement                  Further Progress
                                                    Objective                                                   Needed
Program 2.1 – 5. The City shall continue         N/A                  City Staff continues to          Continue program into
to monitor the status of subsidized                                   monitor the status of            next Housing Element.
affordable projects, rental projects, and                             affordable housing rental
mobile homes in the City and provide                                  units and for sale units in
technical and financial assistance, when                              partnership with the SLO
possible, to ensure long-term                                         County Housing
affordability. This will involve contacting                           Authority.
owner/operators of subsided projects
annually to determine the status of the
units and their potential to convert to
market-rate. If projects are at-risk, the
City will maintain contact with local
organizations and housing providers
who may have an interest in acquiring at-
risk units, and, when feasible, keep track
of and apply for funding opportunities to
preserve at-risk units, and assist other
organizations in applying for funding to
acquire at-risk units.
Policy 4.2 – Encourage conservation and preservation of houses that have historical and architectural significance.
Program 2.2 – 1. Continue to implement           N/A                  The City will continue to        Continue program into
the Historic Site (HS) overlay zone to                                maintain this overlay            next Housing Element.
help preserve and protect historic Colony                             zone to preserve and
homes.                                                                protect historic colony
                                                                      homes.
Program 2.2 – 2. Continue to maintain a          N/A                  The City continues to            Continue program into
GIS based map of protected sites.                                     maintain GIS data in             next Housing Element.
                                                                      regards to historic
                                                                      buildings and sites.
Goal 3: Encourage energy conservation and sustainable building
                             measures in new and existing homes
Policy 3.1- Continue to make residents aware of available energy saving techniques and public utility rebates
Program 3.1 – 1. Promote                         N/A                  City staff continues to          Continue program into
environmentally sustainable building                                  work with developers             next Housing Element.
practices that provide cost savings to                                and homeowners to
homeowners and developers                                             avoid environmental
                                                                      impacts and promote
                                                                      sustainable building
                                                                      practices.
Program 3.1 – 2. Make available in the           N/A                  In partnership with               Continue program into
Community Development Department                                      PG&E and San Luis                 next Housing Element.
brochures from PG&E and others that                                   Obispo Green Build,
detail energy conservation measures for                               there are various
new and existing buildings.                                           brochures available to
                                                                      homeowners that detail
                                                                      energy conservation.
Final Plan                                                 Page V-19                                              January 27, 2015

                                                      City of Atascadero
                                                       Housing Element
             Program Summary                       Quantified               Achievement                  Further Progress
                                                    Objective                                                 Needed
Program 3.1- 3. Continue to strictly            N/A                  The City's Building             Continue program into
enforce the State energy standards of                                Department continues to         next Housing Element.
Title 24.                                                            enforce Title 24
                                                                     requirements upon
                                                                     review of building plans
                                                                     that require energy
                                                                     reports.
Program 3.1-4. Continue to implement            N/A                  This program has been           Remove.
AB 811 by providing an assessment                                    suspended due to
district for homeowners wishing to                                   pending litigation
install energy efficiency improvements.                              because Fannie Mae and
This will allow the homeowners to                                    Freddie Mac would not
spread the cost of the photovoltaic                                  issue loans.
systems out over a number of years on
their annual tax bill, thus reducing the
upfront cost.
Goal 4: Ensure equal access to sound, affordable housing for all persons
                              regardless of race, religion, age, sex, marital status,
                              ancestry, national origin, color, familial status, or
                              disability.
Policy 4.1 - Support equal housing opportunities and enforcement of State and federal anti-discrimination laws.
Program 4.1 – 1. Cooperate with non-            N/A                  The City continues to           Continue program into
profit groups and local religious                                    encourage local churches        next Housing Element.
organizations to allow the temporary use                             to provide temporary
of churches as homeless shelters.                                    shelters for the homeless
                                                                     population.
Program 4.1 – 2. Continue to support            N/A                  The City will continue to       Continue program into
local motel voucher programs for                                     work with local non-            next Housing Element.
temporarily displaced and extremely                                  profits and obtain CDBG
low-income persons. The motel voucher                                grant funding for this
program is funded through the City’s                                 program
CDBG funding. Motel vouchers are
available to aid residents experiencing
emergency situations, such as a house
fire, in finding temporary housing. The
City works with non-profit organizations
(such as Loaves and Fishes) to aid the
residents in need and provide technical
support for the motel voucher program.
Final Plan                                                Page V-20                                             January 27, 2015

                                                        City of Atascadero
                                                         Housing Element
            Program Summary                          Quantified               Achievement               Further Progress
                                                      Objective                                              Needed
Program 4.1 – 3.                                  N/A                   The City continues to       Modify to consider
Continue to allow group housing                                         support proper              allowing large
(residential care facilities) in accordance                             permitting of group         residential care facilities
with State law. Additionally, the City                                  housing in accordance       in more zones.
will update the zoning regulations to                                   with State law. The City
clarify that both small (6 or fewer) and                                completed changes to the
large (7 or more) residential care facilities                           RMF Zoning that clarifies
are permitted by right in the Residential                               that both small and large
Multi Family (RMF) zone.                                                residential care facilities
                                                                        are permitted by right.
Program 4.1 – 4. Amend Zoning                     N/A                   Completed in 2013.          City adopted
Ordinance to comply with SB 2,                                                                      Emergency Shelter
permitting emergency shelters without a                                                             Overlay Zone. The
conditional use permit or other                                                                     overlay is applied to one
discretionary permits in the Commercial                                                             site currently operating
Service (CS), Commercial Park (CPK),                                                                as an emergency shelter.
Public (P) zoning districts, or other                                                               The shelter, operated by
appropriate zones or sites. These three                                                             the El Camino
zoning districts have sufficient capacity                                                           Homeless Organization,
to house emergency shelters with over 74                                                            has an existing capacity
acres available                                                                                     of 50 beds. As of 2014,
                                                                                                    there is excess capacity.
                                                                                                    The program will be
                                                                                                    modified to monitor
                                                                                                    capacity of the ECHO
                                                                                                    shelter and expand the
                                                                                                    ES zone allow more
                                                                                                    shelters if need arises.
Policy 4.2- Ensure that persons with disabilities have adequate access to housing.
Program 4.2 – 1. Continue to ensure full          N/A                   City Staff continues to     Continue program into
compliance with the California Disability                               comply with ADA             next Housing Element.
Guidelines and enforce the                                              standards for new and
complementary provisions of the                                         change of occupancy
Uniform Building Code. The Zoning                                       building projects.
Ordinance will be evaluated on an
ongoing basis and amended as necessary,
to ensure ADA compliance and remove
governmental constraints on the
production of housing for persons with
disabilities.
Program 4.2 – 2. Pursuant to the Fair             N/A                   Completed in 2013.          None. Program
Housing Amendments Act of 1988 and                                                                  Complete.
the requirements of Chapter 671, Statues
of 2001 (Senate Bill 520), the City will
establish a policy or ordinance to provide
Final Plan                                                 Page V-21                                            January 27, 2015

                                                         City of Atascadero
                                                          Housing Element
            Program Summary                           Quantified               Achievement               Further Progress
                                                      Objective                                                 Needed
reasonable accommodations (i.e.
modifications or exceptions) in their
zoning laws and other land use
regulations and practices when such
accommodations may be necessary to
afford disabled persons equal access to
housing. The purpose of the reasonable
accommodation ordinance or policy is to
remove constraints to the development,
improvement and maintenance of
housing for persons with disabilities.
The City will promote its reasonable
accommodations procedures on its web
site and with handouts at City Hall.
Policy 4.3- Leverage redevelopment set-aside funds with other State and Federal loans and grants, to assist in providing
affordable housing, preserving existing housing, and rehabilitating unsound housing structures. (This policy assumes that
housing set aside funds are not affected by State budget take aways.)
Program 4.3 – 1.Consider developing a              5 units              This program has been         Remove program, no
first-time homebuyers program to enable                                 suspended due to the          funding or staff to
lower-income households (up to 80                                       dissolution of the RDA.       administer.
percent of AMI) to purchase their first                                 Staff will seek grant
homes. Assistance could be provided in                                  funding available to
the form of a loan secured by a deed of                                 continue this program.
trust.
Program 4.3 – 2.Leverage redevelopment             40 units             This program has been         Remove program.
housing set aside funds and partner with                                suspended due to the
developers on projects funded with                                      dissolution of the RDA.
HOME funds, tax credits, and other                                      This program may be
financial assistance programs for                                       continued once direction
construction of houses affordable to                                    is given by the State on
lower-income households. Financial                                      the future of the City's
assistance to developers could include                                  Housing set aside fund.
payment of impact fees and write down
of land costs.
Program 4.3 – 3. Consider establishing a           75 units             This program has been         Remove Program.
housing rehabilitation program that                                     suspended due to the
provides loans and rebates to income-                                   dissolution of the RDA.
qualified households to correct Health                                  This program may be
and Safety Code violations and make                                     continued once direction
essential repairs and retrofits. The                                    is given by the State on
maximum loan limit could be $20,000                                     the future of the City's
with 0% interest and could be limited to                                Housing set aside fund.
lower-income households (<80 percent
AMI).
Program 4.3 – 4. Continue to use the               N/A                  The City will continue to     Continue program into
Affordable Housing Participation                                        utilize the checklist to      next Housing Element.
Checklist and corresponding ranking                                     evaluate affordable
system to evaluate and prioritize                                       housing projects for any
affordable housing developers and                                       potential future funding
projects in the City.                                                   that may become
Final Plan                                                  Page V-22                                             January 27, 2015

                                                       City of Atascadero
                                                       Housing Element
            Program Summary                        Quantified                  Achievement              Further Progress
                                                    Objective                                                 Needed
                                                                        available.
Program 4.3 – 5. Establish a program to        10 units                 The City created 2 units     Remove program.
assist building owners in converting                                    through this program. At
upper floor residential space in the                                    this time the program has
downtown to deed restricted extremely                                   been suspended due to
low-, very low- and low-income units                                    the dissolution of the
                                                                        RDA.
Program 4.3 – 6. Work with nonprofits          5 units                  RDA funds are no longer      Modify program and
and identify funding to address the                                     available. City Staff will   continue program into
housing needs of extremely low-income                                   work with non-profits for    next Housing Element.
households and totally and permanently                                  any grant funding
disabled persons.                                                       opportunities.
Goal 5: Decrease non-governmental constraints on housing production
Policy 5.1 – Encourage interplay between lending institutions, the real estate and development community, and the City to
better understand and address non-governmental constraints and facilitate production of affordable housing.
Program 5.1 – 1. Continue to facilitate        N/A                      City Staff attend            Continue program into
understanding of the impacts of                                         economic roundtables         next Housing Element.
economic issues, employment, and                                        and other events as
growth on housing needs among                                           continuing education of
financial, real estate, and development                                 these impacts.
professionals in formalized settings, such
as the Economic Round Table.
Program 5.1 – 2. Continue to work with         N/A                      City Staff continues to      Continue program into
development community to identify and                                   work with developers,        next Housing Element.
mitigate any constraints on access to                                   key stakeholders, and
financing for multi-family development.                                 property owners on
The City will conduct regular stakeholder                               overcoming constraints
meetings with members of the                                            in project design to help
development community including                                         facilitate financing.
representatives from local non-profit
housing organizations, developers, and
real estate brokers to solicit feedback.
Policy 5.2 – Help lower development costs where feasible, especially for low- and moderate-income housing units.
Program 5.2 – 1. Continue to monitor and       N/A                      As City staff identifies     Continue program into
evaluate development standards and                                      issues with the municipal    next Housing Element.
advances in housing construction                                        code and advance
methods.                                                                construction methods,
                                                                        the City will amend the
                                                                        code as necessary.
Program 5.2 – 2. Continue to track the         N/A                      The City tracks all          Continue program into
affordability of housing projects and                                   housing projects and         next Housing Element.
progress toward meeting regional                                        provides status updates
housing needs. Reports should be                                        to both the Council and
provided semi-annually to the Planning                                  Planning Commission.
Final Plan                                                 Page V-23                                             January 27, 2015

                                                       City of Atascadero
                                                        Housing Element
            Program Summary                         Quantified                Achievement                 Further Progress
                                                    Objective                                                  Needed
Commission and annually to the City
Council and the California Department of
Housing and Community Development.
Goal 6: Decrease governmental constraints on housing production
Policy 6.1 – Review projects in as timely a manner as possible, while maintaining adequate public involvement and fulfilling the
appropriate requirements of State and local laws.
Program 6.1 –1.Continue to consolidate            N/A                  Staff continues this           Continue program into
all actions relating to a specific project on                          practice for ease of           next Housing Element.
the same Council or Commission agenda                                  tracking.
Program 6.1 – 2. Continue to review minor         N/A                  Staff utilized the DRC to      Revise program to
modifications through an adjustment                                    make determinations that       account for Design
procedure and more substantial changes                                 may necessitate further        Review Committee role
through a conditional use permit.                                      entitlement such as a          in review of residential
                                                                       CUP.                           projects and continue
                                                                                                      into next Housing
                                                                                                      Element.
Program 6.1 – 3. Continue to review and           N/A                  The City created the           Continue program into
revise local review procedures to                                      Design Review                  next Housing Element.
streamline the process                                                 Committee in 2010 to
                                                                       help with project
                                                                       streamlining and review.
                                                                       The DRC has been
                                                                       helpful in working out
                                                                       issues that normally
                                                                       would have been dealt by
                                                                       Planning Commission or
                                                                       simply at a staff level.
Program 6.1 – 4. Continue to maintain             N/A                  Stock plans are available      Continue program into
pre-approved stock development plans                                   for larger projects.           next Housing Element.
to streamline the plan check process.
.
Program 6.1 – 5. Provide pre-application          N/A                  Staff provides pre-            Continue program into
technical assistance to affordable housing                             application and technical      next Housing Element.
providers to determine project feasibility                             assistance to all projects
and address zoning compliance issues in                                when requested.
the most cost-effective and expeditious
manner possible.
Program 6.1 – 6. Provide, when possible,          N/A                  The City's process             Continue program into
developer incentives such as expedited                                 streamlining is already        next Housing Element.
permit processing and fee deferrals for                                expediting projects.
units that are affordable to lower income                              Developers can defer
households. Atascadero will promote                                    development impact fees
these incentives to developers on the                                  until final occupancy.
City’s website
(http://www.atascadero.org) and during
the application process.
Program 6.1 –7. The City shall establish          N/A                  Completed in 2013.             Program Complete.
Final Plan                                                Page V-24                                             January 27, 2015

                                              City of Atascadero
                                              Housing Element
            Program Summary                 Quantified              Achievement          Further Progress
                                            Objective                                         Needed
policies, standards, and procedures that                                             Consider modification
encourage and facilitate the development                                             of standards to allow
of single-room occupancy units (SROs).                                               SROs by right in MFR
                                                                                     zones.
Program 6.1 –8. The City shall review     N/A                City Staff solicited a  Modify program to
impact fees and the capital facility fee                     proposal for completion allow for continued
schedule to reduce fees and barriers to                      of this.                monitoring of fee
housing development, particularly                                                    schedule to mitigate
affordable units. (See also Program 4.3-2                                            constraints to affordable
for the potential use of Redevelopment                                               housing and consider
Agency Set-Aside Funds for fee waivers.)                                             revision to fees based on
                                                                                     unit size to encourage
                                                                                     affordability by design.
                                                                                     Continue program into
                                                                                     next Housing Element.
Final Plan                                       Page V-25                                      January 27, 2015

                                              City of Atascadero
                                              Housing Element
 C. Population and Employment Trends
 1.        Population
The Atascadero population grew 7 percent from 2000 to 2010, for a total of 28,310 persons.
Growth in Atascadero increased at a slower rate than that of San Luis Obispo County and Paso
Robles, which grew 9 percent and 18 percent, respectively, during the same period. The San
Luis Obispo Council of Governments (SLOCOG) estimates the population in Atascadero to
grow to 32,486 by 2040, a 14 percent increase from 2010. See Table V-3 for detailed population
information for Atascadero and surrounding communities.
                                 Table V-3.Trends in Population
                                                 Growth
                          2000                        2010
                        Number            Number               Change
Atascadero                   26,411             28,310                7%
Paso Robles                  24,297             29,793               18%
San Luis Obispo              44,174             45,119                2%
San Luis Obispo
County                      246,681           269,637                 9%
Source: U.S. Census, 2000 and 2010
Age Characteristics
As of 2010, Atascadero had a median age of 41, slightly above the median for San Luis Obispo
County at 39.4. Substantial growth can be seen in the 55-64 and 25-34 age groups from 2000 to
2010, while the population in the 35-44 age group decreased by 37 percent over the same period.
This is similar to trends seen across the state, in which the proportion of individuals over the
age of 50 has increased significantly over the past 10 years, while the age group 35-44 declined.
See Table V-4 for additional information on age trends in Atascadero.
                                        Table V-4.Trends in Population Age
                           2000                             2010
                Number of      Percent of      Number of         Percent of Percent
Age Group        Persons          Total          Persons           Total    Change
< 15                  5,389             20%             4,970          18%        -8%
15-24                 3,562             13%             3,378          12%        -5%
25-34                 2,892             11%             3,805          13%        24%
35-44                 4,713             18%             3,439          12%       -37%
45-54                 4,518             17%             4,682          17%         4%
55-64                 2,293              9%             4,350          15%        47%
65+                   3,044             12%             3,686          13%        17%
Total                26,411           100%             28,310         100%         7%
Source: U.S. Census, 2000 and 2010
Final Plan                                       Page V-26                            January 27, 2015
                                            City of Atascadero
                                            Housing Element
Race and Ethnicity
As of 2010, the population for the City of Atascadero was 86 percent white, down 3 percent
from 89 percent in 2000. The next highest racial category represented in Atascadero is
other/two or more races. Of the total population, 16 percent are Hispanic in origin, an increase
of almost 60 percent between 2000 and 2010. Refer to Table V-5 for detailed figures on race
and ethnicity.
                                  Table V-5.Trends in Race and Ethnicity
                                     2000                           2010
Race/Ethnicity              Number      Percent           Number         Percent
White                         23,451           89%             24,457          86%
Black or African American        623            2%                585           2%
Asian or Pacific Islander        336            1%                685           2%
American Indian                  247            1%                295           1%
Other/Two or More              1,754            7%              2,288           8%
Total                         26,411         100%              28,310         100%
Hispanic (all races)           2,783           11%              4,429          16%
Source: U.S. Census, 2000 and 2010
 2.        Employment
According to SLOCOG (2011), in 2010 there was an estimated 8,400 jobs in Atasacadero, with an
expected increase to 10,900 by 2040. Professional and business services and education services,
health care, and social assistance are the two job sectors with the highest anticipated growth by
2040 (See SLOCOG 2040 Regional Growth Forecast). The major industry and occupation sectors
of Atascadero residents are shown below. Industry employment in Atascadero was spread over
a number of sectors in both 2000 and 2010. From 2000 to 2010 the total number of employed
residents increased 3 percent from 12,456 to 12,828. As of 2010, the Education, Health, and
Social Services industry accounted for the largest share of Atascadero employment, accounting
for 29 percent, a 4 percent increase from 2000. Retail trade is the second largest industry,
offering 12 percent of total jobs, followed closely by Professional, Scientific, Management,
Administrative, and Waste Management services at 10 percent of the jobs, a 35 percent increase
from 2000. Whole Sale Trade had the largest job loss from 2000 to 2010, down 34 percent. See
Table V-6 for additional information on industry trends in Atascadero.
Final Plan                                     Page V-27                              January 27, 2015
                                                 City of Atascadero
                                                  Housing Element
                                                 Table V-6.Industry Trends in Atascadero
                                                           2000                2010
                                                                                               Percent
 Employment Sector                                 Number       Percent Number      Percent    Change
 Educational, health and social services            3,041         25%    3,717        29%        22%
 Retail trade                                       1,502         12%    1,481        12%        -1%
 Professional, scientific, management,
 administrative, and waste management
 services                                            979           8%    1,317        10%        35%
 Construction                                       1,221         10%    1,129        9%         -8%
 Public administration                              1,027          9%    1,089        8%          6%
 Arts, entertainment, recreation,
 accommodation and food services                    1,098          9%     821         6%        -25%
 Manufacturing                                       747           6%     760         6%          2%
 Transportation and warehousing, and utilities       649           5%     691         5%          6%
 Finance, insurance, real estate, and rental and
 leasing                                             598           5%     641         5%          7%
 Other services                                      875           7%     583         5%        -33%
 Wholesale trade                                     408           3%     268         2%        -34%
 Agriculture, forestry, fishing and hunting, and
 mining                                              139           1%     180         1%         29%
 Information                                         172           1%     151         1%        -12%
 Total                                             12,456        100%   12,828       100%         3%
 0BSource: U.S. Census, 2000 and 2006-2010 ACS (5 year estimates)
In 2010, 40 percent of Atascadero residents held managerial/professional jobs, representing a
continuing trend from 2000. Managerial/professional occupations increased 27 percent from
2000 to 2010, growing from 4,015 to 5,105 jobs. Occupations in the sales and office sector also
increased from 3,064 to 3,326 jobs during this period, an increase of 9 percent. Occupations in
services; production, transportation, and material moving occupations; and natural resources,
construction, and maintenance occupations experienced decreases for the period. Table V-7
provides additional information on occupation trends.
Final Plan                                          Page V-28                               January 27, 2015
                                              City of Atascadero
                                              Housing Element
                                             Table V-7.Trends in Occupations
                                               2000                       2010
                                                                                           Percent
Occupations of Residents              Persons         Percent     Persons      Percent     Change
Managerial/Professional                   4,015            33%       5,105         40%          27%
Sales and Office                          3,064            25%       3,326         26%           9%
Services                                  2,428            20%       2,091         16%         -14%
Natural resources, construction, and
maintenance occupations                   1,540            13%       1,308         10%         -15%
Production, transportation, and
material moving occupations               1,237            10%         998           8%        -19%
Total                                    12,284           100%      12,828        100%           4%
Source: U.S. Census, 2000 and 2006-2010 ACS (5 year estimates)
The distribution of class of workers in Atascadero remained similar from 2000 to 2010. As of
2010, the private sector employed 64 percent of Atascadero workers, the government sector
employed 24 percent, 12 percent were self-employed and less than one percent were unpaid
family workers. Refer to Table V-8 for trends in class of worker.
                                                Table V-8.Class of Worker Trends
                                                       2000                     2010
                                                                                                 Percent
Employment Sector                           Number          Percent    Number       Percent      Change
Private wage and salary workers               7,408           60%        8,187         64%        11%
Government workers                            3,190           26%        3,045         24%         -5%
Self-employed workers in own (not
incorporated) business                        1,665           14%        1,566         12%         -6%
Unpaid family workers                          21            <1%          30          <1%         43%
Total                                        12,284          100%       12,828        100%         4%
Source: U.S. Census, 2000 and 2006-2010 ACS (5 year estimates)
Final Plan                                       Page V-29                                     January 27, 2015
                                          City of Atascadero
                                           Housing Element
 D. Housing Characteristics
 1.        Households
Household composition and size are often interrelated and are indicators of the type of housing
appropriate for residents of Atascadero. The majority of householders in Atascadero are 35 to
65 years old. This age group represented 60 percent of householders in Atascadero in 2010.
From 2000 to 2010, the number of householders over the age of 65 increased from 20 to 22
percent, representing the highest percent growth between 2000 and 2010.
The percentage of family households fell slightly from 71 percent in 2000 to 69 percent in 2010,
while the percentage of single person households increased over the same period. The average
household size dropped from 2.62 in 2000 to 2.51 in 2010. There was a 34 percent increase in
household types of the “other” category from 2000 to 2010. See Table V-9 for detailed figures
on household structure in Atascadero
                                          Table V-9. Trends in Households
                                            2000                    2010
                                                                                  Percent
                                    Number        Percent    Number       Percent Change
Avg. Household Size                         2.62                     2.51
Households by Age
Householders < 35 yrs                  1,650           17%      1,953         18%      18%
Householders 35-65 yrs                 5,968           63%      6,465         60%       8%
Householders 65+ yrs                   1,913           20%      2,319         22%      21%
Household Types
Family Households                      6,812           71%      7,404         69%       9%
  Married Couple                       5,286           78%      5,681         77%       7%
  Other Families                       1,526           22%      1,723         23%      13%
Single Persons                         2,094           22%      2,497         23%      19%
Other                                    625            7%        836          8%      34%
Total                                  9,531          100%     10,737        100%      13%
Source: U.S. Census, 2000 and 2010
Household Income
According to the U.S. Census, the median household income in Atascadero increased 34 percent
from $48,725 in 2000 to $65,479 in 2010. The largest increases were in the $75,000 to $99,999 and
$100,000 or more income brackets, with the latter increasing over 100 percent for the period.
The $10,000 to $14,999 income category also grew, while the remaining income brackets
decreased, with the less than $10,000 income category experiencing the largest decrease. Refer
to Table V-10 for trends in Atascadero household income groups.
Final Plan                                   Page V-30                                January 27, 2015

                                              City of Atascadero
                                              Housing Element
                                   Table V-10.          Trends in Household Income Groups
                                               2000                        2010
                                                                                         Percent
Income Group                         Households        Percent   Households      Percent Change
Less than $10,000                        619              7%          355          3%     -43%
$10,000 to $14,999                       480              5%          556          5%      16%
$15,000 to $24,999                      1,066            11%          817          8%     -23%
$25,000 to $34,999                      1,175            12%          957          9%     -19%
$35,000 to $49,999                      1,560            17%         1,409         13%    -10%
$50,000 to $74,999                      2,407            25%         2,070         20%    -14%
$75,000 to $99,999                      1,147            12%         1,533         15%     34%
$100,000 or more                        1,044            11%         2,756         26%    164%
Total Households                        9,498           100%        10,453        100%     10%
Median household income                $48,725                     $65,479                 34%
Source: U.S. Census, 2000 and 2010
Tenure and Vacancy
Housing tenure refers to the occupancy of a housing unit – whether the unit is owner-occupied
or renter-occupied. Housing tenure is influenced by demographic factors (e.g., household
income, composition, and age of the householder) as well as the cost of housing. As of 2010, 7
percent of Atascadero’s housing units were vacant. This is 4 percent higher than 2000, when the
vacancy rate was 3 percent. It is generally accepted that a vacancy rate of 5 to 6 percent is
healthy, thus Atascadero’s higher vacancy may be an indicator of economic problems associated
with the recession. Indicators of a strengthening housing market are seen with the increasing
home price and value, as discussed under housing affordability, in section 5 below.
Among occupied units, the percentage of owner-occupied homes decreased from 66 percent in
2000 to 59 percent in 2010. See Table V-11 for detailed figures on housing tenure.
                                   Table V-11.          Trends in Housing Tenure
                                                2000                        2010
Tenure                                 Number          Percent    Number         Percent
Occupied Units                              9,531           97%        10,737        93%
  Owner                                     6,249           66%         6,827        59%
  Renter                                    3,282           34%         3,910        34%
Vacant Units                                  317             3%          768         7%
Total                                       9,848          100%        11,505       100%
Source: U.S. Census, 2000 and 2010
Final Plan                                       Page V-31                                January 27, 2015

                                             City of Atascadero
                                             Housing Element
 2.        Housing Units
Housing Type and Age
The majority of Atascadero homes are single-family detached. The variety of housing types has
remained similar over the period from 2000 to 2010, with growth in single-family homes
detached and slight decline in single-family homes attached. Slight increases can be seen in
multi-family units and mobile homes with a complete loss of other housing types. Table V-12
shows trends in housing units by type.
                              Table V-12.         Trends in Housing
                                                  Type
                                 2000                       2010
Housing Type              Units      Percent        Units        Percent
Single-Family Detached      6,797        69%          8,068           72%
Single-Family Attached        441         4%            427            4%
Multiple-Family 2-4
Units                         862         9%          1,030            9%
Multiple-Family 5+
Units                       1,200        12%          1,241           11%
Mobile Homes                  507         5%            517            5%
Other (e.g., R.V Park)         44        <1%               0           0%
Total Units                 9,851       100%         11,283          100%
Source: U.S. Census, 2000 and 2010
According to the U.S. Census, 49 percent of Atascadero’s housing stock was built after 1980.
Housing construction slowed from 1990 to 2010. There were 2,876 units constructed during this
period, down from 2,782 in the 1970s, but slightly higher than the 2,647 housing units
constructed in the 1980s. See Table V-13 for a breakdown of Atascadero housing units by year
constructed.
                                Table V-13.         Housing Units by
                                                    Age
Year Built                                Units                 Percent
Built 2005 or later                         506                    4%
Built 2000 to 2004                          967                    9%
Built 1990 to 1999                        1,403                   12%
Built 1980 to 1989                        2,647                   23%
Built 1970 to 1979                        2,782                   25%
Built 1960 to 1969                        1,048                    9%
Built 1950 to 1959                          911                    8%
Built 1940 to 1949                          548                    5%
Built 1939 or earlier                       471                    4%
Total                                     11,283                 100%
Final Plan                                      Page V-32                         January 27, 2015

                                           City of Atascadero
                                            Housing Element
Source: U.S. Census, 2010
 3.        Housing Conditions
City staff conducted a visual housing conditions survey in June 2009. To complete the survey,
the City randomly selected and evaluated 200 properties and found that all but three were
structurally sound. Utilizing the same methodology, Staff re-reviewed the same 200 properties
from the 2009 survey. A total of two properties were found not to be structurally sound, yet
required only minor repairs. The survey was conducted through a windshield assessment that
rated the physical condition of a unit in one of the following categories:
                     -   Foundation,
                     -   Roofing,
                     -   Siding/Stucco,
                     -   Windows, and;
                     -   Electrical.
 4.        Housing Costs
Median Home Price
According to the real estate website, Trulia.com, the median home sales price in Atascadero
between January and April, 2014, was $365,000. Historical home price data from Central Coast
Lending shows that home sales prices have remained relatively steady since 2013, when median
price in April 2013 was $368,000, a 16.9 percent increase from 2012. Overall, the housing market
is recovering from the overall price floor in 2011, of $302,500, a 41.8 percent drop from peak
prices in 2005 ($520,000). See Figure V-1 for a comparison of median home prices in Atascadero
and San Luis Obispo County from 2003 to 2012.
               Figure V-1.      Median Home Price, 2003-2013 Atascadero and SLO County
Final Plan                                    Page V-33                                 January 27, 2015
                                           City of Atascadero
                                           Housing Element
Median Rent
According to the 2010-2012 U.S. Census ACS 3-year estimates, the median rent in Atascadero
was $1,109 per month. More than half of all renters in Atascadero are cost burdened. See Table
15 for more information on renter cost burden.
Low and Extremely Low-Income Housing Needs
Lower income households (earning 80 percent or less of the area’s median household income)
generally have higher incidence of housing problems and overpayment (paying 30 percent or
more of income for housing costs). Table V-14 shows what percentages of low, very-low, and
extremely low-income (ELI) households in Atascadero have housing problems, as well as those
overpaying for housing.
Extremely low-income households earn 30 percent or less of median household income. Of the
10,737 households in the City, 960 households (620 renters and 340 owners) have household
incomes less than 30 percent of median income (about 8.9 percent of total households). As Table
V-14 illustrates, these households have a high percentage of housing problems, with the
majority (80 percent) cost burdened, and between 60 and 70 percent extremely cost burdened
(greater than 50 percent of household income on housing costs). Very-low income households
are similarly cost burdened, with over 90 percent of very-low income renters spending greater
than 30 percent of household income on housing costs. Tables V-15 and V-16 discuss the
overpayment in Atascadero by tenure.
The current RHNA estimates the City of Atascadero will need to accommodate 98 very-low
income housing units between 2014 and 2019. Based on the State law methodology, the City
estimates that 50 percent of very-low-income households are extremely low-income (ELI)
households. Therefore, it is projected that the City will need to accommodate 49 ELI
households.
                               Table V-14.     Housing Problems for All Lower Income
                                                          Households
                                           Renters            Owners    Total Households
Housing Income <= 30 Percent MFI
(Extremely Low Income)                       620                340            960
% With any Housing Problems                86.29%             79.41%         83.85%
% With Housing Cost Burden > 30%           83.87%             80.88%         82.81%
% With Housing Cost Burden > 50%           70.16%             60.29%         66.67%
Household Income >30% to <= 50% MFI
(Very Low Income)                            645                420           1,065
% With any housing problems                82.95%             83.33%         88.26%
% With Housing cost burden > 30%           91.47%             83.33%         88.26%
Household income > 50 to <= 80% MFI
(Low Income)                                 820                670           1,490
% With any housing problems                65.24%             52.24%         59.40%
% With Housing cost burden > 30%           64.02%             52.99%         58.39%
Source: CHAS Databook, 2014
Overpayment
Final Plan                                    Page V-34                               January 27, 2015

                                               City of Atascadero
                                               Housing Element
According to federal government standards, paying over 30 percent of income for housing costs
is considered to be cost-burdened, and spending more than 50 percent of household income is
extremely cost burdened. In Atascadero, overpayment is particularly problematic for renters.
An estimated 8.4 percent of renters pay between 30 and 34.9 percent of household income on
rent and 47 percent of renters pay more than 35 percent of household income on rent. See Table
V-15.
                                Table V-15.            Gross Rent as a
                                        Percent of Income 2012
           Unit Type                 Total                   Percent
Gross Rent                                        $1,109
Less than 15 %                        417            n/a      10.4%
15% to 19.9%                          489                     12.2%
20% to 24.9 %                         446                     11.1%
25% to 29.9%                          438                     10.9%
30% to 34.9 %                         338                      8.4%
More than 35%                        1,888                    47.0%
Overall                              4,106                     100%
Source: U.S. Census, ACS 2010- 2012 (3-year estimates)
Among homeowners, 48.4 percent of owners with a mortgage and 12.1 percent of owners
without a mortgage were overpaying for housing. See Tables V-16 for monthly housing costs a
percentage of household income for homeowners.
                               Table V-16.           Monthly Owner Costs as a
                                        Percentage of Household Income
                              With a Mortgage                 Without a Mortgage
 Number of
 Households                Total         Percent             Total         Percent
 Less than 20 %            1,472          27.7%              1,160          75.8%
 20 % to 24.9 %             669           12.6%               126            8.2%
 25 % to 29.9 %             609           11.4%               59             3.9%
 30 % to 34.9 %             620           11.7%               62             4.0%
 More than 35 %            1,951          36.7%               124            8.1%
 Total                     5,321           100%              1,531          100%
 Source: U.S. Census, ACS 2010-2012 (3 year estimates)
 5.        Housing Affordability
Final Plan                                        Page V-35                        January 27, 2015
                                            City of Atascadero
                                            Housing Element
Housing affordability in Atascadero can be inferred by comparing the cost of renting or owning
a home with the income levels of households of different sizes. Table V-17 shows the annual
income ranges for extremely low-, very low-, low-, and moderate-income households. Table
V-18 shows the maximum affordable monthly rental payment based on the standard of 30
percent (as defined by HUD) of household income going towards housing costs. The table also
displays the maximum affordable home sale or rental price based on income category and unit
size.
Homes priced at the 2014 median sales prices of $365,000 for Atascadero are affordable only to
households in the upper end of the moderate-income range. Thus home ownership is out of
range for many moderate and all low-, very low- and extremely low-income households.
Average rents are affordable for moderate income households but are unaffordable without
overpayment or overcrowding for households earning at the extremely low-, very low-, and
low-income levels.
                               Table V-17.           San Luis Obispo County Income
                                                              Limits
Persons in Family        Extremely Low          Very Low             Low            Moderate
One                               $15,850            $26,400           $42,250         $64,700
Two                               $18,100            $30,200           $48,250         $73,900
Three                             $20,350            $33,950           $54,300         $83,150
Four                              $22,600            $37,700           $60,300         $92,400
127BSource: HCD, 2014
                            Table V-18.           San Luis Obispo County Maximum Sales and Rental
                                                                      Prices
                         HCD Income Limits              Monthly Housing Costs        Maximum Affordable Price
                                     Affordable                      Taxes & Ins.
                      Max Annual        Total                             (for
                       Income         Payment           Utilities     ownership)        Own              Rent
     Income Group
     Very Low
     One Person           $26,400         $660                  $75            $184      $66,950           $585
     Two Person           $30,200         $755                 $100            $205      $75,079           $655
     Three Person         $33,950         $849                 $125            $226      $83,066           $724
     Four Person          $37,700         $943                 $150            $247      $91,051           $793
     Low
     One Person           $42,250        $1,056                 $75            $310     $111,905           $981
     Two Person           $48,250        $1,206                $100            $349     $126,270          $1,106
     Three Person         $54,300        $1,358                $125            $388     $140,783          $1,233
     Four Person          $60,300        $1,508                $150            $427     $155,156          $1,358
     Moderate
     One Person           $64,700        $1,618                 $75            $489     $175,692          $1,543
     Two Person           $73,900        $1,848                $100            $553     $199,169          $1,748
     Three Person         $83,150        $2,079                $125            $618     $222,796          $1,954
     Four Person          $92,400        $2,310                $150            $683     $246,419          $2,160
     Notes:
Final Plan                                     Page V-36                                      January 27, 2015
                                                      City of Atascadero
                                                      Housing Element
 1. Utility costs assumed at $75 per month for one person households and an additional $25 for each additional person.
 2. Taxes and insurance include property taxes, private mortgage insurance, and homeowners insurance.
 3. Total affordable mortgage based on an annual six percent interest rate, 30-year mortgage, and monthly payment equal
 to 30 percent of income (after utilities, taxes, and insurance). Even though interest rates are at historic lows (four to five
 percent) for a 30-year conventional mortgage, six percent was used as a more conservative estimate over time.
 4. Monthly affordable rent based on 30 percent of income less estimated utilities costs.
 Source: HCD Income Limits 2014, Lisa Wise Consulting, Inc., 2014
 6.        At-Risk Units
State law requires that Housing Elements include an inventory and analysis of assisted multi-
family housing units “at risk” of conversion to market-rate housing. The inventory must
account for all units for which subsidies expire within the planning period for the Housing
Element update. The potential loss of existing affordable housing units is an important issue to
the City due to potential displacement of lower-income tenants and the limited alternative
housing options available for such persons. It is typically less expensive to preserve the
affordability of existing units than to subsidize construction of new affordable units due to the
rising cost of land and construction.
In Atascadero, there are no units currently at risk of converting from affordable to market rate.
In 2011, the new owner of California Manor, a 95-unit, multi-family rental property formerly at
risk of converting from affordable units to market rate was awarded 9 percent State Low-
Income Tax Credit financing for acquisition and rehabilitation to maintain the unit affordability.
Currently, the tax credits have been awarded, but the owners have not submitted
documentation signifying the completion of rehabilitation. As part of the purchase agreement
for financing of the transfer of ownership, the owner agreed to maintain the affordability of the
units for an additional 30 years. Renovations will include the installation of a new roof, ADA
accessibility upgrades, concrete siding, energy-efficient appliances, carpet, linoleum, cabinets,
countertops, HVAC, and lighting.
Final Plan                                               Page V-37                                          January 27, 2015

                                                                   City of Atascadero
                                                                   Housing Element
 E. Special Housing Needs
Certain members of the population encounter unique difficulties in finding appropriate housing
due to special circumstances. Special circumstances may be related to one’s employment type
and income, family characteristics, medical condition or disability, and/or household
characteristics. Table V-19 lists special needs populations. This section discusses the housing
needs for each group and identifies the major programs available to address their housing and
services needs.
                                        Table V-19.         Special Needs Populations, 2000 and 2010
                                                                   133B2000                                         2010
  131BSpecial Needs Group                      136BNumber                   137BPercent        134BNumber                 135BPercent
  13Senior Households                                  141B1,935                    142B 20%                 2,319                140B19%
                                1
  143BPersons with Disabilities                        146B4,437                    147B 19%                 3,092                  14 12%
  148BSingle-Parent Households                         151B1,565                    152B 23%            149B1,723                  15016%
  153BLarge Households                                       156B941                157B 10%                  154B940                   155B9%
  158BResidents Employed in Farming                          161B139                162B<1%                   159B180                   160B1%
  163BHomeless                                                    184                    11%                       96                 <1%
  Note:
  1. Civilian non-institutionalized population ages 5 and above.
  Source: U.S. Census, 2000and 2010and EOC 2009, Homeless Services Oversight Council, 2013
 1.           Senior Households
Senior households are included in those with special housing needs due to the likelihood of
limited income, physical disabilities, or higher health care costs.
As illustrated in Table V-20, 2,319 Atascadero households (22 percent) were headed by seniors
(persons age 65 years and older) in 2010. The number of seniors is expected to continue to grow
as the percentage of residents in the 55 to 64 year age range increased by21 percent in the period
from 2000 to 2010. In Atascadero, about 64 percent of senior householders were homeowners in
2010.
                                         Table V-20.                             Senior Households, 2010
                                     Owner                                 Renter                             Total
Householder by Age             Number     Percent                 Number           Percent     Number                Percent
Total 65 and over                 1,820       27%                         499              13%       2,319               22%
       65 to 74 years             1,011       15%                         226               6%       1,237               12%
       75 to 84 years               589             9%                    144               4%         733                7%
       85 years & over              220             3%                    129               3%         349                3%
Total 64 and under                5,007       73%                       3,411              87%       8,418               78%
Total (all ages)                  6,827      100%                       3,910             100%      10,737             100%
Source: U.S. Census, 2010
Final Plan                                                              Page V-38                                                              January 27, 2015

                                             City of Atascadero
                                              Housing Element
According to the 2006-2010 ACS, approximately 53 percent of senior households earn less than
$50,000 annually, with 28 percent earning less than $30,000 per year. This is less than 50 percent
of the median household income for the City of Atascadero, $65,479 (Table V-21). The same
report estimates 5.1 percent of senior households are living below the poverty line.
                                Table V-21.  Households by Income
                                             Level, 2006-2010
Income Level                              Percent of Elderly Household
Under $30,000                                        28.1%
$30,000 to $49,999                                   24.8%
$50,000 to $74,999                                   19.5%
$75,000 to $99,999                                    8.0%
More than $100,000                                   19.7%
Total                                                 100%
Source: U.S. Census 2006-2010 ACS
As stated above, seniors typically have special needs due to disabilities, health care needs, and
fixed incomes. Seniors may also require assistance with domestic chores and activities such as
driving, cooking, cleaning, showering, or climbing stairs. For elderly people who live alone or
don’t have relatives to care for them, the need for assistance may not be met.
The special needs of seniors can by met through congregate care, rent subsidies, shared
housing, and housing rehabilitation assistance. For the frail or disabled elderly, housing with
architectural design features that accommodate disabilities can help extend the ability to live
independently. In addition, seniors with mobility/ self-care limitations benefit from
transportation options. As of 2014, there are twelve residential and group care facilities offering
171 units in Atascadero. The facilities offer a range in level of assistance and community
structure. Refer to Table V-22 for a detailed list of senior housing facilities.
In meeting the needs of the increasing elderly population, the following factors must be
considered:
            Limited remaining sites suitably zoned for senior housing;
            Decreasing State and Federal funding to provide additional housing for seniors; and
            Physical and/or other restrictions that may limit seniors’ ability to maintain their
             own health and the condition of their home.
Final Plan                                      Page V-39                                January 27, 2015

                                                City of Atascadero
                                                Housing Element
                                   Table V-22.          Senior Housing Facilities, 2014
Facility                               Capacity       Location
A Touch Above Care, Inc                     6         5800 Llano Road
A Touch Above Care, Sycamore                6         7150 Sycamore Road
Atascadero Christian Home                   64        8455 Santa Rosa Road
C.A.L.L. – Carmelita House                  6         2660 Ferrocarril
Country Living Senior Home                  8         4930 Sycamore Road
Garden View Inn                             15        7105 San Gabriel Road
Horizon Hills Retirement Home               6         10775 San Marcos Road
Ingleside Assisted Living                   16        10630 West Front Road
Ingleside By the Lake                       6         9375 Mountain View Drive
Paradise Valley Care                        15        9525 Gallina Court
Paradise Valley Care at the Lake, Inc       11        9220 Mountain View Drive
Park Place                                  12        9435 El Bordo Avenue
Total                                      171
Source: CA Department of Social Services, 2014
 7.        Persons with Disabilities
Persons with disabilities have special housing needs because of employment and income
challenges, the need for accessible and appropriate housing, and higher health care costs. A
disability is defined broadly by the U.S. Census Bureau as a physical, mental, or emotional
condition that lasts over a long period of time and makes it difficult to live independently. The
U.S. Census collects data for several categories of disability. These categories are defined below:
     General disabilities:
            Sensory disability: Blindness, deafness, or a severe vision or hearing impairment.
              Physical disability: A condition that substantially limits one or more basic physical
               activities such as walking, climbing stairs, reaching, lifting, or carrying.
     Disabilities lasting six months or more:
      Mental disability: Difficulty learning, remembering, or concentrating.
          Self-care disability: Difficulty dressing, bathing, or getting around inside the home.
          Independent- living disability: Difficulty going outside the home alone to shop or visit a
           doctor’s office.
In 2010, there were 2,053 non-institutionalized persons in Atascadero living with a disability
(Table V-23). Approximately 50 percent of all persons with disabilities are over the age of 65,
and thus face additional housing needs, as described in the previous section.
Final Plan                                         Page V-40                                January 27, 2015

                                                City of Atascadero
                                                Housing Element
                                      Table V-23.        Persons with
                                            Disabilities by Type
Total disabilities for people 5 to 64 years         2,053             66%
Sensory disability                                     523            17%
Physical disability                                 1,091             35%
Mental disability                                      897            29%
Self-care disability                                   592            19%
Independent-living disability                          932            30%
Total disabilities for people 65 years and
over                                                1,039             34%
Sensory disability                                     932            30%
Physical disability                                    440            14%
Mental disability                                      203             7%
Self-care disability                                   120             4%
Independent-living disability                          373            12%
Total disabilities for all ages                     3,092           100%
Source: 2008-2010 ACS (3-year estimates)
Persons with Developmental Disabilities
According to Section 4512 of the Welfare and Institutions Code a “developmental disability”
means a disability that originates before an individual attains age 18 years, continues, or can be
expected to continue indefinitely, and constitutes a substantial disability for that individual,
which includes mental retardation, cerebral palsy, epilepsy, and autism. This term shall also
include disabling conditions found to be closely related to mental retardation or to require
treatment similar to that required for individuals with mental retardation, but shall not include
other handicapping conditions that are solely physical in nature.
Many persons with developmental disabilities can live and work independently within a
conventional housing environment. Individuals with more severe developmental disabilities
require a group living environment where supervision is provided. The most severely affected
individuals may require an institutional environment where medical attention and physical
therapy are provided. Because developmental disabilities exist before adulthood, the first issue
in supportive housing for the persons with developmental disabilities is transition from the
person’s living situation as a child to an appropriate level of independence as an adult.
The State Department of Developmental Services (DDS) currently provides community-based
services to approximately 243,000 persons with developmental disabilities and their families
through a statewide system of 21 regional centers, four developmental centers, and two
community-based facilities. The Tri-Counties Regional Center (TCRC) is one of 21 regional
centers in the State of California that provides point of entry to services for people with
developmental disabilities who reside in Ventura, Santa Barbara, and San Luis Obispo
Counties. TCRC is a private, non-profit community agency that contracts with local businesses
to offer a wide range of services to individuals with developmental disabilities and their
families.
Final Plan                                         Page V-41                            January 27, 2015

                                                City of Atascadero
                                                 Housing Element
As of 2014, TCRC served approximately 11,500 people in their three-county area, with 280 staff
members. Table V-24 shows the number of individuals served by TCRC in the 93422 zip code,
which includes the City of Atascadero. (Note: The boundary of this zip code extends beyond the
borders of Atascadero city limits.)
There are a number of housing types appropriate for people living with a development
disability: rent subsidized homes, licensed and unlicensed single-family homes, inclusionary
housing, Section 8 vouchers, special programs for home purchase, HUD housing, and SB 962
homes. The design of housing-accessibility modifications, proximity to services and transit, and
availability of group living opportunities represent the types of considerations important in
serving this need group. Incorporating ‘barrier-free’ design in all, new multifamily housing (as
required by California and Federal Fair Housing laws) is especially important to provide the
widest range of choices for disabled residents. Special consideration should also be given to
affordability of housing, as people with disabilities may be living on a fixed income.
                                  Table V-24.           Number of Persons with Developmental
                                                              Disabilities, 2014
                0-14      15-22       23-54 years           55-65 years         65+
               years      Years                                                years           Total
93422           118         43            101                    29              21             312
Source: Tri-County Regional Center, 2014
 8.        Large Families and Overcrowding
A household of five or more persons is considered to be a large family. In 2010, nine percent of
Atascadero households had five or more persons. Large households may experience difficulty
in finding suitable units, particularly renter-occupied households, which are much less likely to
find three or more bedroom units. See Table V-25 for household size by tenure for Atascadero.
                                      Table V-25.           Household Size by Tenure in
                                                               Atascadero
                                             1-4 Persons           5+ Persons            Total
Owner Occupied                               6,243 (58%)            584 (5%)         6,827 (64%)
Renter Occupied                              3,554 (33%)            356 (3%)         3,910 (36%)
Total                                        9,797 (91%)            940 (9%)            10,737
Source: U.S. Census, 2010
Overcrowding is defined as more than one person per room not including kitchens and
bathrooms. Overcrowding can occur when housing costs are high relative to income where
families must double up or reside in smaller units, which tend to be more affordable, to devote
income to other basic living needs. This is often a problem for large families but can also occur
Final Plan                                         Page V-42                                      January 27, 2015

                                           City of Atascadero
                                           Housing Element
in smaller households when income is too low to afford adequate housing. Overcrowding also
tends to result in accelerated deterioration of homes, a shortage of off-street parking, increased
strain on public infrastructure, and additional traffic congestion. As illustrated in Table V-26,
in 2010, 0.9 percent of owner-occupied households in Atascadero were overcrowded and 6.3
percent of renter-occupied households were overcrowded, of these less than one percent was
extremely overcrowded.
                                  Table V-26.          Overcrowded Households in
                                                      Atascadero, 2010
Owner Occupied                                 6,970 units                 Percent
0.50 or less occupants per room                    5,260                     75%
0.51 to 1.00 occupants per room                    1,648                     24%
1.01 to 1.50 occupants per room                     62                        1%
1.51 to 2.00 occupants per room                      0                        0%
2.01 or more occupants per room                      0                        0%
Percent Overcrowded by Tenure               62 (0.9%) total overcrowded owner-occupied units
Renter Occupied                                3,483 units                 Percent
0.50 or less occupants per room                    1,893                     54%
0.51 to 1.00 occupants per room                    1,370                     39%
1.01 to 1.50 occupants per room                     206                       6%
1.51 to 2.00 occupants per room                      0                        0%
2.01 or more occupants per room                     14                       <1%
Percent Overcrowded by Tenure               220 (6.3%) total overcrowded renter-occupied units
Total                                                             10,453
3 Source: U.S. Census, 2006-2010 ACS (5-year estimates)
   9.      Single-Parent Households
As of 2010, sixteen percent (1,723) of Atascadero households were single-parent families, 69
percent (1,185) of which are headed by women with no husband present. Housing problems for
this group can be significant. Any household with only one person able to earn wages is at a
significant disadvantage in the housing market and single parents may have to take more time
off from work to care for their children. Single-parent households are at a higher risk of
becoming homeless because of lower incomes and the lack of affordable housing and support
services. Planning for housing development to serve single-parent families may require on-site
child-care facilities. Housing needs of single-parent households is an important issue in
Atascadero.
Final Plan                                    Page V-43                                        January 27, 2015
                                                  City of Atascadero
                                                   Housing Element
                                                Table V-27.            Single Parent Households, 2010
                                              Owner-occupied housing            Renter-occupied housing
                                                          units                          units                     Total
                                             Total             Percent         Total         Percent
  Family households [1]                              5,172               75.8        2,232             57.1            7,404
        Female householder,
        no husband present                              484                7.1         701             17.9            1,185
        Male householder,
        no wife present                                 236                3.5         302              7.7              538
  Single Parent Households                              720              10.6         1003             25.6            1,723
  Nonfamily households [2]                           1,655               24.2        1,678             42.9            3,333
        Male householder                                726              10.6          787             20.1            1,513
        Female householder                              929              13.6          891             22.8            1,820
  Total Households                                   6,827                100        3,910              100           10,737
  Source: U.S. Census, 2010
 Female Head of Households
 According to the U.S. Census, Atascadero had 3,005 female head of households in 2010. Female
 householders made up 37 percent of all householders in Atascadero in 2010. Female-headed
 households have unique housing needs due to a single source of income and greater cost
 burden. More female-headed households live below the poverty line than other family type,
 which emphasizes their need for affordable housing. The U.S. Census estimates 17.2 percent of
 single parent female-headed households in Atascadero are living below the poverty line, 11
 percent higher than family households.
                                    Table V-28.         Female Headed
                                             Households, 2010
                                                              2010
                                                    Number          Percent
 Female Family Householder, no husband
 present                                                  1,185           20%
            With children under 18 years                    778           65.7
 Female Non-Family Householder                            1,820           17%
 Total Female Householders                                3,005           37%
 Family Households Below Poverty Level                                   6.1%
 Female Households Below Poverty Level                                 17.2%
            With Children under 18 years                               18.7%
 Total Households                                        10,737         100%
 Source: U.S. Census, 2010
10.         Persons in Need of Emergency Shelter
 Final Plan                                          Page V-44                                       January 27, 2015
                                            City of Atascadero
                                            Housing Element
 State housing element law requires the analysis of the special housing requirements of persons
 and families in need of emergency shelter and identification of adequate sites that will be made
 available with appropriate zoning and development standards, and with public services and
 facilities needed to facilitate the development of emergency shelters and transitional housing.
 According to the 2000 U.S. Census, there were approximately 184 homeless persons in
 Atascadero. More recently, initial data from the January 2013 San Luis Obispo County
 Homeless Enumeration Report Point in Time Survey estimates a homeless population of 2,186
 in San Luis Obispo County. This represents a 3 percent increase in the homeless population in
 San Luis Obispo County from 2011. Based on this count, the Homeless Services Oversight
 Council (HSOC) estimates 3,497 persons will be without shelter at some point during the year.
 Of those surveyed in the County, 571 were chronically homeless, 71 percent lived in San Luis
 Obispo County before becoming homeless, 82 percent were unsheltered, 49 percent indicated
 having some mental illness, 12 percent were minors, and 9 percent were between 18 and 24
 years old. Note: Consistent with HUD definition of homeless, the HSOC did not include
 families living doubled up with other families or those living in RV or trailer parks in the count
 of homeless.
 There were 466 homeless identified in (21 percent) located in North County, including 96 in the
 City of Atascadero. The majority of homeless in North County were living on the streets, with
 16 percent in an emergency or transitional shelter.
 Atascadero participates in local efforts to assist the homeless and those in need of temporary
 shelter. Atascadero amended its Zoning Ordinance to allow for an Emergency Shelter Overlay
 Zone. This Zone provides an area where an emergency shelters may be permitted without a
 Conditional Use Permit in compliance with Senate Bill 2. Currently, one site is zoned and
 operating under the Emergency Shelter Overlay Zone (APN 030-341-013) with a maximum
 capacity of 50 beds. Prior to the Zoning amendment to permit emergency shelters at this site,
 the emergency shelter was ‘at risk’ of permanent closure. To ensure the new ordinance was not
 overly restrictive, the City worked closely with El Camino Housing Organization (ECHO), a
 non-profit organization that addresses homelessness issues and operates this facility.
11.         Farmworkers
 The number of farmworkers in Atascadero is difficult to quantify as U.S. Census data frequently
 underestimates this population. However, according to 2010 U.S. Census data, 180 members of
 the Atascadero population were employed in agriculture, forestry, fishing and hunting, and
 mining. This represents approximately one percent of the total population. From 2000 to 2010,
 the number of residents working under this Census category increased about 3 percent.
 The City has approximately 43.82 acres of designated “agriculture”, comprising of 5 separate
 parcels currently under one owner. These parcels are being utilized as a Christmas tree farm to
 grow and sell seasonal Christmas trees. Atascadero Municipal Code section 9-3.122 (o) allows
 for “farm labor quarters” as a permitted use, where no Conditional Use Permit (CUP) is
 required, in all Agriculture zones. Agriculture uses are conditionally allowed in the RS zone for
 Final Plan                                    Page V-45                               January 27, 2015

                                           City of Atascadero
                                           Housing Element
uses such as crop production and grazing. This category is defined as “Agricultural uses
including the production of grains, field crops, vegetables, melons, fruits, tree nuts, flower fields
and seed production, tree and sod farms, crop services and crop harvesting. Also includes the
raising or feeding of beef cattle, sheep and goats by grazing or pasturing.” This type of use may
require farm labor quarters and may be included as a part of a CUP. Program 4.1.6 has been
included to ensure the City complies with the Employee Housing Act, and permits farmworker
housing for six or fewer employees as a single family residential use and for up to 12 units, or
36 beds, as an agricultural use subject to same level of review as other agricultural uses in the
same zone.
While there are very few agricultural parcels in the city, Atascadero is surrounded by land
devoted to agricultural uses, including vineyards. It is likely that farmworkers may be housed
on-site at agricultural operations outside Atascadero. Because of the limited need for
farmworker housing, the City’s current method of permitting Farmworker housing and the
overall approach to affordable housing meets existing need.
Final Plan                                    Page V-46                                  January 27, 2015

                                           City of Atascadero
                                            Housing Element
 F. Housing Resources
As part of housing element law, the State has adopted a process for determining each local
jurisdiction’s fair share of regional housing needs. The process begins with the State
Department of Housing and Community Development (HCD) meeting with each regional
council of governments to determine the need for new housing in that region. The regional
council of governments is then required to determine the share of the housing need that should
be assigned to each city and county in the region. The allocation includes a share of housing
needs for all income levels (California Health and Safety Code Section 50079.5): very low
income (less than 50 percent of the area median income); low income (50-80 percent of median
income); moderate income (80-120 percent of median income); and above moderate income
(more than 120 percent of median income).
 1.        Regional Housing Needs Allocation
SLOCOG and HCD determined that the County has a need for 4,090 new housing units during
the period from January 1, 2014 to June 30, 2019. SLOCOG allocated shares of this need to cities
by calculating each city’s share of the projected increase in the number of jobs and households
during that period. This is called the regional housing needs allocation (RHNA).
Cities are not expected to actually produce this number of units; it is assumed that housing
production will be carried out primarily by the private sector and will be affected by market
conditions and other factors beyond a city’s control. However, the City must create conditions
through zoning and land use policies that would allow the private sector to construct the
targeted number of units. Cities can employ a variety of strategies to meet their RHNA housing
production goals, as provided in Government Code Section 65583(c)(1)).
2014 – 2019 Regional Housing Needs Allocation
The 2014 -2019 Regional Housing Needs Allocation (RHNA) for Atascadero is shown in Table
V-29. The number of new units approved or constructed since the start of the projection period,
starting January 2014, can reduce the Regional Housing Needs Allocation. Since January 2014,
there have been 81 units constructed or approved in the City of Atascadero, including 30 units
affordable to moderate income households. See Section B. for a discussion on units constructed
or permitted during the previous cycle, including 24 very-low and low-income units in 2013 as
part of the People’s Self-Help Housing (PSHH) project in Oak Grove.
Final Plan                                    Page V-47                              January 27, 2015

                                                    City of Atascadero
                                                     Housing Element
Table V-29 shows that the City has a remaining State allocation of 312 units, 160 for very-low
and low-income housing, after accounting for the 81 units constructed or approved..
                                    Table V-29.             City Share of Regional Housing
                                                             Need, 2014-2019
                                        Very Low       Low           Moderate     Above Moderate     Total
2014 - 2019 RHNA                        98             62            69           164                393
                                1
Units Constructed/Approved              0              0             30           51                 81
2014-2019 Subtotal RHNA                 98             62            39           113                312
Notes:
1. Affordability determined by deed restriction or based on sales price of home Source: CA Dept. of Housing
and Community Development, SLOCOG, 2013, City of Atascadero, 2014
 2.        Site Inventory and Analysis
Local governments can employ a variety of development strategies to meet their RHNA
housing production goals, as provided in Government Code Section 65583(c)(1)). In addition to
identifying vacant or underutilized land resources, local governments can address a portion of
their adequate sites requirement through the provision of second units. This section
summarizes the vacant land inventory, underutilized sites, and second unit potential.
Vacant Sites
Table V-30 shows a summary of vacant land in Atascadero. A complete list is available in
Appendix I. The table shows that there are 578 vacant parcels on approximately 1,857 acres
suitable for residential development that have the capacity to accommodate approximately
1,375 homes at 80 percent of maximum buildout, or maximum allowed per a Specific Plan, for
the multi-family parcels and 100 percent buildout for the single-family parcels where one house
per lot is assumed. The 80 percent buildout factor is based on historical trends and the
assumption that development standards combined with unique site features may not always
lead to 100 percent buildout. There may also be political barriers to full development. There are
adequate vacant sites to meet the City’s RHNA of 312, including the 160 very-low and low
income units at minimum densities of 20 units per acre in the High Density Residential Multi-
Family (HD-RMF) zone. See Table V-31 for a summary of vacant land by income category to
satisfy the RHNA.
                                         Table V-30.             Summary of Vacant Parcels, Atascadero 2014
                                                               # of
                                     Land                                                Max        80%
               Zone                               Acres      Parce       Density**                            Infrastructure
                                     Use                                                du/ac      du/ac
                                                                ls
Residential Multi-Family – 24       HDR              34.11        17   24 units/acre      819           560          Yes
Subtotal High Density                                34.11        17                                    560
Residential Multi-Family – 10       MDR               8.16         5   10 units/acre        74           58          Yes
Commercial Professional             GC                7.56         9   20 units/acre      151           120
Final Plan                                             Page V-48                                       January 27, 2015

                                                     City of Atascadero
                                                     Housing Element
Downtown Commercial                     D             6.12          7   20 units/acre                        122          95
Subtotal Medium Density                              21.84        21                                                     273
Residential Single-Family –                           1.28          6                                          6          6*
                                        SFR-X                           1 unit/parcel                                                 Yes
LSF-X
Residential Single-Family –                          16.29        42                                          42         42*
                                        SFR-Y                           1 unit/parcel                                                 Yes
LSF-Y
Residential Single-Family –                           9.30        17                                          17         17*
                                        SFR-X                           1 unit/parcel                                                 Yes
RSF-X
Residential Single-Family –                          56.36        60                                          60         60*
                                        SFR-Y                           1 unit/parcel                                                 Yes
RSF-Y
Residential Single-Family –                          65.66        45                                          45         45*
                                        SFR-Z                           1 unit/parcel                                                 Yes
RSF-Z
Residential Single-Family – RS          RE        1,651.87       370    1 unit/parcel 0F1F2F3 F4 F5F
                                                                                                     1       372        372*          Yes
Subtotal Low Density                              1,800.76       540                                                     542          Yes
Total                                             1,856.71       578                                       1,708       1,375
* Parcels in single family zones are not calculated at 80% as density is calculated per parcel rather than per acre.
**Density for some parcels has been reduced due to slope.
Source: City of Atascadero, 2014
                                          Table V-31.          RHNA Summary, 2014-2019
                                                                                   Above
                                           Very Low     Low           Moderate                                   Total
                                                                                   Moderate
2014 - 2019 Subtotal RHNA                  98           62            39           113                           312
Vacant Land Inventory                               560                  273                           542       1,375
Remaining RHNA                             0                          0            0                             0
Source: CA Dept. of Housing and Community Development, SLOCOG, 2013
 3.        Infrastructure Resources
Infrastructure adds to the cost of new construction (e.g. major and local streets, water and sewer
lines, and street lighting). Water and sewer service capacity is discussed below.
Water Service
Water service in the City is supplied by the Atascadero Mutual Water Company (AMWC).
AMWC manages the water supply that consists of 17 active wells that pump from the
Atascadero sub-basin of the Paso Robles Ground Water Basin and both riparian and
appropriated Salinas River underflow. Maximum well production is 12.9 million gallons per
day.
AMWC service area encompasses hundreds of undeveloped parcels, AMWC’s future plans
include a reliable water supply for an increased population. With approval of the Nacimiento
Water Project, the AMWC has been allocated an additional 3,000 AFY, with a flow rate of 3.48
1 One parcel in this zone allowed 2 units
Final Plan                                              Page V-49                                                       January 27, 2015

                                                             City of Atascadero
                                                             Housing Element
million gallons per day (mgd). The Nacimiento Water Project broke ground in 2007 and the
construction of the infrastructures needed to deliver water to the Atascadero area is complete.
AMWC began taking deliveries of water in the summer of 2012. The City analyzed the capacity
of existing water resources and determined that given the existing water supply and that which
will result from the Nacimiento Water Project, the existing water supply is not a constraint to
growth in the City and is available for all vacant zones within the City to accommodate the
City’s RHNA. However, as a result of the Nacimiento Water Project connection fees, water rates
have increased gradually2 to help pay for the cost of the additional water source.
The City recognizes that the region is currently going through a period of extreme drought in
2012 through the beginning of 2014. While the primary basin, the Paso Robles Ground Water
Basin, is experiencing decline in many areas, the Atascadero Sub-basin is a hydro-geologically
distinct sub-basin that is separated from the primary basin by the Rinconada Fault line and has
not experienced the level of decline when compared to the Paso Robles Ground Water Basin
Due to the increase in the cost of water service to ensure a reliable water supply, the City
recognizes that the connection fees for water is critical for the development of affordable
housing. Program 1.1-9 is proposed by the City to work with AMWC to explore possible
options to ease the burden of water service fees for second units and other affordable housing
projects.
Wastewater
Residential development in the City of Atascadero relies on both the City’s wastewater
treatment facilities and on-site septic systems. Approximately 50% of Atascadero’s residents
use the Collection and Treatment service. The City’s Wastewater Division maintains a 2.39
million gallon-per-day (mgd) wastewater treatment facility, over 40 miles of pipeline, and 13
wastewater-pumping stations. The treatment plant operates at approximately 60 percent
capacity, which results in an average daily flow of 1.4 mgd. Minor upgrades have been
approved for the treatment plant facility,3 but no expansions are planned for increasing the
treatments capacity.
Average daily flow for residential use is 100 gallons per capita per day. Based on the average
household size of 2.02 persons, the daily flow is 0.0002 mgd per household. The average daily
flow of the projected housing need (RHNA) is well within the capacity of the upgraded
wastewater treatment system.
  4.         Administrative Resources
El Camino Homeless Organization (ECHO)
2 Water   rates are planned to increase by 8% (net) per year over four years beginning on January 1, 2008. There are two more years of
8% rate increases. After that, water rates will increase based on inflation or other typical increases in operation and maintenance costs
(i.e. increase energy costs, treatment chemical costs, labor rates, etc.) (Source: pers. comm. John Neil, Atascadero Mutual Water
Company General Manager, July 22, 2009.)
3 Headworks/Barscreen project approved during the 2009/2011 Budget (City of Atascadero, 2008).
Final Plan                                                      Page V-50                                                January 27, 2015

                                             City of Atascadero
                                             Housing Element
ECHO is a non-profit organization serving the homeless population of Northern San Luis
Obispo County. The organization also assists those in need with obtaining permanent housing
and developing skills necessary to lead a more stable life. ECHO recently purchased the former
First Baptist Church and operates a permanent shelter in Atascadero at 6370 Atascadero
Avenue, under the City’s Emergency Shelter Overlay Zone. The shelter can accommodate up to
50 persons per night. ECHO has commenced an upgrade of their facility to accommodate the
additional persons including installation of new restrooms, accessibility upgrades, and other
facility renovations as part of its acquisition of the former church.
El Camino Homeless Organization, Atascadero Shelter.
Community Action Partnership San Luis Obispo (CAPSLO)
The CAPSLO provides a wide variety of social services in San Luis Obispo County. Their
divisions are Homeless Services, Head Start, Health and Prevention, Family Support, Adult Day
Center, and Energy Conservation Services. CAPSLO operates the Maxine Lewis Memorial
Homeless Shelter and the Prado Day Center in San Luis Obispo. They also operate Head Start
and Migrant Head Start programs and two health centers in San Luis Obispo and Arroyo
Grande. The Energy Conservation division provides weatherization and home repairs
throughout the County.
Habitat for Humanity
Habitat for Humanity is an international non-profit organization dedicated to partnering with
those in need of safe and affordable homes. Habitat for Humanity has constructed over 300,000
homes for families around the world. The San Luis Obispo County Habitat chapter has been
Final Plan                                      Page V-51                          January 27, 2015

                                          City of Atascadero
                                          Housing Element
active since 1997 and is involved in several development projects throughout the Central Coast.
In 2008, Habitat for Humanity constructed four very low-income homes in Atascadero.
Housing Authority of San Luis Obispo County (HASLO)
The Housing Authority of San Luis Obispo County was created to provide housing assistance
for the County's lower-income residents. The Housing Authority administers the Section 8
rental assistance program and manages public housing developments. The Housing Authority
also administers the Tenant Based Rental Assistance (TBRA) Program for the San Luis Obispo
Supportive Housing Consortium and established the San Luis Obispo Non-Profit Housing
Corporation to take advantage of federal tax credits. The Non-Profit Housing Corporation has
since helped with the development of the low-income Atascadero Senior Housing Project in
2008 and owns two housing complexes in Atascadero.
Final Plan                                   Page V-52                             January 27, 2015
                                          City of Atascadero
                                           Housing Element
People’s Self-Help Housing (PSHH)
People's Self-Help Housing is a diverse, nonprofit organization committed to furthering
opportunities for decent, safe, affordable housing and support services in San Luis Obispo,
Santa Barbara, and Ventura Counties. PSHH has two primary programs – Self Help
Homeownership Program and a Rental Housing Development and Construction Services
Program. Additionally, PSHH also administers the Supportive Housing Program assisting
residents with accessing community services and provides home ownership counseling. Since
its inception in the 1960s, PSHH has developed more than 1,100 homes and 1,400 rental units
and assisted in the rehabilitation and repair of more than 3,000 housing units. PSHH has
constructed 15 affordable home-ownership properties and currently owns and operates
Atascadero Gardens, a 17-unit affordable rental complex. The purchase of this building in 1999
prevented a pending conversion to market rate units and tenant displacement. PSHH also
assisted in the development of 15 homes in 1975. Since 2012, PSHH has been developing a tract
of 24 single-family residential homes in El Camino Oaks subdivision (Oakgrove Phase II) that
fell into foreclosure. Since 2013, PSHH has purchased an 11 unit subdivision tract on Atascadero
Avenue from a bankruptcy auction and is working with City Staff to commence construction
for additional very-low and low-income housing units. It is estimated construction for the
additional 11 affordable single-family residential units will begin in late 2014/early 2015.
Transitional Food and Shelter
Final Plan                                   Page V-53                                  January 27, 2015

                                                 City of Atascadero
                                                 Housing Element
Transitional Food and Shelter is a charitable organization operating throughout San Luis
Obispo County. The organization has three primary programs, shelter, food, and family-to-
family assistance. The organization provides temporary, emergency shelter in motels and
apartments in the North County, for homeless persons who are fragile, sick, and/or disabled.
The program provides relief for those who cannot be accommodated in more traditional
homeless shelters. The organization also operates “The People’s” kitchen of Paso Robles,
serving food nightly to homeless and/or hungry.
  5.       Financial Resources
Availability of Financing
The availability of financing affects the ability to purchase or improve homes. In the Atascadero
area4, 2,851 applications for loans were received in 2012, of which 2,324 were conventional
loans. Of the 2,324 conventional loan applications, 1,906 were refinancing, 379 were for home
purchase, and 39 were for home improvements. Of the 418 conventional loan applications for
home purchase or repair, only 2 percent were denied, 13 percent were withdrawn or not
accepted by applicant, and 53 percent were approved and accepted.
There were 296 applications for government assisted home purchase or improvement loans
(VA, FHA, FSA/RHS) in 2012. This is significantly higher than the number of applicants in
2007, 7 total. Of these, 176, or 60 percent of government assisted loans were approved and
accepted by the applicant.
Most (60 percent) applicants for government assisted loans had an annual income of less than
the median income of $75,400 in 2012. Conversely, over 62 percent of conventional loan
applicants earned greater than the County median income. However, 46 percent of all
originated loans were awarded and accepted by applicants with less than median household
income, demonstrating equal availability of financing for upper and lower-income households
and there are no mortgage deficient segments of the community.
Local Housing Funds
Inclusionary Housing In-Lieu Fee Funds
The City’s inclusionary housing program offers the option of paying a fee in lieu of building
affordable housing for projects of 10 units or less. Fees deposited into the account may be used
in the acquisition, construction, or rehabilitation of affordable housing. Following the March
2012 dedication of $100,000 to the North County Connection and $255,000 to El Camino
Homeless Organization to support property acquisition for emergency, transitional, and
affordable housing services, the Fund has a remaining balance of approximately $82,000.
San Luis Obispo County Housing Trust Fund
Another source of local housing funding is through the San Luis Obispo County Housing Trust
Fund (SLOCHTF), which is a private nonprofit corporation created to increase the supply of
affordable housing in San Luis Obispo County for very low, low, and moderate income
4 Home Mortgage Disclosure Act data is based off census tracts. The census tracts that cover the City of Atascadero
also encompass the unincorporated area surrounding the City.
Final Plan                                          Page V-54                                            January 27, 2015

                                               City of Atascadero
                                                Housing Element
households. SLOCHTF provides financing and technical assistance to help private developers,
nonprofit corporations and government agencies produce and preserve homes that working
families, seniors on fixed incomes and persons with disabilities can afford to rent or buy. More
information on SLOCHTF can be found at www.slochtf.org.
 6.        Other Resources
Many programs within the State of California exist to provide financial assistance to the City
and to individual developers for the development, preservation, and rehabilitation of
residential development; primarily affordable units. The Department of Housing and
Community Development identifies and provides detailed information on the grants and loans
available for affordable housing, which include:
Affordable Housing Innovation Fund
The   Affordable Housing Innovation Fund provides funding for pilot programs to demonstrate
innovative, cost-saving approaches to creating or preserving affordable housing. Legislation in
2007 (SB 586, Chapter 652) allocated these funds to four new activities and to the revival of the
Local Housing Trust Fund program originally created by Proposition 46. Key programs are:
             o  Golden State Acquisition Fund (GSAF) Affordable Housing Innovation
                Program: This program provides quick acquisition financing for the
                development or preservation of workforce housing. Provides loans for
                developers through a nonprofit fund manager.
                http://www.hcd.ca.gov/fa/ahif/ahip-l.html
             o  Local Housing Trust Fund Program: Matching grants (dollar-for-dollar) to local
                housing trust funds dedicated to the creation or preservation of affordable
                housing that are funded on an ongoing basis from private contributions or public
                sources that are not otherwise restricted in use for housing programs.
                http://www.hcd.ca.gov/fa/ahif/lhtf.html
CalHome Program: Provides grants to local agencies and nonprofit developers to assist very-
low income homeowners through deferred payment loans as well as direct, forgivable loans to
assist development projects.
www.hcd.ca.gov/fa/calhome
Emergency Solutions Grant (ESG): Provides grants to fund projects that serve homeless
individuals and families with supportive services, emergency shelter/transitional housing,
assisting persons at risk of becoming homeless with homelessness prevention assistance, and
providing permanent housing to the homeless population.
http://www.hcd.ca.gov/fa/esg/index.html
Enterprise Zone Program: Provides incentives such as sales tax credits and operation
deductions for business investment.
www.hcd.ca.gov/fa/cdbg/ez/#EZ
Final Plan                                        Page V-55                            January 27, 2015
                                          City of Atascadero
                                          Housing Element
Governor’s Homeless Initiative: Provides loans and grants for the development of permanent
supportive housing for chronically homeless residents who suffer from severe mental illness.
www.hcd.ca.gov/fa/ghi
HOME Investment Partnerships Program: Provides cities, counties, and nonprofit
organizations with grants and low-interest loans to create and retain affordable housing.
http://www.hcd.ca.gov/fa/home/
Infill Infrastructure Grant Program: Provides grants to assist in the creation and rehabilitation
of infrastructure that supports higher-density affordable and mixed-income housing in places
designated for infill.
http://www.hcd.ca.gov/fa/iig/
Mobilehome Park Resident Ownership Program: Provides loans to finance the preservation of
affordable mobilehome parks by conversion to ownership or control by resident organizations,
nonprofit housing sponsors, or local public agencies.
http://www.hcd.ca.gov/fa/mprop/
Multifamily Housing Program: Provide deferred payment loans to fund the construction,
rehabilitation, and preservation of permanent and transitional rental units for supportive
housing. This includes housing for low-income residents with disabilities, or those who are at
risk of homelessness.
www.hcd.ca.gov/fa/mhp
Office of Migrant Services: Provides grants to local government agencies that contract with
HCD to operate OMS centers in California. OMS centers provide safe and affordable seasonal
rental housing and support services for migrant farmworker families.
www.hcd.ca.gov/fa/oms
Predevelopment Loan Program: Provides short-term loans for financing low-income housing
projects.
www.hcd.ca.gov/fa/pdlp
State CDBG Program Economic Development Allocation: Provides grants for planning and
technical assistance and the creation or maintenance of jobs for rural low-income workers.
http://www.hcd.ca.gov/fa/cdbg/EconDevelopment.html
State CDBG Program Community Development Allocation: Provides grants to fund housing,
public improvement, community facilities, public services, and planning and technical
assistance that benefit lower-income residents in rural communities.
http://www.hcd.ca.gov/fa/cdbg/CommunityDevelopment.html
Final Plan                                   Page V-56                               January 27, 2015

                      City of Atascadero
                       Housing Element
           This Page Intentionally Left Blank
Final Plan               Page V-57            January 27, 2015
                                             City of Atascadero
                                             Housing Element
 G. Constraints on Housing Production
Government policies and regulations impact the price and availability of housing and, in
particular, the provision of affordable housing. Constraints include residential development
standards, fees, and permitting procedures. Providing infrastructure and services also increases
the cost of producing housing. This Chapter addresses potential governmental and
nongovernmental constraints and focuses on mitigation options available to the City.
 1.        Governmental Constraints
Although local governments have little influence on such market factors as interest rates and
availability of funding for development, their policies and regulations can affect both the
amount of residential development that occurs and the affordability of housing. Since
governmental actions can constrain development and affordability of housing, State law
requires the Housing Element to “address and, where appropriate and legally possible, remove
governmental constraints to the maintenance, improvement, and development of housing.”
Land Use Controls
The City’s primary policies and regulations that affect residential development and housing
affordability include: Title 9 (the City’s Planning and Zoning Regulations), the General Plan, the
Atascadero Downtown Revitalization Plan, the Appearance Review Manual, development
processing procedures and fees, on and off-site improvement requirements, and building codes.
In addition to a review of these policies and regulations, an analysis of governmental
constraints on housing production for persons with disabilities is included in this Section.
Planning and Zoning Regulations
Title 9, the City’s Planning and Zoning Regulations, allows residential development in the
agriculture zone, 4 residential zones, 2 downtown zones, 4 commercial zones, 2 industrial
zones, and 3 recreation and public zones. The maximum residential density allowed is 24 units
per acre. Title 9 does not include specific development standards for the Rural Residential zone
that is identified on the Zoning Map. Program 1.1-6 has been proposed to codify the Rural
Residential zone into Title 9 and include zoning standards that distinguish it from the
Residential Suburban zone.
Agriculture (A) Zone. This zone is established to protect, preserve, and encourage agriculture
on suitable land. Agriculture related residential uses are permitted including single-family
dwellings, primary family housing, and farm labor quarters. The A zone corresponds to the
Agriculture (AG) land use designation of the General Plan.
Final Plan                                      Page V-58                             January 27, 2015

                                          City of Atascadero
                                           Housing Element
Rural Residential (RR) Zone. This zone is established for large lot single-family residential
uses. The General Plan details a maximum allowable density of 0.4 units per acre. The RR zone
corresponds to the Rural Residential (RR), Rural Estate (RE), Suburban Estate (SE), and
Agriculture (AG) land use designations of the General Plan.
Residential Suburban (RS) Zone. This zone is established for large lot single-family residential
uses. Second units are permitted by right in the RS zone, subject to specific development
standards identified in Chapter 5 of Title 9. The maximum allowable density is 0.4 units per
acre. The RS zone corresponds to the Rural Residential (RR), Rural Estate (RE), Suburban Estate
(SE), and Agriculture (AG) land use designations of the General Plan.
Residential Single Family (RSF) Zone. This zone is established to provide for single-family
residential areas within the urban service line. Second units are permitted by right in the RSF
zone, subject to specific development standards identified in Chapter 5 of Title 9. The RSF is
divided into 3 categories based on minimum lot sizes, RSF-X, RSF-Y, RSF-Z; and density ranges
from 0.5 - 2.0 units per acre. Density may be increased to 4 units per acre with a Planned
Development in the RSF-X zone. The RSF zone corresponds to the Single-Family Residential
(SFR) land use designation of the General Plan, which includes the sub-land use designations
SFR-Z, SFR-Y, SFR-X.
Limited Single Family (LSF) Zone. This zone is established for single-family residential where
raising of farm animals is not allowed. Second units are permitted by right in the LSF zone,
subject to specific development standards identified in Chapter 5 of Title 9. The LSF is divided
into 3 categories based on the minimum lot size, LSF-X, LSF-Y, LSF-Z; and density ranges from
0.5 - 2.0 units per acre. The LSF zone corresponds to the Single-Family Residential (SFR) land
use designation of the General Plan, which includes the sub-land use designations SFR-Z, SFR-
Y, SFR-X.
Residential Multiple Family (RMF) Zone. This zone is established for apartment,
condominium, and townhouse development. The maximum allowable density for areas
designated Low Density Multiple Family Residential (RMF-10) is 10 units per acre; for areas
designated High Density Multiple Family Residential (RMF-20) is 24 units per acre; and for
hillside areas the density ranges from 1 - 20 units per acre depending on average slope (density
exceptions exist for group quarters and nursing facilities). The RMF zone corresponds to the
Medium-Density Residential (MDR) and High-Density Residential (HDR) land use designations
of the General Plan.
Downtown Commercial (DC) Zoning District. This zone is established to enhance the
economic viability and pedestrian-oriented character of downtown. Residential uses are
permitted on upper floors in the DC zoning district. Home occupations and live/work projects
are also encouraged in the DC zoning district. The maximum allowable density is 20 units per
acre. The DC zone corresponds to the Downtown (D) land use designation of the General Plan.
Downtown Office (DO) Zoning District. This zone is established for professional and other
office uses close to the services provided in the DC zoning district. Residential uses are
permitted on upper floors in the DO zoning district. The maximum allowable density is 20
Final Plan                                   Page V-59                              January 27, 2015
                                           City of Atascadero
                                           Housing Element
units per acre. The DO zoning district corresponds to the Downtown (D) land use designation
of the General Plan.
Commercial Professional (CP) Zone. This zone is established for limited retail shopping and
personal service facilities. It allows mixed-use with residential up to 24 units per acre with a
conditional use permit. Caretaker residences are also permitted conditionally. The CP zone
corresponds to the General Commercial (GC) and Mixed Use (MU) land use designations of the
General Plan.
Commercial Retail (CR) Zone. This zone is established for a wide range of commercial uses to
accommodate retail and service needs; however, it does allow residential care facilities for the
elderly (RCFE) and conditionally permit caretaker residences, mixed-use with residential up to
24 units per acre, and single room occupancy. The CR zone corresponds to the General
Commercial (GC) and Mixed Use (MU) land use designations of the General Plan.
Commercial Service (CS) Zone. This zone is established for light manufacturing and large lot
service commercial, however it does conditionally permit caretaker residences or multifamily
dwellings within an existing structure of historical significance. The CS zone corresponds to the
Service Commercial (SC) land use designation of the General Plan.
Commercial Tourism (CT) Zone. This zone is established for limited commercial uses for
Highway 101 travelers; however, it does conditionally permit caretaker residences. The CT zone
corresponds to the General Commercial (GC) land use designation of the General Plan.
Industrial Park (IP) Zone. This zone is established for light manufacture and large lot service
commercial; however, it does conditionally permit caretaker residences. The IP zone
corresponds to the Industrial (IND) land use designation of the General Plan.
Industrial (I) Zone. This zone is established for heavy manufacture and industrial uses;
however, it does conditionally permit caretaker residences. The I zone corresponds to the
Industrial (IND) land use designation of the General Plan.
Recreation (L) Zone. This zone provides suitable locations for recreational facilities; however, it
does conditionally permit caretaker residences. The L zone corresponds to the RR, RE, SE, SFR,
MDR, HDR, Public Recreation (REC), Public Facilities (PUB), and Open Space (OS) land use
designation of the General Plan.
Special Recreation (LS) Zone. This zone provides suitable locations for recreational facilities on
land in private ownership. This zone also provides for residential uses where intensive
recreational activity may not be appropriate. The maximum allowable density for residential is
0.7 unit per acre (sewer not available) or 1 unit per acre (sewer is present). Additionally, the LS
zone allows caretaker residence with a conditional use permit. The LS zone corresponds to the
Commercial Recreational (CREC) land use designation of the General Plan.
Public (P) Zone. This zone provides suitable locations for public and quasi-public facilities,
however, it does conditionally permit single family, residential care, and caretaker residences.
Final Plan                                    Page V-60                                January 27, 2015
                                          City of Atascadero
                                          Housing Element
The maximum allowable density for residential is 0.4 unit per acre. The P zone corresponds to
the RR, RE, SE, SFR, MDR, HDR, CREC, REC, PUB, and OS land use designation of the General
Plan.
Planned Development (PD) Overlays. The City has established 30 overlays (PD 1 - 12 and 14 -
31) to allow for special use standards that differ from those established by the underlying zone.
The maximum allowable density is 24 units per acre. Planned Development Overlays are
typically used to allow for individual lot ownership units in multi-family zones and clustered
residential development in rural areas to achieve minimal environmental impacts and reduced
infrastructure costs.
Emergency Shelter (ES) Overlay. The City established an emergency shelter overlay zone in
2013 which allows emergency shelters by right on specific sites, subject to operational and
development standards. In 2013 one ES site was designated at 6370 Atascadero Avenue for the
El Camino Homeless Organization (ECHO) shelter.
Table V-32 summarizes the General Plan land use designations and the zoning districts that
either allow by right or conditionally permit residential development. In 2013, the City
amended the zoning ordinance to allow residential densities up to 24 units per acre in the RMF-
20 Zone and up to 20 units per acre in the DC and DO zones.
Final Plan                                   Page V-61                               January 27, 2015
                                                   City of Atascadero
                                                   Housing Element
                                  Table V-32.           General Plan Land Use Designations and Zoning
                                                                  District Comparison
   General Plan Land Use                    Density                    Corresponding Zoning Districts
         Designation
                                                               1
RR/RE/SE                         0.1 - 0.4 unit/acre gross                       RR, RS, P, L
SFR-Z                               1.0 unit/acre gross1                      RSF-Z, LSF-Z, P, L
SFR-Y                               2.0 unit/acre gross                       RSF-Y, LSF-Y, P, L
SFR-X                                4.0 unit/acre net2                       RSF-X, LSF-X, P, L
MDR                                   10 unit/acre net                           RMF-10, P, L
HDR                                   24 unit/acre net                           RMF-20 P, L
GC                                    20 unit/acre net                            CP, CR, CT
SC                                         (0.4 FAR)                                    CS
D                                     20 unit/acre net                               DC, DO
MU                                    24 unit/acre net                      CR, CP: (MU/PD overlay)
CREC                                  10 unit/acre net                                LS, P
IND                                        (0.4 FAR)                                   I, IP
AG                               0.1 - 0.4 unit/acre gross1                        RR, RS, A
REC                                            --                                      L, P
PUB                                            --                                      L, P
Notes:
1. Density is adjusted by performance standards in this land use designation. The maximum density may be lower
based on the application of performance standards.
2. The maximum density sets a limit to the number of units that may be developed in each land use designation. The
General Plan also sets minimum lots size areas that are allowed through the subdivision process consistent with the
"Elbow Room" principle. The minimum lot sizes are more restrictive than the maximum densities in order to reflect
historic small lot development densities and to allow for new planned development projects that incorporate smaller
lot sizes with innovative design concepts.
Final Plan                                            Page V-62                                      January 27, 2015
                                        City of Atascadero
                                         Housing Element
Table V-33 summarizes the housing types permitted by zone. Each use is designated by a letter
denoting whether the use is permitted by right (P) or conditionally permitted (CUP).
                                Table V-33.         Zoning District’s Permitted Land Uses in 2014A
Land Uses       A  RR  RS   RSF  LSF    RMF     DC     DO   CP    CR    CS   CT  IP   I     L      LS  P
Single-family                                      2      2
dwelling        P   P   P    P     P     P       P      P    --    --    --   --  --   --    --     P CUP
Multiple family                                             CU    CU    CU
                --  --  --   --    --    P2      P2     P2                    --  --   --    --    --  --
dwelling                                                     P    P7    P7
                                                 P3/
Live/work
projects        --  --  --   --    --    --     CU       --  --    --    --   --  --   --    --    --  --
                                                 P4
Secondary
residential     --  P   P    P     P     --      --      --  --    --    --   --  --   --    --    --  --
units
Residential
accessory       P   P   P    P     P     P       --      --  --    --    --   --  --   --    --     P  --
uses
Temporary
dwelling        P   P   P    P     P     P       --      --  --    --    --   --  --   --    --     P  --
Mobilehome
dwelling        P   P   P    P     P     --      --      --  --    --    --   --  --   --    --    --  --
Mobilehome         CU  CU   CU    CU    CU
developments    --                               --      --  --    --    --   --  --   --    --    --  --
                    P   P    P     P     P
Primary family
housing         P   --  --   --    --    --      --      --  --    --    --   --  --   --    --    --  --
Farm labor
quarters        P   --  --   --    --    --      --      --  --    --    --   --  --   --    --    --  --
Home
occupations     P   P   P    P     P     P        P      P   --    --    --   --  --   --    --     P  --
                C                                                            C    C    C     C     C
Caretaker          CU  CU   CU    CU                        CU    CU    CU
residence       U                        --      --      --                  U    U    U     U     U  CUP
                    P   P    P     P                         P     P     P
                P                                                             P   P    P     P     P
Residential
care, ≤ 6       --  P   P    P     P     P       --      --  --    --    --   --  --   --    --    -- CUP
clients
Residential        CU  CU   CU    CU
care, > 6       --                       P       --      --  --    --    --   --  --   --    --    -- CUP
clients             P   P    P     P
Residential
                                        CU
Care for the    --  --  --   --    --            --      --  --    P     P    --  --   --    --    --  --
Elderly                                  P
Organizational     CU  CU   CU    CU    CU
houses          --                               --      --  --    --    --   --  --   --    --    --  --
                    P   P    P     P     P
Medical
extended                                CU
     5
care , ≤ 6
                --  --  P    P     P             --      --  --    --    --   --  --   --    --    -- CUP
                                         P
clients
Medical
extended               CU   CU    CU    CU
     5          --  --                           --      --  --    --    --   --  --   --    --    -- CUP
care , > 6              P    P     P     P
clients
Age restricted                                  CU
                --  --  --   --    --    --              --  --    --    --   --  --   --    --    --  --
housing                                          P6
Final Plan                                 Page V-63                                 January 27, 2015

                                                             City of Atascadero
                                                             Housing Element
                                                 Table V-33.             Zoning District’s Permitted Land Uses in 2014A
Land Uses            A      RR      RS      RSF LSF         RMF      DC      DO      CP        CR      CS     CT IP         I     L      LS       P
Notes:
A. Not regulatory. For reference only, refer to Zoning Ordinance for the latest official zoning designations. Zoning Ordinance may be
amended independently of this table.
1. RSF-Y only, see Section 9.6106
2. RMF Zone – CUP required for projects over 12 units, excluding RMF-20 properties identified in Appendix I. RMF-20 properties identified
in Appendix I are allowed by right, not subject to a CUP or specific plan. DC and DO Zones - Residential uses allowed only on second and
third floor, except sites north of Olmeda Avenue. If project is required to provide a unit in compliance with Americans with Disabilities Act,
the handicapped accessible unit may be located on a first floor. A first floor unit shall be located in a non-storefront location within a tenant
space.
3. Permitted use if the residential quarters are located on the second or third floors.
4. Conditional Use Permit required if the residential quarters are located on the first floor.
5. A skilled nursing facility (also referred to as medical extended care) is a board and care home for residents, where no medical care is
provided, and is subject to all applicable standards for multiple family dwellings.
6. Use allowed only on sites north of Olmeda Avenue.
7. When located on second floor or above
As shown in Table V-33, zoning regulations are not a constraint to development of multi-family
or affordable housing. The Conditional Use Permit (CUP) requirement for multi-family projects
greater than 12 units does not apply to multi-family projects in the RMF-20 zone under single
property ownership or when used as income property. CUP requirements in the RFM-20 zone
apply for subdivisions and planned development. Program 1.1.20 has been included to amend
the zoning ordinance to require a CUP only for multi-family housing projects greater than 50
units, to ensure minimum densities are achievable in the RFM-20 zone.
Table V-34 provides development standards for the residential zones and Table V-35 provides
the development standards in the Downtown Zones. Minimum parcel size and setback
requirements in Atascadero are not unusually strict and are not considered a constraint to the
development of affordable housing. The height limit in residential zones has proven not to
impede development or discourage density. The Hidden Oaks Apartments and Southside Villas
condominium projects, 90 and 86 units, respectively, achieved densities over 20 units per acre
while meeting the 30 foot, two story height restriction. The Emerald Ridge condominium
development, approved in 2004, also met the height requirement while achieving a density of
18 units per acre with 132 units on 7.3 acres. Program 1.18 proposes to amend the Zoning
Ordinance to allow a waiver of the two-story height limit in the RMF Zone through the Minor
Use Permit process. Its process is similar to that of a major CUP but the fee of a MUP is
substantially decreased from a CUP ($1,090 and $3,910, respectively)5. Both a MUP and a CUP
go through the Design Review Committee then the Planning Commission for approval. The
MUP process normally takes between two to six months and allows for review of the building
height by the City’s Fire Department for health, safety, and welfare reasons. A typical major
CUP may take six months up to one year. With the reduction of fees and expedited processing,
the MUP allows for the proper review by departments.
                                             Table V-34.             Residential Zones Development Standards A
5 A. Not regulatory. For reference only. Planning and development fees display current rates at the time of
publication. Fees are subject to change at the discretion of the City Council.
Final Plan                                                      Page V-64                                                  January 27, 2015

                                                           City of Atascadero
                                                           Housing Element
                                                                               Zone
  Development
     Standard                       RS
                                                          RSF                          LSF                            RMF
                                                    X       Y        Z         X          Y       Z
    Min lot size                                                                                1.5 -                      3
                                 2.5 - 10          0.5      1     1.5 -2.5    0.5         1                             .5
      (acres)1,2                                                                                 2.5
    Max Height                                                                                                         30 ft.
                                                          30 ft. max.
        (feet)                                                                                                   (2 stories max.)
Setbacks4 (feet)
                                                           25 ft. min
        Front                Exceptions for shallow lots, flag lots, sloping lots, and variable                        15 ft
                                                             block.
                                                                              5 ft. min
         Side                   Exceptions for corner lots, key lots, small corner lots, accessory buildings, common wall
                                                             5                                6
                                                development , zero lot line development , access easements.
                                                           Principle residential building - 10 ft. min
         Rear                              Accessory building - 3 ft. min if under 12 ft in height and under 120 sf
       Interior              Principle residential buildings - 10 ft Accessory building - 10 ft.(some code exceptions apply)
Notes:
A. Not regulatory. For reference only, refer to Zoning Ordinance for the latest official development standards. Zoning Ordinance may
be amended independently of this table.
1. Depending upon conformance with performance standards set in each zone.
2. Smaller lot sizes allowed with a Planned Development.
3. Smaller lot sizes allowed for PD projects, including condominiums and mobile home developments, provided that the overall
   density within the project conforms with Section 9-3.17 (RMF Zone - Density).
4. Except for 2nd story dwellings over commercial and industrial uses.
5. Two dwelling units, and/or their accessory garages constructed on adjoining lots with minimum building code separation.
6. A group of dwelling units on adjoining lots may be established so that all units about 1 side property line..
                                              Table V-35.             Downtown Zones Development
                                                                           Standards A
                                                 DC                                                 DO
  Min lot size                                                     No minimum
    Density                                  20 du/acre                                         20 du/acre
                               Minimum and maximum setbacks required. See Section 9-4.103 for setback
   Setbacks                    requirement, allowed projections into setbacks, and exceptions to setbacks.
                           None allowed, except for building insets
                          designed to accommodate outdoor eating
                                                                                 As required by Section 9-4.106 when
                         and seating areas, and except for East and
      Front                West Mall between El Camino Real and
                                                                                  adjacent to a residential zone, none
                                                                                            required otherwise.
                         Palma Avenue, where a minimum of twenty
                                       (20) feet is required.
Sides (each)                                                      None required
       Rear                                                       None required
      Creek                                                            20 ft.
                                  45 ft. not to exceed 3 stories;
 Height limit             18 ft. on the west side of El Camino Real
                                                                        1                           25 ft.
                         See Section 9-4.114 for residential uses and              As required by Sections 9-4.114 et
   Off-street
                         for development east of Atascadero Creek.                                  seq.
    parking                      All other uses - none required.
Notes:
A. Not regulatory. For reference only, refer to Zoning Ordinance for the latest official development
standards. Zoning Ordinance may be amended independently of this table.
1. Between Atascadero Creek and lot line common to Lots 19 and 20, Block H-B, Atascadero Colony Map.
Final Plan                                                    Page V-65                                                  January 27, 2015
                                           City of Atascadero
                                           Housing Element
Historical Preservation
To promote the conservation, preservation, protection, and enhancement of Atascadero’s
historical and architecturally significant structures, the City adopted a Historic Site Overlay
(HS) zone. The standards are intended to protect historic structures and sites by requiring new
uses and alterations to existing uses to be designed with consideration for preserving and
protecting the historic resource. Given the quality of Atascadero’s historical and architecturally
significant structures, and the contribution of these structures to the image and quality of life in
Atascadero, the historic preservation policies and regulations are reasonable and appropriate
and do not pose an unreasonable constraint to residential development in the City of
Atascadero. Only one site identified in the vacant land inventory (Appendix I) contains a
designated colony house, but is not subject to the HS overlay. No other sites identified in the
vacant land inventory are subject to the HS overlay.
Sensitive Resources
The City adopted a Sensitive Resource Overlay (SR) zone to protect areas with special
environmental resources and to protect areas containing unique or endangered vegetation or
habitat. The purpose of these standards is to require that proposed uses be designed with
consideration of the identified sensitive resources, and the need for their protection.
Development that falls within a SR overlay zone does require additional measures to ensure
environmental protection, which can add to the cost of development. It is in the best interest of
the community, and also is mandated by State and Federal laws to protect sensitive
environmental resources. The City’s regulations do not pose an unreasonable constraint to
residential development in the City. No sites identified in the vacant land inventory are subject
to the SR overlay.
Mobile and Manufactured Homes
State law requires that mobile and manufactured homes be allowed in residential zones. These
units cannot be regulated by any planning fees or review processes not applicable to
conventional single-family dwellings. However, the architectural design of manufactured or
mobilehomes can be regulated by the City.
Under the City’s zoning regulations mobilehome developments are permitted with approval of
a Conditional Use Permit in all residential zones. Individual mobilehome dwellings are
permitted by right in all single-family residential zones (RS, RSF, LSF) and in the Agriculture
zone.
The City’s zoning regulations address manufactured homes in section 9-6.142 of the Atascadero
Municipal Code. In order be in compliance with State law, the City should clarify that the
terms “mobilehome” and “manufactured home” are essentially the same and should be
considered a single-family dwelling and permitted in all zones that allow single-family housing.
Manufactured housing can be subject to design review. Program 1.1-3 is recommended to
encourage a variety housing options within the City.
Final Plan                                    Page V-66                               January 27, 2015

                                             City of Atascadero
                                             Housing Element
Mixed-Use Development
Atascadero encourages mixed-use development in the downtown districts (DC and DO). As
stated in Title 9:
           The downtown zoning districts are intended to develop an attractive, pedestrian-oriented, and
           economically successful downtown area by providing for a mixture of commercial, office, and
           residential land uses…
The development of mixed-use projects provides more housing opportunities by permitting
residential uses on the upper floors. Mixed-use development also enhances economic viability,
pedestrian-oriented character, and the overall downtown environment. Table V-35 provides the
development standards for mixed-use developments in the downtown area. In addition, mixed-
use is allowed in all areas with a General Commercial land use designation. In 2013, the City
amended the Zoning Ordinance to allow vertical mixed-use with a Conditional Use Permit in
General Commercial land use designations and horizontal mixed-use subject to a zone change
(PD overlay) and General Plan Amendment. This is a reduction in previous requirements for
horizontal or vertical mixed-use.
Secondary Residential Units
To encourage establishment of second units, State law requires cities to either adopt an
ordinance authorizing second units in residentially zoned areas, or, where no ordinance has
been adopted, to allow second units if they meet standards set out in the State law. State law
requires ministerial consideration of second unit applications in zones where single-family
dwellings are permitted. Local governments are precluded from totally prohibiting second units
in residentially zoned areas unless they make specific findings (Government Code § 65852.2).
Second units can be an important source of affordable housing since they are smaller than
primary units and they do not have direct land costs. Supporting the development of second
units expands housing opportunities for very low-, low-, and moderate-income households by
increasing the number of rental units available within existing neighborhoods. Second units are
intended to provide livable housing at lower cost while providing greater security,
companionship, and family support for the occupants.
Second units, or secondary residential units, are defined within the Atascadero zoning
regulations as residential occupancy constructions (R) with a kitchen and full bathroom that is
accessory to the primary unit and intended for permanent occupancy by a second household.
Second residential units provide quarters for independent living areas, sleeping, cooking, and
sanitation facilities. Second residential units are permitted by right in the single-family
residential zones (RS, RSF, LSF). Second units are also allowed in single family planned
development overlay districts only when consistent with an approved Master Plan of
Development.
Second units are subject to all development standards of the underlying zoning district and/or
planned development overlay districts, with a few minor exceptions:
   o    Floor Area. The total floor area shall not exceed 1,200 square feet.
Final Plan                                      Page V-67                                  January 27, 2015

                                                City of Atascadero
                                                Housing Element
   o    Private Open Space Requirement. A second unit shall have a minimum private open
        space area of 250 square feet. No portion of an open space area shall have a dimension of
        less than 10 feet in width.
   o    Attached Second Units. If the second unit is attached to the primary dwelling, each shall
        be served by separate outside entrances.
   o    Second units are permitted on lots greater than 1 gross acre in size if on a private septic
        system or connected to City sewer.
   o    Second units are permitted on lots less than 1 gross acre in size if connected to City sewer
        only.
Second units, whether attached or detached, are considered as single-family units for purposes
of determining impact fees. This has been identified as a potential constraint to development of
second units. Programs 1.1-12 considers reduction of impact fees for second units as part of an
AB1600 study and 6.1-8 has been introduced to index fees based on size of the unit to encourage
affordability by design. Parking requirements for second residential units are shown in Table
V-36.
For a second unit to be approved, it must be served by a public water system and the City
sanitary sewer system or an engineered septic system (depending on lot size), and allow for the
installation of separate utility meters. Atascadero Mutual Water Company (AMWC) establishes
the water connection fees and these have been identified as a constraint to the development of
second residential units due to the disproportion of fees to actual development costs.6 Program
1.1.12 is recommended to establish a program that would address second unit fees and create an
incentive program to encourage the development of second units. (See Section F – Housing
Resources (Infrastructure Resources - Water Service) for additional information on water service
from AMWC.)
Group Homes and Residential Care Facilities
The Lanterman Development Disabilities Services Act declares that persons with mental or and
physical disabilities are entitled to live in normal residential surroundings. A State-authorized,
certified, or licensed family care home, foster home, or group home serving six or fewer
disabled persons or dependent and neglected children on a 24-hour-a-day basis is considered a
residential use that is permitted in all residential zones. No local agency can impose stricter
zoning or building and safety standards or require variances on these homes than those
required for homes in the same zone.
The City’s Planning and Zoning Regulations accommodate housing for group living situations.
Residential care facilities serving six or fewer residents (small) are permitted by right in all
residential zones. Residential care facilities serving more than six residents (large) are permitted
by right in the RMF zone and conditionally permitted in the RS, RSF, and LSF zones. Program
4.1.3 is recommended to allow large residential care facilities by right in additional zones.
6 City of Atascadero, Planning Commission/City Council meeting, June 16, 2009.
Final Plan                                         Page V-68                             January 27, 2015

                                            City of Atascadero
                                            Housing Element
See the section below Housing for People with Disabilities, for additional discussion on housing for
special needs.
Emergency Shelters and Transitional Housing
State legislation SB 2 requires jurisdictions to permit emergency shelters without a Conditional
Use Permit (CUP) or other discretionary permits, and transitional housing and supportive
housing must be considered residential uses and must only be subject to the same restrictions
that apply to the same housing types in the same zone.
Transitional and supportive housing are considered single family or multi-family uses under
Title 9. Transitional and supportive housing are permitted in all residential zones and thus held
to the same development standards as other residential uses of the same type in the same zone.
Additionally, the City has an Emergency Shelter (ES) Overlay Zone, which allows emergency
shelters on a specific site subject to the development and operational standards outlined in the
zoning ordinance. The ES Overlay Zone was applied to the property where El Camino
Homeless Organization (ECHO) runs and operates a homeless shelter with a maximum of 50
occupants. The ECHO shelter does not typically operate at capacity. As a shelter was not a
permitted use in the base zone, the Overlay protects the operation and establishes operational
guidelines.
The site of ECHO shelter has the capacity to expand to accommodate an additional 60 beds, for
a total capacity of 110 beds at the single ES overlay site. With the existing site not operating at
capacity, with the ability to expand up to 110 beds, the shelter meets the City’s need for
emergency shelters. Program 4.1-4 is proposed to identify additional sites for emergency
shelters, should a need arise for these facilities.
Building Codes And Site Improvements
Building codes and site improvements can also increase the cost of developing housing,
particularly affordable rental housing. The following examines the City’s building codes and
site improvement standards.
Building Codes and Enforcement
Atascadero implements the 2013 edition of the California Building Code and other model
construction codes, with amendments adopted by the California Building Standards
Commission. These model codes establish standards and require inspections at various stages
of construction to ensure code compliance and minimum health and safety standards. Although
these standards and the time required for inspections increase housing production costs and
may impact the viability of rehabilitation of older properties, the codes are mandated for all
jurisdictions in California.
The City has also adopted an ordinance requiring fire sprinklers in all newly constructed
residential units and substantially remodeled units, adding to the cost of construction. The
ordinance was instated for the protection of Atascadero residents because most residential sites
Final Plan                                     Page V-69                                 January 27, 2015

                                                City of Atascadero
                                                Housing Element
in Atascadero are in a high or very high fire hazard severity zone. With the very hot summers
in Atascadero and abundance of dry brush and native vegetation located in the residential
zones, there is a high potential for fire. The installation of fire sprinklers adds approximately $2
per square foot to the cost of construction of single-family homes. The additional cost is likely to
be passed along to the homebuyer as part of the final cost of the home or to renters in the form
of a higher monthly rental price. The added cost does not pose a significant constraint to the
construction of new units and second units.
Aside from this ordinance, the City has not adopted local amendments to the model codes that
increase housing costs (the Plumbing Code has been amended to address large-lot development
with septic systems). Building inspectors are responsible for ensuring that proposed projects
meet State and local codes.
Site Improvements
The City of Atascadero, along with other agencies, requires the installation of certain on- and
off-site improvements to ensure the safety and livability of residential neighborhoods. On-site
improvements typically include private or shared driveways, parking areas, drainage, sections
of underground pipe, swales, ponding areas, and amenities such as landscaping, fencing, open
space, and park facilities. Off-site improvements typically include:
      Sections of roadway, medians, bridges, sidewalks, and bicycle lanes;
      Sewage collection and treatment;
      Water systems, including lines, storage tanks, and treatment plants (Atascadero Municipal
       Water Company); and
      Public facilities for fire, school, and recreation.
The costs of on- and off-site improvements, which average about $35.00 per square foot for
single family residential construction and $28.00 per square foot for multi-family residential
construction are usually passed along to the homebuyer as part of the final cost of the home.
The on- and off-site improvement standards imposed by the City are typical for most
communities and do not pose unusual constraints for housing development.
Parking Standards
The City’s parking requirements are based upon unit type and size. As shown in Table V-36,
parking requirements are typically two spaces per single-family residential unit. Multi-family
residential units generally average 2.25 spaces per unit after accounting for guest parking.
The City has several exceptions for parking. Bicycle parking may substitute parking spaces in
lots with 20 or more spaces. A bicycle rack providing for at least five bicycles at a ratio of one
bicycle rack for each 20 spaces is allowed. For compact car spaces, lots with 20 or more spaces
may substitute compact car spaces for up to 20 percent of the total number of spaces. For
motorcycle parking, lots with 20 or more spaces may replace regular spaces with motorcycle
Final Plan                                         Page V-70                             January 27, 2015

                                                          City of Atascadero
                                                          Housing Element
spaces at a ratio of one motorcycle space for each 20 spaces.
                                                         Table V-36.               Parking Requirements A
Land Use                                                             Parking requirement
Single-family dwellings (including mobilehomes)                       2 spaces per du, except 1/du on lots < 4,000 s.f. in area
Second unit                                                          1 covered space for each 1 bedroom unit
                                                                     2 covered or uncovered for 2 or more bedrooms
Multifamily dwellings (including           condominiums      and     1 bedroom unit: 1.5 spaces
attached ownership dwellings)                                        2 bedroom unit: 2 spaces, each add. bedroom: 0.5 space
                                                                     Guest parking: 1 space per 5 units, or fraction thereof
Skilled nursing facility                                             1 space per 4 beds
Group quarters                                                       1 space per bedroom, plus 1 per eight beds
Single room occupancy                                                1 space per 4 units and 1 space per employee, plus 0.5
                                                                     space per 2 units
Notes:
A. Not regulatory. For reference only, refer to Zoning Ordinance for the latest official development standards. Zoning Ordinance may
be amended independently of this table.
In certain situations, parking requirements may be reduced or waived. This includes some
alternative parking arrangement options:
   o    Tandem Parking. Tandem parking permitted for single-family dwellings and individual
        mobilehomes upon meeting appropriate performance criteria.
   o    Parking Districts. Parking requirements may be modified within a parking district where
        adequate parking is provided within the limits of the district and the parking
        requirements of a new use are accommodated by the parking district.
   o    Shared Peak-Hour Parking. Where two or more uses have distinct and differing peak traffic
        usage periods the required number of parking spaces may be reduced through
        conditional use permit approval.
   o    On-Street Parking Adjustment. In the case that a new driveway eliminates on-street parking
        spaces, the requirement for off-street spaces may be adjusted.
   o    Planning Commission Modification. The required parking standards may be modified
        through Conditional Use Permit approval by the Planning Commission.
Permit Processing and Fees
Development Fees
The City charges various fees and assessments to cover the costs of processing permits and
providing services. Impacts fees are also charged to cover the cost or providing municipal
services or mitigating project impacts. These fees are summarized in Table V-37. The total
amount of fees varies from project to project based on type, existing infrastructure, and the cost
of mitigating environmental impacts. Atascadero does not control school and water impact fees.
These services are managed by separate districts.
Final Plan                                                   Page V-71                                                January 27, 2015
                                                   City of Atascadero
                                                    Housing Element
                                       Table V-37.           Planning and Development FeesA
             Fee Category                                             Fee Amount
Planning Fees (cost recovery) - Adopted May 1, 2014
Administrative AUP Review                     $665 per application
Minor CUP Review                              $1,090 per application
Major CUP Review                              $3,910 per application
Variance Application                          $1,725 per application
Development Agreement                         $12,000 deposit, plus additional fees (staff charges, etc)
Specific Plan                                 $9,000 deposit, plus additional fees (staff charges, etc)
General Plan Amendment                        $6,895 per application
PD Zone Change                                $6,810 per application
Rezoning (Map or Text)                        $3,785 per application ($7,235 rezoning with GP amendment)
Tentative Parcel Map                          $4,080 per application
Tentative Tract Map                           $5,615 per map, plus $40 per lot over 15 lots
Condominium Conversion Tentative Map          $4,920 + $64 per unit over 15 units if converting over 4 units
Precise Plan                                  $2,045 per application
Annexation                                    $15,000 deposit, plus additional fees (staff charges, etc)
Lot Line Adjustment Review                    $1,295 per application historic lot line
                                              $2,170 for others
Lot Merger                                    $1,315 per application
Temporary Occupancy Review                    $345 per application (Residential)
Administrative Time Extension Review          $395 per application
Planning Commission Time Extension            $725 per application
Review
Appeal to Planning Commission (not full       $695 per application
cost recovery)
Appeal to City Council (not full cost         $935 per application
recovery)
Planning Review/Approval of Building          Minor $90 per application
Permit                                        Major $315 per application
                                              CUP/PD Compliance $415
                                              DRC Review $355
Affordable Housing Unit Fee Process           $285 per application plus $190/unit and any plus legal costs
Environmental Review
Environmental Impact Report Review         10% of contract consultant amount of City staff review
Environmental Negative Declaration         $1,455 per application in addition to other application fees, where
                                           applicable
Capital Facilities Fees - Adopted June 30, 2007
                                                       SFR                                 MFR
Law Enforcement Facilities                 $574                             $334
Fire Protection Facilities                 $950 - $955                      $516 - $550
Fire Aerial Response Vehicle               --                               $242
Circulation System                         $5,597                           $2,822 - $5,597
Storm Drainage Facilities                  $777 - $2,000                    $314 - $499
General Government Facilities              $1,036                           $1,036
Library Expansion Facilities               $532                             $323 - $418
Public Meeting Facilities                  $1,084                           $660 - $852
Parkland                                   $4,775                           $2,906 - $3,754
Open Space Acquisition                     $1,660                           $1,011 - $1,305
Sewer                                      $573 plus admin fee of $5 plus $1210 extension fee
A. Not regulatory. For reference only. Planning and development fees display current rates at the time of
publication. Fees are subject to change at the discretion of the City Council. Zoning Ordinance may be
amended independently of this table. Please check with the City of Atascadero Community Development
Department for a current fee schedule.
Final Plan                                            Page V-72                                           January 27, 2015
                                                     City of Atascadero
                                                      Housing Element
Source: City of Atascadero, 2014
City records provided examples of fees charged on new housing projects (see Table V-38). Fees
collected by the City in the review and development process are limited to the City's costs for
providing these services, and approximately 48 percent of development fees are imposed by
agencies outside the City’s control (i.e. school district impact fees and water connection fees).
                                        Table V-38.           Development Fees for New Housing, 2014A
             Development Fee Category                              Single Family Unit               Multi-Family Unit
Building and Planning fees                                           $4,500 - $7,500                 $4,000 - $6,000
                                                                                1                               2
School District - Atascadero Unified School District                     $6,720                          $4,368
                    3
Water Connection - Atascadero Mutual Water
                                                                         $21,270                         $13,700
Company
Impact Fees                                                         $16,900 - $18,200               $11,700 - $14,550
Miscellaneous                                                             $1,000                          $2,000
                                                     Total          $50,400 - $54,690               $35,768 - $40,618
Notes:
A. Not regulatory. For reference only, refer to City’s website for latest fee schedule. City fee schedule may be
amended independently of this table.
1. Assumes a 2,000 square foot single family dwelling with the impact fee at $3.36 per square foot.
2. Assumes a 1,300 square foot multi-family unit with the impact fee at $3.36 per square foot.
3. Meter installation and connection fee rates are based on meter size or Equivalent Dwelling Unit (EDU), whichever
is greater. Meter installation fees start at $1,670.00 for 3/4" meter (standard residential size) or 1.00 EDU. Secondary
Residential units are assessed 65% of the fee charged for the primary residence and may connect an additional
meter for a charge of $1,670.00. Connection fees (system impact fees) range from $19,600.00 for 3/4” (residential)
meter to $49,000.00 for a 1” meter, which may be required due to fire flow. Connection fees vary for multi-family
projects. Residential Multi-Family projects without a dedicated landscape meter are charged 0.5 EDU. Residential
Multi-Family projects with a dedicated landscape meter are charged 0.25 EDU.
Source: City of Atascadero, 2014; Atascadero Mutual Water Company, 2014.
Final Plan                                               Page V-73                                          January 27, 2015

                                                  City of Atascadero
                                                  Housing Element
Development fees make up approximately 13 to 20 percent of a home purchase price (see Table
V-39). The City of Atascadero fees are comparable to those of surrounding communities.
                                    Table V-39.         Proportion of Fee in Overall Development Cost
                                                 for a Typical Residential Development, 2014
  Development Cost for a Typical Unit                            Single Family            Multiple Family
  Total estimated fees                                       $50,400 - $54,690/unit   $35,768 - $40,618/unit
                             1
  Estimated sale price/value                                        $379,830                 $184,660
  Estimated proportion of fee cost to overall
                                                                  13.3- 14.4%               19.4-21.9%
  development cost/unit
  1. Based on one (1) year median sales price from January – December 2013 Zillow home value index.
Inclusionary requirements and fees also add to housing development costs. In 2003, the City
Council approved an Inclusionary Housing Policy for all developments requiring a legislative
approval i.e. Zone Change or General Plan Amendment. The Policy requires an in-lieu fee of
five percent of the construction valuation of the market rate unit within a project that does not
provide 20 percent of the units as affordable. All inclusionary units shall be deed restricted for a
period of 30 years. All residential projects under legislative approval are subject to the
inclusionary requirement as follows:
           o  Projects of 1-10 units: pay in-lieu fee or build units.
           o  Projects of 11 or more units must build units or receive a Council approval to pay in-
              lieu fees.
The Inclusionary Housing Policy requires that all affordable units in single family land use
areas be designated for moderate-income households. The distribution of affordable units in
multi-family and mixed-use commercial land use areas area: 20 percent very low-income, 37
percent low-income, and 43 percent moderate-income. Affordable units must be constructed at
the same time as the market-rate units and affordable units must be physically distributed
throughout the project site, rather than concentrated in one area. To ensure compliance with
these requirements, a construction timeline detailing the development of affordable units and a
site map must be approved by the City Council.
With City Council approval alternatives to on-site construction or payment of in-lieu fees for
inclusionary units may be allowed, including: off-site construction, land dedication, or
combinations of construction, fees, and land dedications. As an incentive to provide affordable
units, all inclusionary units shall be treated as density bonus units that are not counted as part
of the maximum density entitlement of a site. As an increasing number of inclusionary units
move toward construction, the development community has raised concerns regarding the
financing and resale of these units. In an attempt to mitigate some of these financing issues, the
City Council approved an equity-sharing program for the moderate-income homes. The equity-
sharing program calls for the home to eventually be re-sold at the fair market value, with the
City receiving its share of the sales proceeds to re-invest in affordable housing.
Permit Processing
Final Plan                                           Page V-74                                     January 27, 2015

                                                    City of Atascadero
                                                     Housing Element
Housing production may be constrained by development review procedures, fees, and
standards. Residential projects proposed in Atascadero may be subject to design, environmental
review, zoning, subdivision and planned unit development review, use permit control, and
building permit approval, which together can take up to 24 months for a single family or multi-
family projects.
Table V-40 displays the review authority required for various planning decisions and permits.
Table V-41 displays the typical timelines for approvals and permits for the City of Atascadero.
Minor residential projects typically take from one to three months from submittal of the
application through completion of the approval process. Larger residential projects can take six
to twelve months. Permit processing is a time consuming and costly process, especially for
integrated projects such as those involving elements of affordable housing and mixed-use. City
Staff adhere to strict review times consistent with State law for entitlement review. Review
times are approximately 30 days for most projects. Processing timeframes have been generally
predicated on how quickly the applicant can process corrections or changes to the proposed
project. The City has proposed Programs 6.1-1 through 6.1-6 to continue to review and revise
procedures to streamline the permitting process.
                                               Table V-40.           Permit Processing ProceduresA
                                                                   Role of Review Authority
                                        Director or City Staff        Design              Planning        City Council
                                                                      Review           Commission
Type of Decision                                                    Committee
Zoning Review (Administrative)                  Decision               N/A                 Appeal             Appeal
                                                               1             1
Administrative Use Permit               Decision/Recommend           Decision              Appeal             Appeal
Variance                                      Recommend                N/A                Decision            Appeal
Zoning Map Amendment                          Recommend                N/A             Recommend             Decision
Design Review Approval                        Recommend              Decision              Appeal             Appeal
Planned Development (Master Plan                                   Recommend
                                              Recommend                                Recommend             Decision
of Development required)
Condition Use Permit                          Recommend            Recommend              Decision            Appeal
Subdivision Maps                              Recommend            Recommend              Decision            Appeal
Notes:
A. Not regulatory. For reference only, refer to Zoning Ordinance for the latest official review procedures. Zoning
Ordinance may be amended independently of this table.
1. Design Review may be considered the “hearing officer” for AUP applications for non-residential uses
Source: City of Atascadero, 2014
                       Figure V-41. Timelines for Permit ProceduresA
Final Plan                                             Page V-75                                          January 27, 2015

                                                   City of Atascadero
                                                    Housing Element
    Type of Approval, Permit, or Review                       Typical Processing Time
These time periods begin when a complete application is submitted and are extended when
additional information is requested by the City. The timeframes below are target issuance
date—when the applicant can expect a decision on their application.
Zoning Review (Administrative)                             Concurrent with building permit
Administrative Use Permit                                             1-3 months
Variance                                                              1-3 months
Design Review Approval                                     Concurrent with building permit
Planned Development Review                                           6-12 months
Condition Use Permit, minor                                           1-3 months
Condition Use Permit, major                                           3-6 months
Zoning Amendment                                                      3-6 months
General Plan Amendment                                               6-12 months
Subdivision Maps                                                      6-9 months
Notes:
A. Not regulatory. For reference only. Actual permit review times may vary.
Source: City of Atascadero, 2014
Ministerial Review
Planning review of ministerial projects, such as building permits, are reviewed concurrently
with building, fire, and public works. The City offers pre-project meetings to discuss zoning
compliance and building code requirements to ensure that the process is streamlined. Planning
review of routine over the counter permits is limited to tree protection when trees exist on-site
and are within the area of development.
Design Review
The Atascadero Appearance Review Manual was adopted by the City Council in 1987. The
Manual includes direction regarding the relationship of buildings to the site, relationship of
buildings and the site to the adjoining area, landscaping, building design, maintenance, and
parking. The purpose of Appearance Review is to ensure that the architectural and general
appearance of buildings and grounds are in keeping with the character of the neighborhood.
The City developed the Downtown Design Guidelines in 2000. The design guidelines were
intended to assist in the revitalization of the Atascadero downtown, provide for infill
development, and promote the conservation and reuse of existing buildings. The Guidelines
provide a basis for review of building orientation, design, architecture, landscaping, and signs
of new projects in the downtown. The guidelines were updated in 2011.
The Design Review Committee (DRC) was established by the City Council in August 2010.
Municipal Code Section 9-2.107 identifies the purpose, authority, and approval criteria for the
DRC. The DRC consists of members of City Council and Planning Commission and one
member of the public, and has the authority to approve and make recommendation in regards
to the architectural appearance, signage, site plans and landscape plans. Appearance approval
is based on adherence to policies of the General Plan, compatibility with surrounding uses, and
consistency with the guidelines and recommendations in the Appearance Review Manual and
Downtown Design Guidelines. All multi-family residential projects, single family residential
Final Plan                                             Page V-76                           January 27, 2015

                                             City of Atascadero
                                             Housing Element
projects requiring a Planned Development permit, or any projects requiring a precise plan,
conditional use permit, zone change or general plan amendment must go through design
review prior to Planning Commission or City Council.
The DRC has been helpful in project streamlining by working out issues that normally would
have been dealt by Planning Commission or simply at a staff level. The Design Review process
does not appear to have a significant effect on housing affordability. Staff will continue to
provide educational materials and training for the DRC regarding the function and scope to
ensure it is not inadvertently used to reduce housing units.
Environmental Review Process/Precise Plan
A considerable amount of larger-scale developments in the City occur through the use of
Precise Plans or other applications that trigger environmental review. Precise plan approval is
required when a development or use of land is listed in a particular zoning district as an
allowable use and when it is determined by the Director that the project is not eligible for a
categorical exemption pursuant to Public Resources Code Section 21084 and the State EIR
Guidelines. State regulations require environmental review of discretionary project proposals
(e.g., subdivision maps, precise plans, use permits, etc.). The timeframes associated with
environmental review are regulated by CEQA. In compliance with the Permit Streamlining Act,
City staff ensures that non-legislative proposals are heard at the Planning Commission within
60 days of receipt of an application being deemed complete. Precise Plan applications are
reviewed and approved by staff concurrently with the building permit review.
Housing for People With Disabilities
California law requires jurisdictions to analyze potential and actual constraints on housing for
persons with disabilities, demonstrate efforts to remove impediments, and include programs to
accommodate housing designed for disabled persons. Review of the Municipal Code,
permitting procedures, development standards, and building codes revealed the following
findings:
          The City enforces Title 24 of the California Code of Regulations that addresses access
           and adaptability of buildings to accommodate persons with disabilities. The City also
           requires compliance with the 1988 amendments to the Fair Housing Act, which requires
           a minimum percentage of dwelling units in new RMF housing projects to be fully
           accessible to the physically disabled. No additional accessibility standards above State
           and Federal law are required.
          In downtown zones, where residential uses are limited to the upper floors, a
           handicapped accessible unit may be located on a first floor if a project is required to
           provide a unit in compliance with the Americans with Disabilities Act, subject to
           development standards.
Process for Reasonable Accommodation
Final Plan                                      Page V-77                               January 27, 2015

                                         City of Atascadero
                                         Housing Element
Accessibility improvements to existing structures, such as a ramp, are usually handled
ministerially by City staff. The City adopted a reasonable accommodation ordinance in 2013.
Table V-42 reviews zoning and land use policies, permitting practices, and building codes to
ensure compliance with State and Federal fair housing laws for persons with disabilities. The
City has proposed Program 4.2-1 to ensure continued compliance with ADA standards and
reasonable accommodation in residential development.
Final Plan                                  Page V-78                            January 27, 2015
                                                     City of Atascadero
                                                     Housing Element
                                           Table V-41.          Constraints on Housing for Persons with
                                                                            Disabilities
General
Does the City have a process for persons with disabilities      Yes. The City adopted a reasonable accommodation
to make requests for reasonable accommodation?                  ordinance in 2013.
Has the City made efforts to remove constraints on              There are no special permits or requirements for homes
housing for persons with disabilities?                          or development for disabled persons in zones where the
                                                                use would be otherwise permitted. In most cases, these
                                                                developments are permitted use.
Does the City assist in meeting identified needs?               The City applies Community Development Block Grant
                                                                (CDBG) funds to accessibility upgrades. The San Luis
                                                                Obispo Housing Authority recently completed a 19-unit
                                                                retirement hotel, which contained ADA compliant units.
Zoning and Land Use
Has the City reviewed all its zoning laws, policies, and        Yes, the City has reviewed the land use regulations and
practices for compliance with fair housing law?                 practices to ensure compliance with fair housing laws.
Are residential parking standards for persons with              Section 9-4.114 of the Planning and Zoning Regulations
disabilities different from other parking standards? Does       (Off-street parking required) mandates the provision of
the City have a policy or program for the reduction of          disabled parking spaces in accordance with California
parking requirements for special needs housing if a             Building Code (part 2 of Title 24) Chapter 11. The
proponent can demonstrate a reduced parking need?               parking requirements also allow flexibility if an applicant
                                                                can demonstrate a lower parking need.
Does the locality restrict the siting of group homes?           No
What zones allow group homes other than those allowed           Group homes (referred to as residential care facilities in
by State law? Are group home over six persons                   the Planning and Zoning Regulations) of six or less
allowed?                                                        individuals are allowed by right in all residential districts.
                                                                They are allowed in the Public (P) zone with a
                                                                Conditional Use Permit. Facilities with greater than 6
                                                                persons are permitted, by right, in the Residential
                                                                Multiple Family (RMF) zone and in the single-family
                                                                residential zones [Residential Suburban (RS),
                                                                Residential Single Family (RSF), Limited Single Family
                                                                (LSF)] and the P zone with a Conditional Use Permit.
Does the City have occupancy standards in the zoning            No.
code that apply specifically to unrelated adults and not to
families?
Does the land use element regulate the siting of special        No, there is no minimum distance required between two
needs housing in relationship to one another?                   or more special needs housing.
Permits and Processing
How does the City process a request to retrofit homes for       Atascadero allows residential retrofitting to increase the
accessibility?                                                  suitability of homes for people with disabilities in
                                                                compliance with ADA requirements, as permitted in the
                                                                2013 California Building Code.
Does the City allow groups homes with six or fewer              Yes.
persons by right in single-family zones?
Does the City have a set of particular conditions or use        Group homes (or residential care facilities) with greater
restrictions for group homes with greater than six              than six persons are permitted, by right, in the RMF zone
persons?                                                        and in the single-family residential zones (RS, RSF, LSF)
                                                                and the P zone with a Conditional Use Permit. They are
                                                                subject design review and are required to be
                                                                incompliance with the same parking and site coverage
                                                                requirements as multi-family uses.
What kind of community input does the City allow for the        Group homes (or residential care facilities) with greater
approval of group homes?                                        than 6 persons are permitted, by right, in the RMF zone.
                                                                No other planning approval is required in the RMF zone
Final Plan                                              Page V-79                                             January 27, 2015
                                                    City of Atascadero
                                                     Housing Element
                                                               other than to ensure that the development conforms to
                                                               the standards of the Development Code. In the single-
                                                               family residential zones (RS, RSF, LSF) and the P zone
                                                               a Conditional Use Permit is required. The Conditional
                                                               Use Permit provides the public with an opportunity to
                                                               review the project and express their concerns in a public
                                                               hearing.
Does the City have particular conditions for group homes       No, the City does not have special standards for group
that will be providing services on site?                       homes regarding services or operation.
Building Codes
Has the locality adopted the Uniform Building Code?            Atascadero has adopted the 2013 California Building
                                                               Code, which incorporated the 2012 International Building
                                                               Code. No amendments have been made that affect the
                                                               ability to accommodate persons with disabilities.
Has the City adopted any universal design element into         No, the City has no adopted universal design standards
the code?                                                      at this time.
Does the City provide reasonable accommodation for             Yes. The City adopted a reasonable accommodation
persons with disabilities in the enforcement of building       ordinance in 2013.
codes and the issuance of building permits?
Energy Conservation
Planning to maximize energy efficiency and the incorporation of energy conservation and green
building features contributes to reduced housing costs. Energy efficient design for sustainable
communities reduces dependence on automobiles. Additionally, maximizing energy efficiency
reduces greenhouse gas emissions. In response to recent legislation on global climate change,
local governments are required to implement measures that cut greenhouse gas emissions
attributable to land use decisions (see discussion on Global Climate Change below). The
Housing Element programs can support energy efficiency that benefits the market, the
environment, and the long-term health of the community by:
      Establishing a more compact urban core, bringing residents close to work and services,
       therefore reducing automobile trips and reducing emissions;
      Implementing passive solar construction techniques that require solar orientation, thermal
       massing, and other energy efficient design standards; and
      Encouraging the use of solar water heating and photovoltaics.
Executive Order S-E-05 initiated the first steps in establishing greenhouse gas emission
reduction targets in California. This was followed by the California Global Warming Solutions
Act (AB 32), which required the California Air Resources Board (CARB) to establish reduction
measures.
Final Plan                                             Page V-80                                          January 27, 2015

                                           City of Atascadero
                                           Housing Element
There are several areas where programs for energy conservation in new and existing housing
units are supported by the City:
      Through application of State residential building standards that establish energy
       performance criteria for new residential buildings (Title 24 of the California
       Administrative Code). These regulations establish insulation, window glazing, air
       conditioning, and water heating system requirements. The City also instituted the City
       Council adopted Energy Conservation Initiative in 2001.
      Through appropriate land use policies and development standards that reduce energy
       consumption. The City of Atascadero’s General Plan is based on the Smart Growth
       Principles of encouraging infill and reuse of existing land and infrastructure. The Land
       Use, Open Space, and Conservation Element include goals to preserve a greenbelt around
       the City, encourage mixed use infill development, revitalize of the Downtown Core, and
       encourage compact development with a pedestrian scale and trails.
      Through the implementation of the City Housing Rehabilitation Loan Program and
       County Neighborhood Preservation Program; which often includes attic and exterior wall
       insulation, door and window repair or replacement, weather stripping and caulking, duct
       insulation, and water heater blankets in rehabilitation projects.
      City environmental review may also require measures to reduce energy consumption.
      Energy Alternatives for low-income families and how the City can perform outreach.
Pacific Gas and Electric (PG&E) provides a variety of energy conservation services for residents
and provides several other energy assistance programs for lower income households. These
programs include their Energy Watch Partnerships and the Charitable Contributions Program.
The Energy Watch Partnerships help residents lower their energy bills and promote cleaner
energy production. Through this program, PG&E has extended the reach of effectiveness of
energy efficiency programs, and provided information about demand responses programs,
renewable energy and self-generations opportunities.
The Charitable Contributions Program provides millions of dollars each year to non-profit
organizations to support environmental and energy sustainability. Projects include residential
and community solar energy distribution projects, public education projects, and energy
efficiency programs. The goal is to ensure that 75 percent of the funding assist underserved
communities, which includes low-income households, people with disabilities, and seniors.
PG&E also offers rebates for energy efficient home appliances and remodeling. Rebates are
available for cooling and heating equipment, lighting, seasonal appliances, and remodeling
(cool roofs, insulation, water heaters). These opportunities are available to all income levels and
housing types.
Energy Consumption
Final Plan                                    Page V-81                                January 27, 2015

                                           City of Atascadero
                                           Housing Element
Residential water heating and HVAC systems are major sources of energy consumption. With
the application of energy efficient design and the use of solar power systems, home heating and
cooling can be operated in a more efficient and sustainable manner.
By encouraging solar energy technology for residential heating/cooling in both retrofits and
new construction, the City can play a major role in energy conservation. There are two distinct
approaches to solar heating: active and passive. The best method to encourage use of solar
systems for heating and cooling is to not restrict their use in the zoning and building ordinances
and to require subdivision layouts that facilitate solar use.
Residential water heating can be made more energy efficient through the application of solar
water heating technologies. Solar water heating relies on the sun to heat water, which is then
stored for later use. A conventional water heater is needed only as a back-up. By cutting the
amount of natural gas needed to heat water by 50 to 75 percent per building, solar water
heating systems can lower energy bills and reduce greenhouse gas emissions significantly. The
City has the opportunity to implement solar technologies with the help of recent legislation. The
Solar Water Heating and Efficiency Act of 2007 (AB 1470) has created a $250 million, ten-year
program to provide consumer rebates for solar water heating systems.
Global Climate Change
There are significant areas where Atascadero can do more to encourage energy conservation in
new and existing residential development to reduce the demand on energy. There are a variety
of energy efficiency and greenhouse gas emission reduction strategies that can be integrated
into land use decisions related to housing. Table V-43 lists strategies to address energy
conservation and global climate change, developed by the California Environmental Protection
Agency’s Climate Action Team. As an active member of Local Governments for Sustainability,
Atascadero is also participating in an effort to inventory and reduce greenhouse gas emissions.
Through these and other conservation measures, the City seeks to help minimize the percentage
of household income required for energy costs as well as minimize the production of
greenhouse gases. Programs have been included to incorporate newly adopted State energy
efficiency standards and to encourage alternative energy efficient technologies.
Final Plan                                    Page V-82                                January 27, 2015

                                                          City of Atascadero
                                                          Housing Element
                                         Table V-42.             Strategies to Address Energy Conservation and
                                                                          Global Climate Change
               Action Team                     Project Design/Mitigation to Comply                  Housing Element Strategy
                                                            with Strategy
Building Energy Efficiency Standards in      Residential development projects have          Ensure all new development is in
Place and in Progress: Public Resources      the potential to achieve a greater             compliance with CEC energy efficiency
Code 25402 authorizes the                    reduction in combined space heating,           requirements as they are updated.
CEC to adopt and periodically update its     cooling and water heating energy
building energy efficiency standards (that   compared to the current Title 24
apply to newly constructed buildings and     Standards.
additions to and alterations to existing
buildings)
Smart Land Use: Smart land use               Specific strategies include:                   Encourage         compact      residential
strategies encourage jobs/housing            Promoting jobs/housing proximity and           development.
proximity, promote transit-oriented          transit oriented development
development, and encourage high-             Encouraging high-density
density residential/commercial               residential/commercial development
development along transit corridors.         along transit/rail corridor.
Green Buildings Initiative:                  Residential development projects could         The City has made some efforts towards
Green Building Executive Order, S-20-04      increase energy efficiency percentage          encouraging green building. In 2006 the
(CA 2004), sets a goal of reducing energy    beyond Title 24 requirements. In addition,     City    signed     a  Memorandum         of
use in public and private buildings by 20    the project could implement other green        Understanding with SLO Greenbuild. In
percent by the year 2015, as compared        building design (i.e., natural daylighting     2007 the City Hall permit counter installed
with 2003 levels.                            and     on-site     renewable,     electricity a kiosk with SLO Greenbuild information
                                             generation).                                   and information on environmentally
                                                                                            friendly construction methods and
                                                                                            materials.
                                                                                            =
California Solar Initiative:                 If feasible, the project could install         The City could access the incentives that
Installation of 1 million solar roofs or an  photovoltaic cells or other solar options.     will be made available and provide
equivalent 3,000 MW by 2017 on homes                                                        information to developers, to encourage
and businesses; increased use of solar                                                      the installation of solar roofs on new
thermal systems to offset the increasing                                                    residential development.
demand for natural gas; use of advanced
metering in solar applications; and                                                         The City has actively promoted solar
creation of a funding source that can                                                       technology by implementing AB 811.
provide rebates over 10 years through a
declining incentive schedule.
Source: State of California, Environmental Protection Agency, Climate Action Team, 2007
 2.        Non-Governmental Constraints
The availability and cost of housing is strongly influenced by market factors over which local
government has little or no control. State law requires that the housing element contain a
general assessment of these constraints, which can serve as the basis for actions that local
governments might take to offset their effects. The primary non-governmental constraints to the
development of new housing are land, construction costs, and environmental constraints.
Land And Construction Costs
The cost and availability of capital financing affect the overall cost of housing in two ways: first,
when the developer uses capital for initial site preparation and construction and, second, when
Final Plan                                                   Page V-83                                                January 27, 2015
                                                          City of Atascadero
                                                          Housing Element
the homebuyer uses capital to purchase housing. The capital used by the developer is borrowed
for the short-term at commercial rates, which are considerably higher than standard mortgage
rates. Construction financing is sometimes difficult to obtain for multifamily construction,
which poses a significant constraint on the production of affordable housing in Atascadero.
Land costs include acquisition and the cost of holding land throughout the development
process. These costs can account for as much as half of the final sales prices of new homes in
small developments or in areas where land is scarce. Land costs in single-family residential
neighborhoods of Atascadero range from $8,000 to $395,000 per acre.7 Among the variables
affecting the cost of land are the size of lots, location and amenities, the availability and
proximity of public services, and the financing arrangement between the buyer and seller.
Construction costs vary widely depending on the type, size, and amenities of the development.
Based on a recent national survey or residential developers8, the average cost of construction of
a single family home in 2013 was $246,453, or $95 per square foot. This is an increase in typical
construction costs over the past few years, $15 more per square foot than in 2011.
Environmental and Physical Constraints
The following potential physical and environmental constraints may affect development
regulated by the City by limiting the development potential and/or adding mitigation costs to a
project:
Environmental Constraints
Several special status species are known to occur in Atascadero, including: dwarf calycadenia,
Douglas’ spineflower, Hardham’s evening-primrose, Jared’s pepper-grass, Kellogg’s horkelia,
Oval-leaved snapdragon, rayless aphanactis, round-leaved filaree, Salinas milk vetch, Salinas
valley goldfields, shining navarretia, and straight-awned spineflower. The City also protects
unique vegetation communities that support sensitive species, including wetlands. Wetland
habitat types are considered a vegetation community of special concern by the CDFG because of
substantial statewide losses. The presence of special-status species and plant communities of
special concern may affect development regulated by the City by limiting the development
potential and/or adding mitigation costs.
The grasslands, riparian habitats, and tracts of undeveloped land provide habitat for a diverse
selection of resident and migrant wildlife. Eighteen special status bird and mammal species are
known to occur in Atascadero. Barriers to wildlife movement and migration and the removal of
raptor nesting sites are to be avoided in future development. The occurrence of any of these
species on a site could pose constraints to a housing project.
7 A review of realtor websites in April 2014 provided 19 vacant lots for sale within the City. Land costs were estimated from this
sample.
8 Taylor, H., Economics and Housing Policy National Association of Home Builders, January 2014.
Final Plan                                                   Page V-84                                                  January 27, 2015

                                           City of Atascadero
                                           Housing Element
Preservation of natural flora and fauna is a basic community goal and native trees are valued
community assets. The City has established regulations for the installation, maintenance,
planting, preservation, protection, and selected removal of native trees within the City limits
through the adoption of the Native Tree Ordinance. A tree removal permit is required for the
removal of native trees (as defined by Chapter 11, Native Tree Regulations) and for pruning of
the live canopy in native trees in excess of 25 percent of the existing canopy area. In addition,
for each residential building permit issued, the planting of one five-gallon native tree is
required. The mitigation requirements may become cumbersome for high-density projects, as
tree replacement may be required on-site that is at the sole expense of the applicant. However,
native and drought tolerant landscaping may be used to meet landscape requirements and does
not specifically add costs above standard Zoning Ordinance landscaping requirements.
Physical Constraints
Several physical constraints may occur in the City. Parcels with steep slopes may have
constraints associated with landslide hazards, grading costs, and access requirements.
Landslides are relatively rare in the developed portions of the City, as compared to in the hilly,
undeveloped areas. Stationary noise sources near potential sites for development may pose
constraints. For example, traffic on U.S. Route 101 exceeds acceptable noise levels. Housing may
be limited within 500 feet of U.S. Route 101 under CEQA, due to the health hazards of siting
sensitive uses near urban roads with over 100,000 vehicles per day unless appropriate
mitigation can be identified and implemented. Operational noise sources near potential sites
for development may pose constraints as well; such as the Southern Pacific railroad tracks that
run north-south through the eastern portion of the City. Residential uses adjacent to the
railroad tracks have the potential to be exposed to noise that exceed acceptable noise levels,
although noise incidences are temporary (dependent on railroad operation). In addition, low-
lying areas of the City may be subject to flooding during a 100-year storm (See Figure IV-1 in
the Safety and Noise Element of the General Plan).
Final Plan                                    Page V-85                               January 27, 2015
                                               City of Atascadero
                                               Housing Element
 H. Housing Element Goals, Policies, and Programs
The following goals, policies, and programs have been established to address housing issues in
Atascadero and to meet State law housing requirements. Programs generally include a
statement of specific City action(s) necessary to implement a policy or goal and identify the City
department or other agency responsible for implementation, the quantified objectives (where
applicable), and a timeframe for completion.
Goal HOS 1:         Promote diverse and high quality housing opportunities to
                    meet the needs of all segments of the community.
Policy 1.1:    Encourage new housing, including mixed-use projects in commercial land use
               areas, to meet the needs of all household types in the City.
               U Programs:
               1. Continue street and infrastructure improvement projects to benefit existing high
                    density residential areas.
                    Funding Source:                General Fund, Public Works Department
                    Responsible Agency:            Community Development Department
                    Timeframe:                     Ongoing
                    Quantified Objective:          n/a
               2. Continue to require the use of specific plans for residential projects of 100 or more
                    units.
                    Funding Source:                General Fund
                    Responsible Agency:            Community Development Department, Planning
                                                   Commission, City Council
                    Timeframe:                     Ongoing
                    Quantified Objective:          n/a
               3. Continue to allow manufactured housing and group housing in accordance with State
                    law.
                    In order be in compliance with State law (Government Health and Safety
                    Code Section 18500), the City should clarify that the terms “mobilehome” and
                    “manufactured home” are essentially the same. Manufactured housing
                    placed on a permanent foundation should be considered a single-family
                    dwelling and permitted in all zones that allow single-family housing.
                    Funding Source:                General Fund
                    Responsible Agency:            Community Development Department, Planning
                                                   Commission, City Council
                    Timeframe:                     Within two years of adoption of the Housing Element
                    Quantified Objective:          20 units
               4. Support the extension and expansion of sewer service for the Eagle Ranch
                    annexation area by allocating the funding necessary.
Final Plan                                        Page V-86                                    January 27, 2015

                                          City of Atascadero
                                          Housing Element
               Funding Source:                General Fund
               Responsible Agency:            Community Development Department, Planning
                                              Commission, City Council, Public Works Department
               Timeframe:                     Ongoing
               Quantified Objective:          100 affordable units
           5. Continue to allow mixed residential and commercial development and promote
               second- and third-story residential development in the City’s Downtown zoning
               districts. Taking into account market conditions and development costs, the City will
               provide, when possible, developer incentives such as expedited permit processing
               and flexible development standards for units that are affordable to lower income
               households. The City will publicize these incentives on the City’s website
               (www.atascadero.org) within one week of a confirmed decision to make them
               available in a timely fashion.
               Funding Source:                General Fund
               Responsible Agency:            Community Development Department, Planning
                                              Commission, City Council
               Timeframe:                     Ongoing
               Quantified Objective:          20 units
           6. Adopt a Rural Residential Zone in the Zoning Ordinance consistent with its
               designation on the Zoning Map and standards that distinguish it from the Residential
               Suburban zone (to facilitate the development of a variety of housing types).
               Funding Source:                General Fund
               Responsible Agency:            Community Development Department
               Timeframe:                     Within three years of Housing Element adoption
               Quantified Objective:          n/a
           7. Continue to encourage, where suitable, Planned Unit Development (PD) Overlay
               Zones, for small lot subdivisions, for higher density attached or row-house style
               housing in the RMF zoning districts.
               Funding Source:                General Fund
               Responsible Agency:            Community Development Department, Planning
                                              Commission, City Council
               Timeframe:                     Ongoing
               Quantified Objective:          75 units
           8. Continue to maintain an affordable housing density bonus ordinance that establishes
               procedures for obtaining and monitoring density bonuses in compliance with State
               law. Following adoption the City shall regularly update the ordinance to be in
               compliance with Government Code §65915.
               Funding Source:                General Fund
               Responsible Agency:            Community Development Department, Planning
                                              Commission, City Council
               Timeframe:                     Ordinance adoption – within two years of Housing
                                              Element adoption; updating ordinance for compliance
                                              with State law - ongoing
               Quantified Objective:          25 units
Final Plan                                   Page V-87                                   January 27, 2015

                                          City of Atascadero
                                           Housing Element
           9. [Modified] Continue to monitor the impact of the City’s current inclusionary housing
               policy on production of market rate housing in response to market conditions. If the
               policy presents an obstacle to the development of the City's fair share of regional
               housing needs, the City will revise the policy accordingly.
               Funding Source:                General Fund
               Responsible Agency:            Community Development Department
               Timeframe:                     On-going
               Quantified Objective:          n/a
           10. Adopt an inclusionary housing ordinance that requires residential developments to
               provide deed-restricted, affordable units or an in-lieu fee. The inclusionary ordinance
               shall be consistent with State rent control laws for rental housing.
               Funding Source:                General Fund
               Responsible Agency:            Community Development Department
               Timeframe:                     Within three years of Housing Element adoption
               Quantified Objective:          70 units
           11. [Modified] To encourage the development of second units, the City will evaluate the
               development standards and update the Zoning Ordinance for second units
               (secondary residential units). For example, the City will explore incentives such as
               eliminating the covered parking requirement for a secondary residential unit.
               Funding Source:                General Fund
               Responsible Agency:            Community Development Department, Public Works
                                              Department, City Council
               Timeframe:                     Within two years of Housing Element adoption
               Quantified Objective:          10 units
           12. [Modified] To encourage the development of second units, the City should consider
               reduced development impact fees for second units as part of an AB 1600 study. The
               City will also work with Atascadero Mutual Water Company to investigate the
               possibility of reductions to water connection fees for second units.
               Funding Source:                General Fund
               Responsible Agency:            Community Development Department, Public Works
                                              Department, City Council
               Timeframe:                     Within one year of Housing Element adoption
               Quantified Objective:          15 units
           13. [Modified] The City will consider an amnesty program that would reduce or eliminate
               fees for unpermitted second units.
               Funding Source:                General Fund
               Responsible Agency:            Community Development Department, Public Works
                                              Department, City Council
               Timeframe:                     Within three years of Housing Element adoption
               Quantified Objective:          15 units
           14. Continue to maintain Chapter 12 of the Zoning Ordinance (Condo Conversion
               Ordinance) in order to reduce the impacts of condo conversions on lower cost rental
               housing.
Final Plan                                   Page V-88                                    January 27, 2015

                                           City of Atascadero
                                           Housing Element
               Funding Source:                 General Fund
               Responsible Agency:             Community Development Department, Planning
                                               Commission, City Council
               Timeframe:                      Ongoing
               Quantified Objectives:          n/a
           15.Continue to work with non-profit agencies, such as the County Housing Authority,
               Habitat for Humanity, the San Luis Obispo County Housing Trust Fund and Peoples’
               Self-Help Housing, to preserve existing affordable housing and to pursue funding for
               new units for extremely low-, very low-, low-, and moderate-income families.
               Funding Source:                 General Fund, CDBG, Tax Credits
               Responsible Agency:             Community Development Department
               Timeframe:                      Annual meetings, during preparation of annual review of
                                               the Housing Element, to discuss funding opportunities,
                                               vacant and opportunity sites, and status of affordable
                                               housing projects, Ongoing collaboration
               Quantified Objective:           50 units
           16.Continue to encourage developers to work with agencies such as the California
               Housing Finance Authority (CHFA) and the Department of Housing and Urban
               Development (HUD) to obtain loans for development of new multifamily rental
               housing for low income households. This will be accomplished by working with
               appropriate non-profit organizations, such as People’s Self Help Housing and the
               San Luis Obispo County Housing Trust Fund to identify opportunities. Specifically,
               the City will:
                       Contact potential affordable housing developers.
                       Identify funding opportunities and pursue financing.
                       Assist in preparing applications for funds.
                       Provide regulatory concessions and incentives, as necessary, to encourage
                        and facilitate the construction of affordable housing.
               Funding Source:                 General Fund
               Responsible Agency:             Community Development Department
               Timeframe:                      Develop list of potential affordable housing developers
                                               within one year of Housing Element adoption, Bi-
                                               annually contact potential affordable housing developers
                                               to discuss funding opportunities, application and
                                               entitlement assistance, including incentives, Ongoing
               Quantified Objective:           n/a
           17.Continue to contract with the San Luis Obispo Housing Authority for administration of
               the Section 8 housing voucher program. The City utilizes this relationship for program
               implementation and income verifications, and will apply for additional Section 8
               vouchers, as appropriate.
               Funding Source:                 HUD Section 8
               Responsible Agency:             Community Development Department, City Council,
                                               Housing Authority
               Timeframe:                      Ongoing, when eligible
               Quantified Objective:           n/a
Final Plan                                    Page V-89                                     January 27, 2015

                                           City of Atascadero
                                           Housing Element
           18. Amend the Zoning Ordinance to allow a waiver of the two-story height limit in the
               RMF Zone through the Minor Use Permit process, substantially reducing permit fee
               and review period. This option applies to projects that are not using the Planned
               Development option.
               Funding Source:                 General Fund
               Responsible Agency:             Community Development Department
               Timeframe:                      Within two years of Housing Element adoption
               Quantified Objective:           n/a
           19. [NEW] To encourage and facilitate development of a variety of housing types, the
               City should consider amending the Zoning Ordinance to establish standards, policies,
               and procedures for efficiency or micro detached units consistent with the California
               Building Code. The ordinance should provide a definition of efficiency or micro
               detached unit as a single habitable living unit, separate from and not including a
               single-room occupancy unit.
               Funding Source:                 General Fund
               Responsible Agency:             Community Development Department
               Timeframe:                      Within three years of Housing Element adoption
               Quantified Objective:           n/a
           20. [NEW] To reduce constraints to multi-family housing production the City will amend
               the zoning ordinance to modify Conditional Use Permit requirements for multi-family
               housing. A CUP will be required only for multi-family projects greater than 50 units.
               This will not affect the ‘by right’ approval of multi-family projects in the RMF-20 zone,
               which are not subject to a CUP or a Specific Plan. The City will periodically evaluate
               the approval process for projects requiring a CUP and monitor the impact the
               requirement has on project certainty, cost, and approval time.
               Funding Source:                 General Fund
               Responsible Agency:             Community Development Department
               Timeframe:                      Modify CUP requirement within two years of Housing
                                               Element adoption, monitor CUP impact on housing
                                               development on-going
               Quantified Objective:           n/a
           21. [NEW] The housing needs of persons with disabilities, including persons with
               developmental disabilities are typically not specifically addressed by Title 9
               Regulations. The housing needs of persons with disabilities, in addition to basic
               affordability, range from slightly modifying existing units to requiring a varying range
               of supportive housing facilities. In order to assist in the housing needs for persons
               with Developmental Disabilities, the City will implement the following programs:
                  The City shall seek State and Federal monies, as funding becomes available, in
                   support of housing construction and rehabilitation targeted for persons with
                   disabilities, including persons with developmental disabilities.
                  The City shall provide regulatory incentives, such as expedited permit processing
                   and reduced fee, to projects targeted for persons with disabilities, including
                   persons with developmental disabilities.
                  The City shall work with local organizations such as the Tri-Counties Regional
                   Center and Transitions Mental Health Association to implement an education and
Final Plan                                    Page V-90                                      January 27, 2015

                                             City of Atascadero
                                             Housing Element
                      outreach program informing families within the City of housing and services
                      available for persons with disabilities, including developmental disabilities. The
                      program will include the development of an informational brochure available on
                      the City’s website or at City Hall,
                 Funding Source:                 General Fund and other sources, as available
                 Responsible Agency:             Community Development Department
                 Timeframe:                      Apply for funding - at least once during the planning
                                                 period; develop informational material- within two years
                                                 of Housing Element adoption; provide incentives for
                                                 development of housing for persons with disabilities- on-
                                                 going.
                 Quantified Objective:           10 units
Goal HOS 2:      Protect and conserve                    the    existing       housing      stock       and
                 neighborhoods.
Policy 2.1: Encourage conservation and preservation of neighborhoods and sound
            housing.
            U Programs:
            1. As new projects, code enforcement actions, and other opportunities arise, the City
                 will investigate ways to meet its housing needs through rehabilitation and
                 preservation of existing units.
                 Utilize code enforcement to identify housing maintenance issues and expedite
                 rehabilitation of substandard and deteriorating housing by offering technical
                 assistance to homeowners and occupants.
                 Funding Source:                 General Fund, CDBG
                 Responsible Agency:             Community Development Department, Public Works
                                                 Department
                 Timeframe:                      Ongoing
                 Quantified Objective:           30 units
            2. Continue to participate in federal grant programs, such as Community Development
                 Block Grants (CDBG), to obtain loans and/or grants for housing rehabilitation. Apply
                 an appropriate amount of the City’s annual share of CDBG funds toward
                 rehabilitation of existing housing units.
                 Funding Source:                 CDBG
                 Responsible Agency:             Community Development Department
                 Timeframe:                      Ongoing
                 Quantified Objective:           25 units
            3. Continue to maintain the sliding density scale for sloped lots in the Zoning Ordinance.
                 Funding Source:                 General Fund
                 Responsible Agency:             Community Development Department
                 Timeframe:                      Ongoing
Final Plan                                      Page V-91                                      January 27, 2015

                                           City of Atascadero
                                            Housing Element
                 Quantified Objective:         n/a
            4. The City shall continue to monitor the status of subsidized affordable projects, rental
                 projects, and mobile homes in the City and provide technical and financial
                 assistance, when possible, to ensure long-term affordability. This will involve
                 contacting owner/operators of subsided projects annually to determine the status of
                 the units and their potential to convert to market-rate. If projects are at-risk, the City
                 will maintain contact with local organizations and housing providers who may have an
                 interest in acquiring at-risk units, and, when feasible, keep track of and apply for
                 funding opportunities to preserve at-risk units, and assist other organizations in
                 applying for funding to acquire at-risk units.
                 Funding Source:               General Fund
                 Responsibility:               Community Development Department
                 Timeframe:                    Contact owners/operators annually and ongoing
                 Quantified Objective:         n/a
Policy 2.2  Encourage conservation and preservation of houses that have historical and
            architectural significance.
            U Programs:
            8. Continue to implement the Historic Site (HS) overlay zone to help preserve and
                 protect historic Colony homes.
                 Funding Source:               General Fund
                 Responsible Agency:           Community Development Department
                 Timeframe:                    Ongoing
                 Quantified Objective:         n/a
            9. Continue to maintain a GIS based map of historic buildings and sites.
                 Funding Source:               General Fund
                 Responsible Agency:           Community Development Department
                 Timeframe:                    Ongoing
                 Quantified Objective:         n/a
Goal HOS 3:      Encourage energy conservation and sustainable building
                 measures in new and existing homes.
Policy 3.1: Continue to make residents aware of available energy saving techniques and
            public utility rebates.
            U Programs:
            1. Promote environmentally sustainable building practices that provide cost savings to
                 homeowners and developers.
                 Funding Source:               General Fund
                 Responsible Agency:           Community Development Department
                 Timeframe:                    Ongoing
                 Quantified Objective:         n/a
Final Plan                                    Page V-92                                      January 27, 2015
                                            City of Atascadero
                                            Housing Element
            2. Make available in the Community Development Department brochures from PG&E
                 and others that detail energy conservation measures for new and existing buildings.
                 Funding Source:                General Fund
                 Responsible Agency:            Community Development Department
                 Timeframe:                     Ongoing
                 Quantified Objective:          n/a
            3. Continue to strictly enforce the State energy standards of Title 24.
                 Funding Source:                General Fund
                 Responsible Agency:            Community Development Department
                 Timeframe:                     Ongoing
                 Quantified Objective:          n/a
            4. [NEW] Enhance partnerships with Solar Providers for installation of PV panels and
                 other alternative electrical services for low-income households.
                 Funding Source:                General Fund
                 Responsible Agency:            Community Development Department
                 Timeframe:                     Ongoing
                 Quantified Objective:          n/a
Goal HOS 4:      Ensure equal access to sound, affordable housing for all
                 persons regardless of race, religion, age, sex, marital status,
                 ancestry, national origin, color, familial status, or disability.
Policy 4.1: Support equal housing opportunities and enforcement of State and federal
            anti-discrimination laws.
            U Programs:
            10. Cooperate with non-profit groups and local religious organizations to allow the
                 temporary use of churches as homeless shelters.
                 Funding Source:                General Fund
                 Responsible Agency:            Community Development Department
                 Timeframe:                     Ongoing
                 Quantified Objective:          n/a
            11. Continue to support local motel voucher programs for temporarily displaced and
                 extremely low-income persons. The motel voucher program is funded through the
                 City’s CDBG funding. Motel vouchers are available to aid residents experiencing
                 emergency situations, such as a house fire, in finding temporary housing. The City
                 works with non-profit organizations (such as Loaves and Fishes) to aid the residents
                 in need and provide technical support for the motel voucher program.
                 Funding Source:                General Fund
                 Responsible Agency:            Community Development Department
                 Timeframe:                     Ongoing
                 Quantified Objective:          n/a
Final Plan                                     Page V-93                                January 27, 2015

                                          City of Atascadero
                                           Housing Element
           12. [Modified] Continue to allow small (6 or fewer) group housing (residential care
               facilities) by right in all residential zones and large (7 or more) residential care
               facilities in the Residential Multi Family (RMF) zone. The City should also consider
               allowing large residential care facilities by right in additional residential, commercial,
               public, and/or industrial zones, such as LSFX and RSFX zones, where sewer is
               available.
               Funding Source:                General Fund
               Responsible Agency:            Community Development Department
               Timeframe:                     Ongoing
               Quantified Objective:          n/a
           13. [Modified] Consider amending the Zoning Ordinance to expand the Emergency
               Shelter (ES) Overlay Zone to other appropriate properties, subject to the same or
               similar, as appropriate, locational and operational criteria as outlined in the Zoning
               Ordinance.
               Funding Source:                General Fund
               Responsible Agency:            Community Development Department
               Timeframe:                               Within one year of housing                  element
               adoption
               Quantified Objective:          n/a
           14. [NEW] Continue to provide information and complaint referral services for those
               persons who believe they have been denied access to housing because of their race,
               religion, sex, marital status, ancestry, national origin, color, or disability, family status,
               sexual orientation, source of income, or political affiliation. The City will educate
               Community Development Department staff on how to respond to complaints
               received regarding potential claims of housing discrimination. Staff will be trained to
               provide the person with an informational handout detailing the process of reporting
               and filing a claim through the California Department of Fair Employment and
               Housing. The staff will notify the City Manager and the City Attorney’s office of the
               intent to file a claim and will be available to provide assistance to the person filing a
               claim, as needed. Information on Fair Housing law and how to file a claim will also be
               made available on the City’s website and at the Community Development
               Department.
               Funding Source:                General Fund
               Responsible Agency:            Community Development Department
               Timeframe:                     Brochures available within one year of Housing
                                              Element adoption, assistance to persons filing a
                                              claim ongoing
               Quantified Objective:          n/a
           15. [NEW] The City will amend the Zoning Ordinance to ensure that permit processing
               procedures for farmworker housing do not conflict with Health and Safety Code
               Sections 17021.5, which states that farmworker housing for six or fewer employees
               should be “deemed a single-family structure with a residential land use designation”,
               and 17021.6 which states that for "employee housing consisting of no more than 36
               beds in a group quarters or 12 units or spaces designed for use by a single family or
               household...no conditional use permit, zoning variance, or other zoning clearance
Final Plan                                   Page V-94                                         January 27, 2015

                                            City of Atascadero
                                            Housing Element
                 shall be required of employee housing of this employee housing that is not required
                 of any other agricultural activity in the same zone”.
                 Funding Source:                General Fund
                 Responsible Agency:            Community Development Department
                 Timeframe:                     Within two years of Housing Element adoption
                 Quantified Objective:          n/a
Policy 4.2: Ensure that persons with disabilities have adequate access to housing.
            U Programs :U
            16. Continue to ensure full compliance with the California Disability Guidelines and
                 enforce the complementary provisions of the Uniform Building Code. The Zoning
                 Ordinance will be evaluated on an ongoing basis and amended as necessary, to
                 ensure ADA compliance and remove governmental constraints on the production of
                 housing for persons with disabilities.
                 Funding Source:                General Fund
                 Responsible Agency:            Community Development Department
                 Timeframe:                     Ongoing
                 Quantified Objective:          n/a
Policy 4.3: Leverage State and Federal loans and grants to assist in providing affordable
            housing, preserving existing housing, and rehabilitating unsound housing
            structures.
            U Programs:
            1. [NEW] Adopt a policy to determine allocation of the City Affordable Housing In-Lieu
                 funds to support the creation of new affordable housing units in Atascadero.
                 Funding Source:                General Fund
                 Responsible Agency:            Community Development Department, City Council
                 Timeframe:                     Within one year of Housing Element adoption
                 Quantified Objective:          n/a
            2. Work with nonprofits and identify funding to address the housing needs of extremely
                 low-income households and totally and permanently disabled persons.
                 Funding Source:                HOME, SHOP, HTF, and other funding sources, as
                                                appropriate
                 Responsible Agency:            Community Development Department
                 Timeframe:                     Identify funding sources annually
                 Quantified Objective:          5 units
Final Plan                                     Page V-95                                  January 27, 2015

                                            City of Atascadero
                                             Housing Element
Goal HOS 5:      Decrease non-governmental constraints on housing production.
Policy 5.1: Encourage interplay between lending institutions, the real estate and
            development community, and the City to better understand and address non-
            governmental constraints and facilitate production of affordable housing.
            U Program :
                      U
            17. Continue to facilitate understanding of the impacts of economic issues, employment,
                 and growth on housing needs among financial, real estate, and development
                 professionals in formalized settings, such as the Economic Round Table.
                 Funding Source:                General Fund
                 Responsible Agency:            Community Development       Department,    ,   Planning
                 Commission, City Council
                 Timeframe:                     Ongoing
                 Quantified Objective:          n/a
            18. Continue to work with development community to identify and mitigate any
                 constraints on access to financing for multi-family development. The City will conduct
                 regular stakeholder meetings with members of the development community including
                 representatives from local non-profit housing organizations, developers, and real
                 estate brokers to solicit feedback.
                 Funding Source:                General Fund
                 Responsible Agency:            Community Development Department
                 Timeframe:                     Ongoing
                 Quantified Objective:          n/a
Policy 5.2: Help lower development costs where feasible, especially for low- and
            moderate-income housing units.
            U Programs :U
            1. Continue to monitor and evaluate development standards and advances in housing
                 construction methods.
                 Funding Source:                General Fund
                 Responsible Agency:            Community Development Department
                 Timeframe:                     Ongoing
                 Quantified Objective:          n/a
            2. Continue to track the affordability of housing projects and progress toward meeting
                 regional housing needs. Reports should be provided semi-annually to the Planning
                 Commission and annually to the City Council and the California Department of
                 Housing and Community Development.
                 Funding Source:                General Fund
                 Responsible Agency:            Community Development Department
                 Timeframe:                     Ongoing
                 Quantified Objective:          n/a
Final Plan                                     Page V-96                                 January 27, 2015
                                          City of Atascadero
                                           Housing Element
Goal HOS 6:      Decrease governmental constraints on housing production.
Policy 6.1: Review projects in as timely a manner as possible, while maintaining
            adequate public involvement and fulfilling the appropriate requirements of
            State and local laws.
            U Programs : U
            3. Continue to consolidate all actions relating to a specific project on the same Council
                 or Commission agenda.
                 Funding Source:               General Fund
                 Responsible Agency:           Community Development Department
                 Timeframe:                    Ongoing
                 Quantified Objective:         n/a
            4. [Modified] Continue to review minor project modifications through the Design Review
                 Committee and more substantial changes through a conditional use process.
                 Funding Source:               General Fund
                 Responsible Agency:           Community Development Department, Planning
                                               Commission, City Council
                 Timeframe:                    Ongoing
                 Quantified Objective:         n/a
            5. Continue to review and revise local review procedures to streamline the process.
                 Funding Source:               General Fund
                 Responsible Agency:           Community Development Department, Planning
                                               Commission, City Council
                 Timeframe:                    Ongoing
                 Quantified Objective:         n/a
            6. Continue to maintain pre-approved stock development plans to streamline the plan
                 check process.
                 Funding Source:               General Fund
                 Responsible Agency:           Community Development Department
                 Timeframe:                    Ongoing
                 Quantified Objective:         n/a
            7. Provide pre-application technical assistance to affordable housing providers to
                 determine project feasibility and address zoning compliance issues in the most cost-
                 effective and expeditious manner possible.
                 Funding Source:               General Fund
                 Responsible Agency:           Community Development Department
                 Timeframe:                    Ongoing
                 Quantified Objective:         n/a
Final Plan                                    Page V-97                                   January 27, 2015
                                           City of Atascadero
                                           Housing Element
            8. Provide, when possible, developer incentives such as expedited permit processing
                and fee deferrals for units that are affordable to lower income households.
                Atascadero will promote these incentives to developers on the City’s website
                (http://www.atascadero.org) and during the application process.
                Funding Source:                General Fund
                Responsible Agency:            Community Development Department
                Timeframe:                     Ongoing
                Quantified Objective:          n/a
            9. [NEW] The City should consider amending the zoning ordinance to allow single-room
                occupancy units (SROs) by right in the Residential Multi-Family (RMF) zone.
                Funding Source:                General Fund
                Responsible Agency:            Community Development Department
                Timeframe:                     Within three years of Housing Element adoption
                Quantified Objective:          n/a
            10. [NEW] To encourage affordability by design, the City shall modify the Capital Facility
                Fee schedule to index fees based on size of unit, providing lower rates for small
                units. Indexed rate shall apply to apartments and second units.
                Funding Source:                General Fund
                Responsible Agency:            Community Development Department
                Timeframe:                     Within three years of Housing Element adoption
                Quantified Objective:          n/a
            11. [Modified] The City shall continue to monitor impact fees and the Capital Facility Fee
                schedule to identify barriers to housing development, particularly affordable units. If
                constraints are identified, the City shall revise the fee schedule accordingly.
                Funding Source:                General Fund
                Responsible Agency:            Community Development Department, Public Works
                                               Department, Planning Commission, City Council
                Timeframe:                     Ongoing
                Quantified Objective:          n/a
Policy 6.2: [NEW] Maintain consistency and compatibility between the Development
            Code and General Plan.
            Programs :  U
            12. Following amendment of the General Plan Conservation and Safety Elements to
                comply with AB 162 related to floodplain mapping, the City will amend the Housing
                Element, if needed, for consistency.
                Funding Source:                General Fund
                Responsible Agency:            Community Development
                Timeframe:                     Within 1 year of updates of the General Plan
                                               Conservation and Safety Elements
                Quantified Objective:          n/a
Final Plan                                    Page V-98                                     January 27, 2015

                                                              City of Atascadero
                                                              Housing Element
                                                  Table V-43.            323B Summary of Quantified Objectives, 2014-2019
                                                                                                                      326BIncome Level
                                                                        Extremely
                                                                                                    Very Low                      Low                       Moderate                    Total
                                                                    327B
    Program                                     Objective                      Low
                                                                                                328B                          329B                      330B                        331B
324B                                        325B
332BNew Construction
354B1.1-3                   355B Mobile and group homes                                356B5                    357B0                      358B15                            359B0                360B 20
361B1.1-4                   362BExpand sewer service                                   363B0               364B15                          365B35                       366B50              367B100
                                  nd    rd
368B1.1-5                   369B2 & 3 story units downtown                             370B2                    371B3                            372B5                  373B10                    374B 20
375B1.1-7                   376BEncourage higher density                               377B0                    378B0                      379B25                       380B50                    381B 75
382B1.1-8                   383BDensity bonus                                          384B0                    385B5                      386B10                       387B10                    388B 25
389B1.1-10                  390BInclusionary ordinance                                 391B0                    392B5                      393B15                       394B50                    395B 70
                                Second unit development
    1.1-11                                                                                 0                        0                                0                      10                         10
                            397B
                            standards
396B                                                                                   398B                     399B                             400B                   401B                      402B
396B1.1-11                  397BSecond unit impact fees                                398B0                    399B5                              55 5                      401B5                402B 15
396B1.1-11                  397BSecond unit amnesty                                    398B0                    399B0                            400B5                  401B10                      15 15
                                Second unit development
    1.1-11                                                                                 0                        0                          20                           20                         40
                            397B
                            standards
396B                                                                                   398B                     399B                       400B                         401B                      402B
                            Persons with disabilities, including
1.1-21                                                                                      0                        5                                5                           0                    10
                            developmental disabilities
                                Extemely low income and
      4.3-2                                                                                2                        3                                0                           0                       5
                            425B
                            disabled
44424B                                                                                 426B                     427B                             412B                        413B                       B
431BNew Construction Subtotal                                                          432B9               433B41                         140                          215                       405
437BRehabilitation
438B2.1-1                   439BCode enforcement rehabs                                440B5                    441B5                      442B10                       443B10                    444B 30
445B2.1-2                   446BParticipate in grant programs                          447B2                    448B3                      449B10                       450B10                    451B 25
459B4.3-2                   460BRepairs and retrofits                                  461B0                    462B5                      463B35                       464B35                    465B 75
466BRehabilitation Subtotal                                                            467B7               468B13                          469B55                       470B55              471B130
Preservation
1.1-15                      Work with non-profit partners                                   2                        3                          15                                5                    25
Preservation Subtotal                                                                       2                        3                          15                                5                    25
Conservation
1.1-15                      Work with non-profit partners                                   3                        2                          15                                5                    25
Conservation Subtotal                                                                       3                        2                          15                                5                    25
472BTotals                                                                         21 21     21            474B59                    475B225                      476B280                   477B585
          Final Plan                                             Page V-99                                                                                      January 27, 2015
                                             City of Atascadero
                                             Housing Element
 I. References
Center for Universal Design, Principles of Universal Design, www.design.ncsu.edu/cud/
           January 27, 2002
City of Atascadero, General Plan, 2002
City of Atascadero, Housing Element, 2011
City of Atascadero, Planning and Development Fee Schedule, 2008
City of Atascadero, Title 9, 2008
Comprehensive Housing Affordability Strategy (CHAS), State of the Cities Data Systems
           (SOCDS) 2006-2010, retrieved from
           http://www.huduser.org/portal/datasets/cp/CHAS/data_querytool_chas.html,
           retrieved April, 2014
County of San Luis Obispo, Homeless Services Oversight Council (HSOC), Point-In-Time
Survey, 2013
San Luis Obispo Council of Governments (SLOCOG), Regional Housing Needs Allocation
           (RHNA) 20014-2019, Regional Housing Needs Plan
State of California, Department of Housing and Community Development (HCD), Median
           Family Income and Household Income Limits, 2014
State of California, Lanterman Developmental Disabilities Services Act, 1969
State of California, Government Code 65915, Density Bonus Program
State of California, California Building Code, 2013
State of California, Title 24 of the California Code of Regulations
State of California, California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA), 1969
State of California, Solar Water Heating and Efficiency Act (AB 1470), 2007
State of California, Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) Climate Action Team, 2007
State of California, Global Warming Solutions Act (AB 32), 2006
Final Plan                                     Page V-100                         January 27, 2015
                                           City of Atascadero
                                           Housing Element
State of California, California Coastal Act, 1976
United States, Bureau of the Census, SF-1 and SF-3, 2000
United States, Bureau of the Census, SF-1 and SF-3, 2010
United States, American Community Survey, 5- year estimates, 2010
United States, Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD)
United States, Civil Rights Act of 1968, Title VIII – Fair Housing Act, amended 1988
Final Plan                                    Page V-101                             January 27, 2015

                                                 City of Atascadero
                                                 Housing Element
Appendix I
                                                           Table V-44.    Vacant Land Inventory
                                                                                                   Realistic
        APN              Address        Acres   Land Use       Zoning         Density       Max                 Site Constraints
                                                                                                    (80%)
 Vacant Residential Parcels – RMF-20
   029-271-001    4711 El Camino Real     1.67       HDR         RMF-20     24 units/acre    40.08   32.000   Slope
   030-101-053    8959 Curbaril           0.87       HDR         RMF-20     24 units/acre    20.88        16
   030-281-014,   6709, 6725, 6735
                                          0.72       HDR         RMF-20     24 units/acre    17.28        13
      015, 016    Atascadero Ave.
   030-283-007,
                  6905 Navajoa            1.89       HDR         RMF-20     24 units/acre    45.36        36
        008
                                                                                                              Access way too narrow
   030-341-017    6855 Santa Lucia Rd.    0.21       HDR         RMF-20     24 units/acre     5.04         4  for multiple units
                                                                                                              without easement
   031-241-019    8391 Amapoa Ave.        0.35       HDR         RMF-20     24 units/acre      8.4         6
   031-244-010    8065 Amapoa Rd.         0.25       HDR         RMF-20     24 units/acre        6         4
   045-321-021    9355 Avenida Maria      1.95       HDR         RMF-20     24 units/acre     46.8        37
   045-321-022    9405 Avenida Maria      0.98       HDR         RMF-20     24 units/acre    23.52        18
   049-042-018    1155 El Camino Real     5.54       HDR         RMF-20     24 units/acre   132.96      106   Slope
   049-042-025    1055 El Camino Real     1.81       HDR         RMF-20     24 units/acre    43.44        34
   049-151-011    2705 El Camino Real       2.4      HDR         RMF-20     24 units/acre     57.6        46  Slope
   049-151-056    23455 El Camino Real    1.95       HDR         RMF-20     24 units/acre     46.8        37  Slope
   049-151-063    2535 El Camino Real     2.48       HDR         RMF-20     24 units/acre    59.52        47  Slope
   049-151-009    2605 El Camino Real     2.39       HDR         RMF-20     24 units/acre    57.36        45  Existing SFR
                                                                                                              100 Apartment Units
   045-310-001    Woodridge Multi-                           SP-1/ RMF-
                                          5.85       HDR                    24 units/acre    140.4        35  completed. Proposed
    through 035   Family Townhomes                                     20                                     35 units remianing
                  2405 El Camino Real /
                  Del Rio Road                                    SP-2 /                                      44 Units max per
   049-151-005                              2.8      HDR                    24 units/acre     67.2        44  Specific Plan approval
                  Commercial Area                                RMF-20
                  Specific Plan
 Subtotal RMF-20                         34.11                                              818.64      560
 Vacant Residential Parcels – RMF-10
                                                                                                              Slope, access to
   029-105-014    5655 Capistrano         0.54       MDR         RMF-10     3 units/acre**    1.61         1  stadium park
   030-292-065    6340 Alcantara          1.21       MDR         RMF-10     7 units/acre**     8.5         6  Slope, creek
   030-373-020    6910 Navajoa Ave.         0.5      MDR         RMF-10     10 units/acre     4.96         4
   030-491-013,
                  9105 Principal Ave.     5.39       MDR         RMF-10     10 units/acre    53.86        43
  019, 020, 001
   031-231-003    7900 Curbaril           0.52       MDR         RMF-10     10 units/acre     5.22         4  Trees
 Subtotal RMF-10                          8.16                                               74.15        58
 Vacant Residential Parcels – LSF-X
   028-051-005    3880 Seperado Ave.      0.07      SFR-X         LSF-X              1 unit      1    1.00*
   028-051-035    4205 Arizona Ave.         0.2     SFR-X         LSF-X              1 unit      1    1.00*
   028-061-049    4965 Arizona Ave.       0.12      SFR-X         LSF-X              1 unit      1    1.00*
   029-272-003    5715 Hermosilla Ave.    0.17      SFR-X         LSF-X              1 unit      1    1.00*
   030-371-015    6920 Santa Ynez Ave.    0.62      SFR-X         LSF-X              1 unit      1    1.00*
   031-142-031    7503 Curbaril Ave.        0.1     SFR-X         LSF-X              1 unit      1    1.00*
 Subtotal LSF-X                           1.28                                                   6         6
 Vacant Residential Parcels – LSF-Y
                  21 Cabrillo Ave.
   028-213-001                            0.02      SFR-Y         LSF-Y              1 unit      1    1.00*
                  #PR21
   028-215-017    5225 Mercedes Ave.      0.56      SFR-Y         LSF-Y              1 unit      1    1.00*
   028-215-021    7000 Cemetery Rd.       1.06      SFR-Y         LSF-Y              1 unit      1    1.00*
Final Plan                                         Page V-102                                           January 27, 2015

                                              City of Atascadero
                                              Housing Element
   028-341-009    5230 Ensenada Ave.     0.34    SFR-Y         LSF-Y 1 unit  1 1.00*
   028-355-010    5235 Mercedes Ave.     0.56    SFR-Y         LSF-Y 1 unit  1 1.00*
   028-361-034    5350 Ensenada Ave.     0.38    SFR-Y         LSF-Y 1 unit  1 1.00*
   028-381-002    5327 Magnolia Ave.     0.23    SFR-Y         LSF-Y 1 unit  1 1.00*
   030-233-008    6625 Marchant Ave.     0.57    SFR-Y         LSF-Y 1 unit  1 1.00*
   030-242-036    7695 Constancia Ave.   0.09    SFR-Y         LSF-Y 1 unit  1 1.00*
   030-301-056    6650 Marchant Ave.     0.73    SFR-Y         LSF-Y 1 unit  1 1.00*
   030-332-002    5650 Aguila Ave.       0.45    SFR-Y         LSF-Y 1 unit  1 1.00*
   030-332-004    5710 Aguila Ave.       0.21    SFR-Y         LSF-Y 1 unit  1 1.00*
   030-351-017    7325 Tecordia Ave.     0.53    SFR-Y         LSF-Y 1 unit  1 1.00*
   028-341-011    5320 Ensenada Ave.     0.06    SFR-Y         LSF-Y 1 unit  1 1.00*
   028-354-009    5295 Magdalena Ave.    0.21    SFR-Y         LSF-Y 1 unit  1 1.00*
   031-142-027    7955 Carmelita Ave.    0.45    SFR-Y         LSF-Y 1 unit  1 1.00*
   031-061-035    7455 Tecorida Ave.     0.53    SFR-Y         LSF-Y 1 unit  1 1.00*
   031-061-037    7655 Tecordia Ave.     0.55    SFR-Y         LSF-Y 1 unit  1 1.00*
   031-061-015    7755 Tecorida Ave.     0.48    SFR-Y         LSF-Y 1 unit  1 1.00*
   031-062-021    7575 Atascadero Ave.    0.4    SFR-Y         LSF-Y 1 unit  1 1.00*
   031-062-004    7500 Tecorida Ave.     0.35    SFR-Y         LSF-Y 1 unit  1 1.00*
   031-062-001    7400 Tecorida Ave.     0.39    SFR-Y         LSF-Y 1 unit  1 1.00*
   031-161-004    8075 Curbaril Ave.     0.67    SFR-Y         LSF-Y 1 unit  1 1.00*
   031-133-001    8235 Larga Ave.        0.22    SFR-Y         LSF-Y 1 unit  1 1.00*
   031-133-003    8209 Larga Ave.        0.41    SFR-Y         LSF-Y 1 unit  1 1.00*
   031-141-040    7205 Curbaril Ave.      0.2    SFR-Y         LSF-Y 1 unit  1 1.00*
   031-141-030    7215 Curbaril Ave.     0.17    SFR-Y         LSF-Y 1 unit  1 1.00*
   031-114-001    8370 Alta Vista Ave.    0.2    SFR-Y         LSF-Y 1 unit  1 1.00*
   031-112-005    8405 Linda Vista Ave.  0.38    SFR-Y         LSF-Y 1 unit  1 1.00*
   031-112-014    7805 El Retiro St.      0.4    SFR-Y         LSF-Y 1 unit  1 1.00*
   031-112-013    7855 El Retiro St.     0.42    SFR-Y         LSF-Y 1 unit  1 1.00*
   031-113-003    8423 Alta Vista Ave.   0.33    SFR-Y         LSF-Y 1 unit  1 1.00*
   031-124-001    6800 Navarette Ave.    0.37    SFR-Y         LSF-Y 1 unit  1 1.00*
   031-023-025    7322 Santa Lucia Rd.   0.13    SFR-Y         LSF-Y 1 unit  1 1.00*
   031-021-007    5961 Chauplin Ave.     0.44    SFR-Y         LSF-Y 1 unit  1 1.00*
   031-012-018    5880 Corta Ave.        0.35    SFR-Y         LSF-Y 1 unit  1 1.00*
   031-012-019    5900 Corta Ave.        0.28    SFR-Y         LSF-Y 1 unit  1 1.00*
   031-021-008    5965 Chauplin Ave.     0.49    SFR-Y         LSF-Y 1 unit  1 1.00*
   030-352-028    7175 Atascadero Ave.   0.33    SFR-Y         LSF-Y 1 unit  1 1.00*
   030-352-004    7150 Tecorida Ave.     0.38    SFR-Y         LSF-Y 1 unit  1 1.00*
   031-062-022    7555 Atascadero Ave.    0.4    SFR-Y         LSF-Y 1 unit  1 1.00*
   031-062-006    7505 Atascadero Ave.   0.61    SFR-Y         LSF-Y 1 unit  1 1.00*
 Subtotal LSF-Y                         16.29                               42    42
 Vacant Residential Parcels – RSF-X
   030-413-008    8535 El Dorado Rd.     0.48    SFR-X        RSF-X  1 unit  1 1.00*
   030-413-009    8525 El Dorado Rd.     0.45    SFR-X        RSF-X  1 unit  1 1.00*
   030-413-014    5575 Santa Fe Rd.       0.3    SFR-X        RSF-X  1 unit  1 1.00*
   030-413-015    5525 Santa Fe Rd.      0.31    SFR-X        RSF-X  1 unit  1 1.00*
   030-413-017    8500 El Corte Rd.      0.29    SFR-X        RSF-X  1 unit  1 1.00*
   030-413-021    5545 Santa Fe Rd.      0.29    SFR-X        RSF-X  1 unit  1 1.00*
   030-413-022    5555 Santa Fe Rd.       0.2    SFR-X        RSF-X  1 unit  1 1.00*
   030-413-024    5515 Santa Fe Rd.      0.19    SFR-X        RSF-X  1 unit  1 1.00*
   030-413-025    8520 El Corte Rd.      0.17    SFR-X        RSF-X  1 unit  1 1.00*
   031-381-027    9495 Avenal Ave.       0.29    SFR-X        RSF-X  1 unit  1 1.00*
   049-033-051    3876 Orillas Way       0.52    SFR-X        RSF-X  1 unit  1 1.00*
   056-111-035    8755 Coromar Ave.      0.57    SFR-X        RSF-X  1 unit  1 1.00*
   056-121-005    8780 Coromar Ave.      0.97    SFR-X        RSF-X  1 unit  1 1.00*
   056-181-039    8585 Atascadero Ave.    1.3    SFR-X        RSF-X  1 unit  1 1.00*
Final Plan                                      Page V-103                      January 27, 2015

                                              City of Atascadero
                                              Housing Element
   056-181-040    8587 Atascadero Ave.   1.17    SFR-X        RSF-X    1 unit  1 1.00*
                                                                                            Specific Plan
                                                           SP-2/RSF-
   049-102-020    1826 El Camino Real    0.63    SFR-X                1 units  1 1.00*     approval 6 units
                                                                   X
                                                                                                max
                                                                                            Specific Plan
                                                               SP-2 /
   049-102-035    1843 El Camino Real    1.17    SFR-X                1 units  1 1.00*     approval 6 units
                                                              RSF-X
                                                                                                max
 Subtotal RSF-X                           9.3                                 17    17
 Vacant Residential Parcels – RSF-Y
   028-021-004    4541 Sycamore Rd.      0.31    SFR-Y        RSF-Y    1 unit  1 1.00*
   028-021-018    4755 Sycamore Rd.      0.24    SFR-Y        RSF-Y    1 unit  1 1.00*
   028-021-021    4559 Sycamore Rd.      0.32    SFR-Y        RSF-Y    1 unit  1 1.00*
   028-141-002    4070 Estrada Ave.      0.32    SFR-Y        RSF-Y    1 unit  1 1.00*
   028-162-016    4660 Viscano Ave.      0.36    SFR-Y        RSF-Y    1 unit  1 1.00*
   028-182-005    5670 San Pedro Ave.    0.32    SFR-Y        RSF-Y    1 unit  1 1.00*
   028-261-022    4665 San Ardo Ave.      0.5    SFR-Y        RSF-Y    1 unit  1 1.00*
   028-281-013    4250 Dolores Ave.      1.11    SFR-Y        RSF-Y    1 unit  1 1.00*
   028-281-015    4815 El Verano Ave.    0.99    SFR-Y        RSF-Y    1 unit  1 1.00*
   028-292-013    4675 Navidad Ave.      0.82    SFR-Y        RSF-Y    1 unit  1 1.00*
   028-311-029    4945 Dulzura Ave.      0.69    SFR-Y        RSF-Y    1 unit  1 1.00*
   028-311-037    5400 Rosario Ave.      0.46    SFR-Y        RSF-Y    1 unit  1 1.00*
   028-311-038    5457 Bajada Ave.       1.16    SFR-Y        RSF-Y    1 unit  1 1.00*
   028-322-001    5125 Rosario Ave.      0.37    SFR-Y        RSF-Y    1 unit  1 1.00*
   028-322-036    5060 Alamo Ave.        0.15    SFR-Y        RSF-Y    1 unit  1 1.00*
   028-331-006    5155 Rosario Ave.      0.37    SFR-Y        RSF-Y    1 unit  1 1.00*
   028-332-001    5265 Barrenda Ave.     0.25    SFR-Y        RSF-Y    1 unit  1 1.00*
   029-062-031    5360 Barrenda Ave       0.1    SFR-Y        RSF-Y    1 unit  1 1.00*
   029-105-007    7140 Serena Ct.        2.71    SFR-Y        RSF-Y    1 unit  1 1.00*
   029-105-023    7150 Serena Ct.        4.21    SFR-Y        RSF-Y    1 unit  1 1.00*
   029-105-032    5495 Mercedes Ave.     0.42    SFR-Y        RSF-Y    1 unit  1 1.00*
   029-105-035    7110 Serena Ct.        1.06    SFR-Y        RSF-Y    1 unit  1 1.00*
   029-105-038    7130 Serena Ct.        1.23    SFR-Y        RSF-Y    1 unit  1 1.00*
   029-121-008    5350 Maleza Ave.       0.97    SFR-Y        RSF-Y    1 unit  1 1.00*
   029-131-002    5365 Maleza Ave.       0.58    SFR-Y        RSF-Y    1 unit  1 1.00*
   029-131-033    7400 Castano Ave.      0.97    SFR-Y        RSF-Y    1 unit  1 1.00*
   029-141-007    7470 Castano Ave.      0.38    SFR-Y        RSF-Y    1 unit  1 1.00*
   029-142-031    9315 Curbaril Ave.      0.1    SFR-Y        RSF-Y    1 unit  1 1.00*
   029-142-034    7470 Cortez Ave.       0.22    SFR-Y        RSF-Y    1 unit  1 1.00*
   029-171-003    7350 Sonora Ave.       0.72    SFR-Y        RSF-Y    1 unit  1 1.00*
   029-222-018    5660 Encima Ave.       0.92    SFR-Y        RSF-Y    1 unit  1 1.00*
   029-371-031    7120 Valle Ave.        0.52    SFR-Y        RSF-Y    1 unit  1 1.00*
   029-371-032    7128 Valle Ave.        0.57    SFR-Y        RSF-Y    1 unit  1 1.00*
   030-031-009    9045 Curbaril Ave.     1.44    SFR-Y        RSF-Y    1 unit  1 1.00*
   030-031-012    9065 Curbaril Ave.     1.71    SFR-Y        RSF-Y    1 unit  1 1.00*
   030-041-006    9025 Curbaril Ave.      0.7    SFR-Y        RSF-Y    1 unit  1 1.00*
   030-041-005    7521 Sombrilla Ave.    0.75    SFR-Y        RSF-Y    1 unit  1 1.00*
   030-051-021    9017 Junipero Ave.     0.84    SFR-Y        RSF-Y    1 unit  1 1.00*
   030-051-035    7950 Valle Ave.        0.92    SFR-Y        RSF-Y    1 unit  1 1.00*
   030-061-055    8981 Junipero Ave.     1.04    SFR-Y        RSF-Y    1 unit  1 1.00*
   030-071-062    8980 Junipero Ave.     0.69    SFR-Y        RSF-Y    1 unit  1 1.00*
   030-111-024    9084 Palomar Ave.      1.89    SFR-Y        RSF-Y    1 unit  1 1.00*
   030-381-001    9100 Palomar Ave.      3.26    SFR-Y        RSF-Y    1 unit  1 1.00*
   030-422-010    8500 Pino Solo Ave.    0.68    SFR-Y        RSF-Y    1 unit  1 1.00*
   030-441-025    9505 Vista Bonita Ave. 0.29    SFR-Y        RSF-Y    1 unit  1 1.00*
   031-261-005    8475 San Francisco     0.55    SFR-Y        RSF-Y    1 unit  1 1.00*
Final Plan                                      Page V-104                        January 27, 2015

                                               City of Atascadero
                                               Housing Element
                  Ave.
                  8255 San Francisco
   031-261-023                            0.36    SFR-Y        RSF-Y 1 unit  1     1.00*
                  Ave.
                  8215 San Francisco
   031-261-028                            0.39    SFR-Y        RSF-Y 1 unit  1     1.00*
                  Ave.
   031-311-002    8655 Azucena Ave.       0.63    SFR-Y        RSF-Y 1 unit  1     1.00*
   049-072-009    3430 Traffic Way        1.08    SFR-Y        RSF-Y 1 unit  1     1.00*
   049-072-010    3450 Traffic Way        1.02    SFR-Y        RSF-Y 1 unit  1     1.00*
                  4550 San Anselmo
   049-075-005                            1.81    SFR-Y        RSF-Y 1 unit  1     1.00*
                  Rd.
   056-162-046    10300 West Front Rd.    1.01    SFR-Y        RSF-Y 1 unit  1     1.00*
   056-162-047    10250 West Front Rd.    1.01    SFR-Y        RSF-Y 1 unit  1     1.00*
   056-162-048    10200 West Front Rd.    1.01    SFR-Y        RSF-Y 1 unit  1     1.00*
   056-171-043    8333 Atascadero Ave.    0.99    SFR-Y        RSF-Y 1 unit  1     1.00*
                  10085 Atascadero
   056-211-037                            3.03    SFR-Y        RSF-Y 1 unit  1     1.00*
                  Ave.
                  10075 Atascadero
   056-211-038                            3.25    SFR-Y        RSF-Y 1 unit  1     1.00*
                  Ave.
   056-281-009    8705 Marchant Ave.      1.41    SFR-Y        RSF-Y 1 unit  1     1.00*
   056-312-007    9015 Lake View Dr.      0.18    SFR-Y        RSF-Y 1 unit  1     1.00*
 Subtotal RSF-Y                          56.36                              60        60
 Vacant Residential Parcels – RSF-Z
   030-181-056    5525 Vega Ave.          1.47    SFR-Z        RSF-Z 1 unit  1 1.00*
   030-251-022    5205 Venado Ave.        1.42    SFR-Z        RSF-Z 1 unit  1 1.00*
   030-251-030    5055 Venado Ave.        0.84    SFR-Z        RSF-Z 1 unit  1 1.00*
   030-251-032    5105 Venado Ave.        2.82    SFR-Z        RSF-Z 1 unit  1 1.00*
   030-261-011    5650 Ardilla Ave.       0.73    SFR-Z        RSF-Z 1 unit  1 1.00*
   030-261-019    5350 Ardilla Rd.        1.05    SFR-Z        RSF-Z 1 unit  1 1.00*
   030-311-002    5105 Chauplin Ave.      2.68    SFR-Z        RSF-Z 1 unit  1 1.00*
   030-311-005    5305 Chauplin Ave.      1.36    SFR-Z        RSF-Z 1 unit  1 1.00*
   030-391-002    8525 El Corte Rd.       4.85    SFR-Z        RSF-Z 1 unit  1 1.00*
   030-441-002    9425 La Quinta Ct.      0.14    SFR-Z        RSF-Z 1 unit  1 1.00*
   030-441-003    9435 La Quinta Ct.      0.15    SFR-Z        RSF-Z 1 unit  1 1.00*
   030-441-004    9445 La Quinta Ct.      0.15    SFR-Z        RSF-Z 1 unit  1 1.00*
   030-441-005    9455 La Quinta Ct.      0.16    SFR-Z        RSF-Z 1 unit  1 1.00*
   030-441-006    9465 La Quinta Ct.      0.15    SFR-Z        RSF-Z 1 unit  1 1.00*
   030-441-007    9475 La Quinta Ct.      0.16    SFR-Z        RSF-Z 1 unit  1 1.00*
   030-441-008    9485 La Quinta Ct.      0.15    SFR-Z        RSF-Z 1 unit  1 1.00*
   030-441-009    9495 La Quinta Ct.      0.19    SFR-Z        RSF-Z 1 unit  1 1.00*
                                                                                          Telecommunications
   030-441-016    9500 Vista Bonita Ave.     1    SFR-Z        RSF-Z 1 unit  1 1.00*
                                                                                          Site
                                                                                          Telecommunications
   030-441-024    9550 Vista Bonita Ave.  2.48    SFR-Z        RSF-Z 1 unit  1 1.00*
                                                                                          Site
                                                                                          Telecommunications
   030-441-026    9450 Vista Bonita Ave.  1.26    SFR-Z        RSF-Z 1 unit  1 1.00*
                                                                                          Site
   031-091-008    5475 Encino Ave.        0.55    SFR-Z        RSF-Z 1 unit  1 1.00*
   031-091-009    5470 Chauplin Ave.      1.96    SFR-Z        RSF-Z 1 unit  1 1.00*
   031-092-016    5460 Encino Ave.        0.29    SFR-Z        RSF-Z 1 unit  1 1.00*
   031-101-003    5775 Encino Ave.        0.42    SFR-Z        RSF-Z 1 unit  1 1.00*
   031-101-006    5875 Encino Ave.        0.43    SFR-Z        RSF-Z 1 unit  1 1.00*
   031-101-011    5820 Chauplin Ave.      0.44    SFR-Z        RSF-Z 1 unit  1 1.00*
   031-102-017    5870 Encino Ave.        0.32    SFR-Z        RSF-Z 1 unit  1 1.00*
   031-103-001    6040 Navarette Ave.     2.77    SFR-Z        RSF-Z 1 unit  1 1.00*
   031-191-009    6370 Navarette Ave.     1.78    SFR-Z        RSF-Z 1 unit  1 1.00*
   031-192-017    6300 Navarette Ave.     7.22    SFR-Z        RSF-Z 1 unit  1 1.00*
   031-202-008    8250 San Marcos Rd.      1.6    SFR-Z        RSF-Z 1 unit  1 1.00*
Final Plan                                       Page V-105                         January 27, 2015

                                             City of Atascadero
                                             Housing Element
   049-221-070    3975 Monterey Rd.     1.62    SFR-Z        RSF-Z 1 unit  1 1.00*
   054-012-041    3862 Ardilla Rd.      0.91    SFR-Z        RSF-Z 1 unit  1 1.00*
   054-013-025    3861 Ardilla Rd.       1.7    SFR-Z        RSF-Z 1 unit  1 1.00*
   054-014-004    3955 Maricopa Rd.     2.52    SFR-Z        RSF-Z 1 unit  1 1.00*
   054-014-005    3825 Maricopa Rd.     1.96    SFR-Z        RSF-Z 1 unit  1 1.00*
   054-051-013    9060 Ramage Ave.      2.62    SFR-Z        RSF-Z 1 unit  1 1.00*
   054-051-068    4590 Portola Rd.      1.56    SFR-Z        RSF-Z 1 unit  1 1.00*
   054-061-071    9190 Santa Lucia Rd.  2.42    SFR-Z        RSF-Z 1 unit  1 1.00*
   054-072-060    6500 Portola Rd.       1.3    SFR-Z        RSF-Z 1 unit  1 1.00*
   054-072-072    8680 San Marcos Rd.   1.48    SFR-Z        RSF-Z 1 unit  1 1.00*
   054-072-073    6760 Portola Rd.      1.11    SFR-Z        RSF-Z 1 unit  1 1.00*
   054-072-078    6150 Portola Rd.      3.85    SFR-Z        RSF-Z 1 unit  1 1.00*
   054-085-048    7300 Portola Rd.      0.88    SFR-Z        RSF-Z 1 unit  1 1.00*
   054-085-050    7470 Portola Rd.      0.74    SFR-Z        RSF-Z 1 unit  1 1.00*
 Subtotal RSF-Z                        65.66                              45        45
 Vacant Residential Parcels – RS
                  11650 Santa Lucia
   055-451-030                          9.56       RE           RS 1 unit  1     1.00*
                  Rd.
   049-041-009    5900 Santa Cruz Rd.   1.25       SE           RS 1 unit  1     1.00*
   049-122-010    3375 Falda Rd.        1.98       SE           RS 1 unit  1     1.00*
   049-112-005    4745 Del Rio Rd.      5.71       SE           RS 1 unit  1     1.00*
   049-073-057    3675 La Luz Rd.       1.02       SE           RS 1 unit  1     1.00*
   049-073-046    3625 La Luz Rd.       1.01       SE           RS 1 unit  1     1.00*
   049-073-053    3305 La Luz Rd.       0.98       SE           RS 1 unit  1     1.00*
   049-302-029    3070 Falda Rd.        1.48       SE           RS 1 unit  1     1.00*
   049-152-031    3207 El Camino Real   0.89       SE           RS 1 unit  1     1.00*
   049-152-039    5555 La Uva Ln.       1.55       SE           RS 1 unit  1     1.00*
   028-131-004    7015 Sycamore Rd.     2.35       SE           RS 1 unit  1     1.00*
   028-132-010    7270 Sycamore Rd.     0.94       SE           RS 1 unit  1     1.00*
   028-132-035    7190 Sycamore Rd.     1.18       SE           RS 1 unit  1     1.00*
   028-412-010    7725 Gabarda Rd.      1.53       SE           RS 1 unit  1     1.00*
   028-412-012    7825 Gabarda Rd.      0.83       SE           RS 1 unit  1     1.00*
   028-412-013    7875 Gabarda Rd.         2       SE           RS 1 unit  1     1.00*
   028-412-014    7925 Gabarda Rd.      1.68       SE           RS 1 unit  1     1.00*
   028-412-015    4355 Tampico Rd.      3.53       SE           RS 1 unit  1     1.00*
   045-401-004    11975 Viejo Camino    4.16       SE           RS 1 unit  1     1.00*
   056-481-008    8230 Los Osos Rd.     2.46       RE           RS 1 unit  1     1.00*
   056-461-003    8330 San Diego Rd.    4.62       RE           RS 1 unit  1     1.00*
   056-271-001    8985 San Rafael Rd.  25.88       RE           RS 1 unit  1     1.00*
   050-312-015    14400 El Monte Rd.    4.42       RE           RS 1 unit  1     1.00*
                  14055 Santa Lucia
   050-312-017                          2.83       RE           RS 1 unit  1     1.00*
                  Rd.
   050-362-009    13055 Cencerro Rd.    4.45       RE           RS 1 unit  1     1.00*
   050-362-006    10105 San Lucas Rd.   3.06       RE           RS 1 unit  1     1.00*
   050-362-011    10355 San Lucas Rd.    4.9       RE           RS 1 unit  1     1.00*
   050-361-008    10300 San Lucas Rd.    4.9       RE           RS 1 unit  1     1.00*
   049-302-039    3300 Falda Rd.        0.83       SE           RS 1 unit  1     1.00*
                  11655 Atascadero
   045-371-006                             3       RE           RS 1 unit  1     1.00*
                  Ave.
   045-341-003    9140 San Diego Rd.    2.39       RE           RS 1 unit  1     1.00*
   045-431-009    9128 San Diego Rd.    5.06       RE           RS 1 unit  1     1.00*
   045-302-009    8910 Ortega Rd.        4.8       RE           RS 1 unit  1     1.00*
   045-302-012    11140 Atascadero Rd.  0.25       RE           RS 1 unit  1     1.00*
   045-451-004    9014 San Rafael Rd.   1.31       RE           RS 1 unit  1     1.00*
   045-441-013    10529 Colorado Rd.    1.45       RE           RS 1 unit  1     1.00*
Final Plan                                     Page V-106                         January 27, 2015

                                          City of Atascadero
                                          Housing Element
   056-481-007 8199 San Dimas Rd.    2,27       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
                                                                                2 lot subdivision
   056-391-001 8400 Toloso Rd.      41.02       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*  potential
   056-402-010 8255 San Diego Rd.    1.93       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
   056-411-019 8250 Toloso Rd.       2.01       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
   056-491-030 8305 Los Osos Rd.     2.49       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
               9945 Old Morro Rd.
   054-231-007                       2.01       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
               East
   054-231-039 8200 San Rafael Rd.   1.56       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
               10050 Old Morro Rd.
   056-451-002                       4.46       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
               East
   054-151-056 8165 San Gabriel Rd.  3.87       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
   050-042-002 2655 Alturas Rd.      5.13       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
   049-271-002 2555 Alturas Rd.      6.86       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
               10330 San Marcos
   054-201-044                       2.09       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
               Rd.
               10410 San Marcos
   054-301-027                       3.39       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
               Rd.
   054-301-019 10555 Escondido Rd.   4.32       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
   054-121-026 6730 Los Gatos Rd.    4.05       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
   056-371-005 8955 San Rafael Rd.   1.88       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
   056-371-006 8965 San Rafael Rd.   1.99       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
   054-151-036 8255 San Gabriel Rd.  2.53       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
                                                                                3 lot subdivision
   055-361-013 13660 Palo Verde Rd. 22.61       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*  potential
   055-361-017 13680 Palo Verde Rd.  7.31       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
   055-361-016 13640 Palo Verde Rd.  7.93       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
   055-361-015 13620 Palo Verde Rd.  4.97       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
                                                                                2 lot subdivision
   055-361-021 13730 Falcon Rd.        24       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*  potential
   055-361-019 13600 Palo Verde Rd.  6.13       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
   055-361-009 13700 Falcon Rd.      8.48       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
   050-362-005 14005 El Monte Rd.    3.88       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
   050-312-013 13090 Cencerro Rd.    4.31       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
   050-324-016 13000 Cencerro Rd.    2.73       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
   050-182-006 14255 Santa Ana Rd.   5.43       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
   050-172-003 9805 Corona Rd.       5.25       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
   050-183-004 14400 Santa Ana Rd.    2.3       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
   050-162-016 9605 Santa Cruz Rd.   1.96       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
   050-162-021 13950 Santa Ana Rd.   5.68       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
   050-161-004 9250 Santa Cruz Rd.   4.79       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
               8900 San Gregorio
   050-091-025                       0.19       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
               Rd. #2
               8875 San Gregorio
   050-101-002                       2.03       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
               Rd.
               8800 San Gregorio
   050-091-004                       2.33       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
               Rd.
               8200 San Gregorio
   050-012-025                       4.77       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
               Rd.
   050-081-001 8550 Santa Cruz Rd.    2.9       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
   049-321-020 8060 Santa Cruz Rd.   1.07       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
   050-011-010 8050 Santa Cruz Rd.   2.39       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
   049-182-017 1200 Garcia Rd.       4.04       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
   049-182-004 955 Ropa Ct.          2.14       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
   049-172-012 7425 Santa Cruz Rd.   3.78       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
   049-172-013 7705 Santa Cruz Rd.   2.91       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
   049-182-005 7270 San Gregorio     1.56       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
Final Plan                                  Page V-107                    January 27, 2015
                                        City of Atascadero
                                        Housing Element
               Rd.
   055-251-001 13780 Old Morro Rd. 1.16       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
   055-243-001 13820 Old Morro Rd. 0.44       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
               10655 San Marcos
   055-053-005                     2.63       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
               Rd.
               10675 San Marcos
   055-053-001                     1.54       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
               Rd.
   049-251-017 2340 Monterey Rd.   2.65       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
   049-092-044 1335 Garcia Rd.     6.29       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
               7020 San Gregorio
   049-181-013                      0.9       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
               Rd.
   049-181-012 1555 Garcia Rd.      0.6       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
   049-181-010 1505 Garcia Rd.     1.15       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
   049-092-041 1300 San Ramon Rd.  2.09       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
   049-131-043 1855 San Ramon Rd.   1.5       SE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
   049-131-052 6020 Del Rio Rd.     1.4       SE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
   049-131-058 6010 Del Rio Rd.    8.46       SE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
   049-131-066 1505 San Ramon Rd.  2.29       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
   050-111-022 13350 Santa Ana Rd. 1.39       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
   050-101-012 8365 Del Rio Rd.    7.88       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
   050-111-023 13300 Santa Ana Rd. 5.19       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
   050-111-020 8315 Del Rio Rd.    5.06       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
   050-101-016 13600 Santa Ana Rd. 3.24       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
   050-202-013 5800 Bolsa Rd.      5.11       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
   050-242-012 7065 Llano Rd.      2.59       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
               12405 Santa Lucia
   055-431-001                     3.13       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
               Rd.
               12455 Santa Lucia
   055-431-011                     1.53       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
               Rd.
               12503 Santa Lucia
   055-462-005                     1.22       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
               Rd.
               12577 Santa Lucia
   055-462-006                     2.49       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
               Rd.
               12645 Santa Lucia
   055-462-008                     1.05       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
               Rd.
               12655 Santa Lucia
   055-462-012                     0.48       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
               Rd.
               12675 Santa Lucia
   055-462-013                     0.51       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
               Rd.
               12571 Santa Lucia
   055-462-002                     1.51       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
               Rd.
               12579 Santa Lucia
   055-462-010                     1.01       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
               Rd.
               11905 Santa Lucia
   055-431-004                     3.91       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
               Rd.
               12125 San Marcos
   055-231-002                     5.06       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
               Rd.
               11965 San Marcos
   055-231-018                     4.81       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
               Rd.
               11950 San Marcos
   055-181-009                     4.36       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
               Rd.
               12000 San Marcos
   055-181-008                     2.39       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
               Rd.
               12250 San Marcos
   055-171-016                     1.98       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
               Rd.
                 12260 San Marcos
   055-171-004                     2.38       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
                        Rd.
Final Plan                                Page V-108                    January 27, 2015
                                           City of Atascadero
                                           Housing Element
               11805 San Marcos
   055-231-013                        2.84       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
               Rd.
               11800 San Marcos
   055-181-022                        8.36       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
               Rd.
   055-251-006 13750 Old Morro Rd.    3.11       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
   055-331-005 12400 Old Morro Rd.    2.41       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
               11085 San Marcos
   055-252-014                        5.19       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
               Rd.
   055-242-010 13790 Morro Rd.        2.96       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
   055-252-016 13750 Morro Rd.        2.24       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
               11255 San Marcos
   055-242-035                        4.86       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
               Rd.
               11275 San Marcos
   055-242-034                        4.28       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
               Rd.
               11285 San Marcos
   055-242-006                        1.85       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
               Rd.
               11500 San Marcos
   055-191-003                        3.37       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
               Rd.
               10900 San Marcos
   055-201-008                        3.84       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
               Rd.
               10950 San Marcos
   055-201-002                         2.3       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
               Rd.
   055-151-019 9450 Laurel Rd.        5.56       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
   055-161-031 10890 Vista Rd.        3.04       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
   055-161-032 10880 Vista Rd.        2.26       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
   055-161-033 10870 Vista Rd.        2.84       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
   055-161-036 10840 Vista Rd.        1.48       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
   055-161-035 10850 Vista Rd.        1.45       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
   055-161-038 10820 Vista Rd.         1.7       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
   055-161-039 10810 Vista Rd.        1.59       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
   055-161-040 10800 Vista Rd.        1.86       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
   055-161-029 10910 Vista Rd.        11.8       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
   055-261-004 13600 Morro Rd.       15.58       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
   055-161-041 10930 Vista Rd.         7.8       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
   055-161-024 10945 Vista Rd.        7.79       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
   055-161-019 10825 Vista Rd.        1.74       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
   055-052-010 10785 Vista Rd.         4.4       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
   055-052-011 10775 Vista Rd.        6.01       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
   055-161-020 10835 Vista Rd.         3.2       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
   055-054-001 10645 Realito Ave.     5.43       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
               10565 San Marcos
   054-311-042                        1.46       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
               Rd.
               10475 San Marcos
   054-311-003                        2.44       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
               Rd.
   055-102-006 8425 Sierra Vista Rd.  1.71       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
               11505 Santa Lucia
   055-022-012                        2.08       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
               Rd.
               10560 San Marcos
   055-041-013                        6.92       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
               Rd.
   055-041-015 9610 Laurel Rd.        4.68       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
   055-041-018 9710 Laurel Rd.         3.6       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
   054-281-012 10800 Portal Rd.        2.6       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
   054-281-001 9800 Laurel Rd.       21.68       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*  2 underlying legal lots
               10955 Santa Lucia
   054-181-019                       44.28       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
               Rd.
   054-262-005 10735 Santa Lucia      7.99       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
Final Plan                                   Page V-109                    January 27, 2015
                                           City of Atascadero
                                           Housing Element
               Rd.
   054-201-013 6720 San Gabriel Rd.   0.52       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
   054-201-037 10205 Escondido Rd.    4.74       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
               10055 San Marcos
   054-322-012                        2.33       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
               Rd.
   054-334-001 8760 Sierra Vista Rd.  1.33       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
   054-331-013 8300 Casitas Rd.       1.33       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
   054-331-005 8720 Sierra Vista Rd.  0.96       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
   050-341-022 6750 Lomitas Rd.       2.01       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
   050-341-006 6910 Lomitas Rd.       3.06       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
   055-442-004 6250 Lomitas Rd.       3.91       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
               11400 Santa Lucia
   055-451-006                       16.43       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
               Rd.
   055-451-011 6170 Llano Rd.         11.1       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
   055-451-033 6805 Lomitas Rd.       3.36       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
   055-451-018 6525 Lomitas Rd.       3.08       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
   055-451-020 7200 Nudoso Rd.        3.03       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
   055-451-019 6435 Lomitas Rd.       3.07       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
   050-122-017 9415 Balboa Rd.        4.11       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
   050-122-005 12705 Santa Ana Rd.    3.51       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
   050-251-022 6805 Llano Rd.         4.74       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
   050-251-012 9700 Corriente Rd.     7.86       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
   050-041-011 8005 Balboa Rd.        4.12       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
               2460 San Fernando
   050-121-020                        3.19       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
               Rd.
   050-121-013 8315 Balboa Rd.        2.22       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
   050-121-002 12600 Santa Ana Rd.    1.02       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
   050-121-007 12750 Santa Ana Rd.    2.46       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
   050-043-002 8505 Balboa Rd.         4.9       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
   050-211-001 12350 Santa Ana Rd.    0.92       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
   050-121-017 12400 Santa Ana Rd.    0.83       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
   050-262-021 9405 Corriente Rd.     4.07       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
   050-262-013 9800 Serrijon Rd.      8.49       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
   050-262-001 9900 Serrijon Rd.      7.29       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
   050-281-006 10005 Serrijon Rd.     4.62       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
   050-281-007 10150 Serrijon Rd.     6.97       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
   050-281-008 10750 Serrijon Rd.     8.56       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
   054-251-003 5400 Telocote Rd.      9.76       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
   050-291-001 10300 Serrijon Rd.     2.07       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
   050-291-002 10260 Serrijon Rd.     0.97       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
   050-291-008 10220 Serrijon Rd.     2.83       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
   050-291-009 10200 Serrijon Rd.     6.03       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
   050-291-004 10100 Serrijon Rd.     7.25       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
   050-291-005 9950 Serrijon Rd.      7.27       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
                                                                                 6 lot subdivision
   050-291-010 6255 Llano Rd.         36.9       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*  potential
                                                                                 7 lot subdivision
   054-251-002 5755 Llano Rd.         30.1       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*  potential
   054-171-034 10400 Serrijon Rd.    44.31       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
               3130 San Fernando
   050-231-005                        2.92       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
               Rd.
   049-142-009 6075 Conejo Rd.         2.1       SE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
   049-191-004 6079 Del Rio Rd.       0.33       SE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
   054-171-033 9950 Santa Ana Rd.     1.19       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
   054-121-032 6653 San Gabriel Rd.   4.66       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
   054-121-042 6545 San Gabriel Rd.   3.84       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
Final Plan                                   Page V-110                    January 27, 2015
                                         City of Atascadero
                                         Housing Element
   054-121-004 6150 Los Gatos Rd.   0.86       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
               2145 San Fernando
   049-281-005                      1.95       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
               Rd.
               2155 San Fernando
   050-051-001                      7.47       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
               Rd.
   050-141-004 7275 Balboa Rd.       4.7       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
               8105 Graves Creek
   050-153-009                      0.89       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
               Rd.
   054-131-011 9300 San Marcos Rd.  2.12       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
   054-131-003 6755 San Gabriel Rd. 7.54       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
   054-122-013 6199 Los Gatos Rd.    0.3       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
   054-142-012 9330 Carmelita Ave.  1.85       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
   054-132-071 9735 San Marcos Rd.  3.92       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
   054-132-066 7980 Bella Vista Rd.  1.6       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
   054-086-013 7470 Bella Vista Rd. 2.04       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
   054-086-005 7110 Bella Vista Rd. 0.94       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
   054-132-014 8697 San Marcos Rd.   2.9       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
   049-211-038 2945 Ramona Rd.      4.09       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
   054-043-012 3695 Ardilla Rd.     0.73       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
   054-043-011 3685 Ardilla Rd.     1.36       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
   054-043-023 3720 Maricopa Rd.     4.9       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
   054-043-006 3625 Ardilla Rd.     5.81       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
   054-043-013 3715 Ardilla Rd.     0.62       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
   054-043-018 3761 Ardilla Rd.     1.02       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
   054-051-044 3640 Ardilla Rd.      2.6       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
   054-091-009 3660 Ardilla Rd.     3.53       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
   054-061-012 9360 Santa Lucia Rd. 7.83       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
               12610 San Marcos
   055-116-013                      5.77       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
               Rd.
               12550 San Marcos
   055-115-015                      7.37       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
               Rd.
               12575 San Marcos
   055-115-010                      6.78       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
               Rd.
               12649 San Marcos
   055-116-003                      2.54       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
               Rd.
   055-114-017 12680 Cabazon Rd.    2.78       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
   055-115-005 12708 San Marcos Ct. 2.53       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
               12620 San Marcos
   055-116-012                      2.03       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
               Rd.
   055-116-020 12430 Madrone Rd.    3.41       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
   055-114-023 12607 Cabazon Rd.    7.41       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
   055-116-017 12450 Madrone Rd.    3.86       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
               12612 San Marcos
   055-116-011                      4.07       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
               Rd.
   055-114-015 12630 Cabazon Rd.    4.22       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
   055-114-027 12616 Cabazon Rd.    3.39       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
   055-114-014 12628 Cabazon Rd.    6.82       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
   055-115-012 12412 Pecos Ct.      3.08       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
   055-115-011 12610 Cenegal Rd.    3.82       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
   055-114-003 12605 Cenegal Rd.    3.42       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
   055-114-002 12635 Cenegal Rd.    5.28       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
               12485 San Marcos
   055-115-007                      3.53       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
               Rd.
               12630 San Marcos
   055-116-010                      7.81       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
               Rd.
   055-116-002 12625 San Marcos     2.68       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
Final Plan                                 Page V-111                    January 27, 2015
                                           City of Atascadero
                                           Housing Element
               Rd.
               12420 San Marcos
   055-115-023                        2.17       RE           RS  1 unit 1 1.00*
               Rd.
   055-114-012 12624 Cabazon Rd.      2.63       RE           RS  1 unit 1 1.00*
   055-114-016 12660 Cabazon Rd.      3.63       RE           RS  1 unit 1 1.00*
   050-173-027 13705 Santa Ana Rd.     5.7       RE           RS  1 unit 1 1.00*
                 14600 Santa Lucia                                                4 lot subdivision
   050-301-002                        27.2       RE           RS  1 unit 1 1.00*  potential
                        Rd.
   050-203-002 9675 Otero Rd.         4.63       RE           RS  1 unit 1 1.00*
   050-241-006 10025 Corona Rd.        4.7       RE           RS  1 unit 1 1.00*
   050-241-007 10075 Corona Rd.       5.48       RE           RS  1 unit 1 1.00*
   050-241-010 10200 Corona Rd.       7.16       RE           RS  1 unit 1 1.00*
   050-201-006 5700 Bolsa Rd.         6.48       RE           RS  1 unit 1 1.00*
   050-201-007 5600 Bolsa Rd.         6.73       RE           RS  1 unit 1 1.00*
   050-242-016 5500 Bolsa Rd.         7.32       RE           RS  1 unit 1 1.00*
   050-192-018 10100 Corona Rd.       4.44       RE           RS  1 unit 1 1.00*
   050-192-015 10000 Corona Rd.       5.99       RE           RS  1 unit 1 1.00*
   054-192-008 6445 Alta Pradera Ln.  2.58       RE           RS  1 unit 1 1.00*
   054-192-006 6425 Alta Pradera Ln.  2.84       RE           RS  1 unit 1 1.00*
   054-192-021 6452 Alta Pradera Ln.  6.36       RE           RS  1 unit 1 1.00*
   054-192-002 6305 Alta Pradera Ln.  5.39       RE           RS  1 unit 1 1.00*
   054-014-005 3825 Maricopa Rd.      4.75       RE           RS  1 unit 1 1.00*
   028-411-027 9552 Curbaril Ave.      0.3       SE           RS  1 unit 1 1.00*
   054-191-045 6780 San Gabriel Rd.   4.84       RE           RS  1 unit 1 1.00*
   054-291-022 10620 Portal Rd.       2.87       RE           RS  1 unit 1 1.00*
   054-192-030 10480 Portal Rd.       4.19       RE           RS  1 unit 1 1.00*
   049-151-062 2555 El Camino Real    2.24       SE           RS  1 unit 1 1.00*
   055-341-008 13410 Palo Verde Rd.   0.96       RE           RS  1 unit 1 1.00*
               10125 Old Morro Rd.
   056-411-026                        1.67       RE           RS  1 unit 1 1.00*
               East
                                                                                  2 underlying legal
   056-261-013 8925 San Gabriel Rd.   9.97       RE           RS 2 units 2  2.0*  parcels, 8 parcel
                                                                                  subdivision potential
   054-111-053 9775 Santa Lucia Rd.   2.52       RE           RS  1 unit 1 1.00*
   054-111-052 9845 Santa Lucia Rd.   2.43       RE           RS  1 unit 1 1.00*
               43 Palo Verde Rd.
   055-311-021                        0.45       RE           RS  1 unit 1 1.00*
               #PR43
   055-113-014 12719 San Felipe Ct.   2.78       RE           RS  1 unit 1 1.00*
   055-116-021 12410 Madrone Rd.      3.38       RE           RS  1 unit 1 1.00*
               12475 San Marcos
   055-115-006                        3.65       RE           RS  1 unit 1 1.00*
               Rd.
               12600 San Marcos
   055-116-014                        5.82       RE           RS  1 unit 1 1.00*
               Rd.
   055-113-006 12715 Escabroso Ct.     6.7       RE           RS  1 unit 1 1.00*
   055-114-013 12620 Cabazon Rd.      5.36       RE           RS  1 unit 1 1.00*
   055-113-011 12721 San Felipe Ct.   5.01       RE           RS  1 unit 1 1.00*
   055-114-022 12617 Cabazon Rd.      3.78       RE           RS  1 unit 1 1.00*
               12655 San Marcos
   055-116-005                        4.45       RE           RS  1 unit 1 1.00*
               Rd.
               12515 San Marcos
   055-115-008                       10.46       RE           RS  1 unit 1 1.00*
               Rd.
   055-114-025 12612 Cabazon Rd.      2.97       RE           RS  1 unit 1 1.00*
               12440 San Marcos
   055-115-022                        2.07       RE           RS  1 unit 1 1.00*
               Rd.
   055-113-015 12723 San Felipe Ct.   3.35       RE           RS  1 unit 1 1.00*
   055-115-014 12419 Pecos Ct.        3.68       RE           RS  1 unit 1 1.00*
Final Plan                                   Page V-112                     January 27, 2015
                                          City of Atascadero
                                          Housing Element
               12648 San Marcos
   055-116-007                        6.7       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
               Rd.
   055-114-026 12614 Cabazon Rd.     7.01       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
   055-113-017 12720 San Felipe Ct.  1.75       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
   055-116-018 12434 Madrone Rd.     4.45       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
   055-114-006 12601 Cenegal Rd.     4.41       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
   055-115-017 12640 Cenegal Rd.     4.41       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
   055-114-028 12604 Cabazon Rd.     4.78       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
   055-114-004 12362 Puente Rd.       2.8       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
   045-353-011 9137 San Diego Rd.    2.76       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
   045-353-010 9135 San Diego Rd.    2.76       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
   045-353-012 9139 San Diego Rd.    2.75       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
   045-353-013 9141 San Diego Rd.     2.5       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
   045-353-022 9110 San Rafael Rd.   2.53       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
   045-353-021 9120 San Rafael Rd.   2.65       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
   054-192-032 10470 Portal Rd.      3.97       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
   054-192-033 10460 Portal Rd.      3.96       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
   054-032-069 3425 Maricopa Rd.     2.71       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
               12555 San Marcos
   055-115-009                       9.97       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
               Rd.
   055-114-010 12325 Puente Rd.      3.64       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
               12650 San Marcos
   055-116-006                       3.43       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
               Rd.
   055-114-001 12655 Cenegal Rd.     4.62       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
               12300 San Marcos
   055-113-024                        2.7       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
               Rd.
               12644 S San Marcos
   055-116-008                       4.93       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
               Rd.
               12500 San Marcos
   055-115-020                       4.88       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
               Rd.
   055-114-007 12342 Puente Rd.      4.61       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
               12640 San Marcos
   055-116-009                       4.09       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
               Rd.
   055-115-016 12415 Pecos Ct.        4.9       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
   055-114-008 12346 Puente Rd.      4.77       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
   055-114-009 12335 Puente Rd.      3.98       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
   055-116-016 12470 Madrone Rd.     3.51       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
   055-113-019 12708 San Felipe Ct.  1.57       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
               12460 San Marcos
   055-115-021                       3.04       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
               Rd.
   055-115-013 12416 Pecos Ct.       5.35       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
   055-115-018 12650 Cenegal Rd.     2.53       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
   055-116-019 12436 Madrone Rd.     4.21       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
   055-113-012 12701 San Felipe Ct.  1.52       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
   055-113-018 12712 San Felipe Ct.  1.67       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
               11170 Atascadero
   045-302-011                       0.25       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
               Ave.
   045-353-023 9080 San Rafael Rd.  13.99       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
   045-441-021 10765 Colorado Rd.    0.49       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
   045-441-025 10825 Colorado R.     1.03       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
   045-441-034 9056 San Rafael R.    4.04       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
   049-102-058 5255 Carrizo Rd.      2.66       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
   049-122-028 3050 Arena Rd.        1.48       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
   049-271-024 2027 Alturas Rd.      2.41       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
               2139 San Fernando
   049-281-016                       3.24       RE           RS 1 unit 1 1.00*
               Rd.
Final Plan                                  Page V-113                    January 27, 2015
                                                           City of Atascadero
                                                           Housing Element
   050-021-037      9030 La Canada Ln.             4.43          RE             RS             1 unit           1        1.00*
   050-131-032      7705 Balboa Rd.                3.18          RE             RS             1 unit           1        1.00*
   050-131-033      7805 Balboa Rd.                2.77          RE             RS             1 unit           1        1.00*
   054-032-072      3556 Maricopa Rd.              1.84          RE             RS             1 unit           1        1.00*
   054-091-026      5255 Cascabel Rd.              4.43          RE             RS             1 unit           1        1.00*
   054-092-026      5150 Cascabel Rd.              2.58          RE             RS             1 unit           1        1.00*
   054-191-042      6730 San Gabriel Rd.           3.64          RE             RS             1 unit           1        1.00*
   055-113-002      12726 Rojo Ct.                 2.42          RE             RS             1 unit           1        1.00*
   055-113-013      12717 San Felipe Ct.             1.5         RE             RS             1 unit           1        1.00*
   055-113-016      12722 San Felipe Ct.           3.82          RE             RS             1 unit           1        1.00*
   055-114-005      12382 Puente Rd.               3.92          RE             RS             1 unit           1        1.00*
   055-114-011      12618 Cabazon Rd.              3.64          RE             RS             1 unit           1        1.00*
   055-114-021      12621 Cabazon Rd.              4.51          RE             RS             1 unit           1        1.00*
   055-114-024      12600 Cabazon Rd.              3.96          RE             RS             1 unit           1        1.00*
   055-115-001      12707 San Marcos Ct.           2.13          RE             RS             1 unit           1        1.00*
   055-115-002      12711 San Marcos Ct.           2.47          RE             RS             1 unit           1        1.00*
   055-115-003      12713 San Marcos Ct.           2.06          RE             RS             1 unit           1        1.00*
   055-115-004      12714 San Marcos Ct.           3.24          RE             RS             1 unit           1        1.00*
                    12657 San Marcos
   055-116-004                                     8.13          RE             RS             1 unit           1        1.00*
                    Rd.
   055-116-015      12490 Madrone Rd.              3.39          RE             RS             1 unit           1        1.00*
   055-161-044      10458 Morro Rd.                15.2          RE             RS             1 unit           1        1.00*
   055-341-009      13025 Old Morro Rd.            3.86          RE             RS             1 unit           1        1.00*
   056-371-045      8875 San Rafael Rd.            5.34          RE             RS             1 unit           1        1.00*
   056-371-046      8895 San Rafael Rd.            6.16          RE             RS             1 unit           1        1.00*
   056-371-047      8905 San Rafael Rd.            5.01          RE             RS             1 unit           1        1.00*
   056-371-048      8935 San Rafael Rd.            3.25          RE             RS             1 unit           1        1.00*
 Subtotal RS                                   1,651.87                                                      372           372
 Vacant Mixed-Use Parcels
                    8725 Arcade                      0.7         GC             CR     20 units/acre           14           11
                    6600, 6780 Morro
                                                     1.5         GC             CP     20 units/acre           30           24
                    Road
                    6955 Morro, 7955 San
                                                     1.2         GC             CP     20 units/acre           24           19
                    Andres
                    7205 Morro, 7105
                                                   0.92          GC          CP/CR     20 units/acre         18.4           15
                    Atascadero Ave.
                    7100 Morro                     0.41          GC             CP     20 units/acre          8.2            6
                    7200, 7250 Morro                 0.5         GC             CP     20 units/acre           10            8
                    7475 Morro                     0.71          GC             CP     20 units/acre         14.2           11
                    7575 Morro                     0.76          GC             CP     20 units/acre         15.2           12
                    7900 Morro                     0.86          GC             CP     20 units/acre         17.2           14
 Subtotal CP                                       7.56                                                    151.2           120
 Vacant Downtown Mixed-Use Parcels
   029-322-012      5802 Traffic Way               0.39            D            DC     20 units/acre          7.8            6    Slope
   030-181-055      5730 El Camino Real            0.18            D            DC     20 units/acre          3.6            2
   029-344-029      5930 West Mall                 0.09            D            DC     20 units/acre          1.8            1
   029-347-031      5901 A East Mall               0.11            D            DC     20 units/acre          2.2            1
   029-347-030      5901 B East Mall               0.06            D            DC     20 units/acre          1.2            1
                                                                                                                                  Master Plan of
   029-361-018      6905 El Camino Real            5.28            D            DC     20 units/acre       105.6            84    Development
                                                                                                                                  Approved.
 Subtotal DC                                       6.12                                                    122.2            95
 TOTAL                                         1856.75                                                     1,708        1,375
 *Single Family Parcels are not calculated at 80% of maximum density as the maximum is established per parcel rather than per acre.
Final Plan                                                   Page V-114                                                   January 27, 2015
                                     City of Atascadero
                                     Housing Element
 **Reduced densities based on slope.
Final Plan                             Page V-115       January 27, 2015
                      City of Atascadero
                       Housing Element
Appendix II
            Figure V-42. Vacant Land Inventory Map
Final Plan              Page V-116                 January 27, 2015
