







                                                                                  February 3, 2009
1. Land Use
             It is surprising how these towns grow upon one. Already the Angel's
             Hotel seemed like home to me and after an excellent dinner, I joined the loungers
             on the side-walk and became one of a row, seated on chairs tilted at various
             angles against the wall of the hotel. And there I dozed, watching the passing
             show between dreams; for in the evening when the electric lights are on, there is a
             sort of parade of the youth and beauty of the town, up and down the winding
             street.
                                                A Tramp Through the Bret Harte Country, 1914,
                                                by Thomas Dykes Beasley
Requirements
The land use element is a required element of the general plan and is considered to be the
most important element of the general plan. All other elements of the general plan relate
directly to the land use element.
Government Code Section 65302(a) states that a general plan shall include a land use
element that designates the proposed general distribution and general location and extent of
the uses of the land for housing, business, industry, open space, including agriculture, natural
resources, recreation and enjoyment of scenic beauty, education, public buildings and
grounds, solid and liquid waste disposal facilities, and other categories of public and private
uses of land.
The land use element shall include a statement of the standards of population density and
building intensity recommended for the various districts and other territory covered by the
plan.
The land use element shall identify areas covered by the plan that are subject to flooding and
shall be reviewed annually with respect to those areas.
The land use element shall designate, in a land use category that provides for timber
production, those parcels of real property zoned for timberland production pursuant to the
California Timberland Productivity Act of 1982, Chapter 6.7 (commencing with Section
51100) of Part 1 of Division 1 of Title 5. It is noted that there are no commercially
Angels Camp 2020 General Plan                                         Land Use Element          I-1
                                                                                           February 3, 2009
significant timberlands located within the Angels City Limits. Therefore, this land use
designation is inapplicable to Angels Camp.
Projected Population Trends through 2020
The resident population of Angels Camp on January 1, 2005, was estimated by the California
Department of Finance at 3,537 individuals1. The average annual growth rate for Angels
Camp has varied widely throughout its history - from a population decline of 0.28% to a
population increase of 5.25% as described in the following paragraphs.
The California Department of Finance (DOF) projects that Calaveras County will grow from
a population of 40,890 in 2000 to a population of 59,691 in 20202- a population increase of
46% over 20 years (an average annual population increase of 940± individuals, or an average
annual growth rate of approximately 2.3%) for the period between 2000 and 2020.
However, while the Department of Finance provides annual population estimates for cities, it
does not provide population projections for cities the size of Angels Camp. And, the growth
rate in Angels Camp historically has not followed that of the county (being both above and
below the county growth rate throughout history). Therefore, the city must rely on other
guides to project population growth trends through the year 2020. These guides include, but
are not limited to:
                  Historical Population Growth Trends for the City
                  The Regional Housing Needs Allocation Studies (RHNA), 2001-2008 and
                   2007-2014
                  The City’s Water and Wastewater Master Plan
1
    Table E-1 City/County Population Estimates with Annual Percentage Change January 1, 2004 -
    January 1, 2005, California Department of Finance, Sacramento, CA May, 2005
2
    State of California, Department of Finance, Population Projections by Race/Ethnicity, Gender and Age for
   California and Its Counties 2000-2050, Sacramento, California, May 2004 - Calaveras County 2000, 2020
Angels Camp 2020 General Plan                                                Land Use Element             I-2

                                                                                           February 3, 2009
Historical Population Growth Trends
                                               Table 1-1
                        Historical Population Growth 1912-2000/a/
                                 City of Angels (Incorporated 1912)*
       Year               Population                     Change from Preceding Census Year
                                                  # Persons               10 Yr.            Gross Annual
                                                                        % Change            Growth Rate
       1912*                  4,000                    --                    --                   --
        1920                   941                  -3,059                   --                   --
                               915                    -26                 -2.8%                 0.28%
        1930
                              1,163                  +248                +27.1%                 2.71%
        1940
                              1,147                   -16                 -1.4%                 0.14%
        1950
                              1,121                   -26                 -2.3%                 0.23%
        1960
                              1,710                  +589                 52.5%                 5.25%
        1970
                              2,302                  +592                 34.6%                 3.46%
        1980
        1990                  2,409                  +107                  4.6%                 0.46%
        2000                  3,004                  +595                 24.7%                 2.47%
/a/ Source: Historical Census Populations of Places, Towns and Cities in California, 1850-1990; California
Department of Finance
                                                 Table 1-2
              Gross Annual Average Population Variations 1912-2000
                                             City of Angels/a/
          80-year gross annual average (1920-2000)                              1.71%
          50-year gross annual average (1950-2000)                              2.25%
          20-year gross annual average (1980-2000)                              3.20%
          10-year gross annual average (1990-2000)                              1.47%
         /a/ Derived from Table 1-1
Angels Camp 2020 General Plan                                                  Land Use Element            I-3
                                                                                         February 3, 2009
                                                 Table 1-3
                          Recent Population Trends 2001-2005/a/
                                     Population           Change from         % Change from
                 Year
                                       Estimate          Preceding Year        Previous Year
                  2001                   3,153                 +149                 4.96%
                  2002                   3,307                 +154                 4.88%
                  2003                   3,392                 +85                  2.57%
                  2004                   3,494                 +102                 3.00%
                  2005                   3,537                 +43                  1.23%
                                5-Year Average Annual Growth Rate                   3.33%
          /a/ Source: State of California, Department of Finance, E-4 Population Estimates for Cities,
               Counties and the State, 2001-2005, with 2000 DRU Benchmark. Sacramento, California,
               May 2005.
Regional Housing Needs Allocation Study
Another guide for projecting the city’s growth rate may be found in the city’s Housing
Element (Chapter 2). That element is based on projections in support of the Regional
Housing Needs Allocation (RHNA) Study covering a period of 7.5 years from January 1,
2001 through June 30, 2008 for the counties of Alpine, Amador, Calaveras and Tuolumne.
The RHNA is based on regional population projections for the four counties adjusted for net
migration, births and deaths.
The RHNA projections call for 282 new housing units for a 7.5 year period in Angels Camp
between 2001 and 2008. Household size in Angels Camp averages 2.34 persons and
comprises 33.4% of total units. Family size in Angels Camp averages 2.82 persons and
comprises 66.6% of total units. Therefore, 282 housing units is equivalent to a population
increase of approximately 750 persons over a 7.5 year period (or an average of
approximately 100 new persons annually). This equals a gross annual average growth rate of
approximately 3%.
The RHNA for the planning period of January 1, 2007 through August 31, 2014 identifies the
need for 201 housing units for Angels Camp; approximately 7.9% of the county’s total
housing needs and indicating a slowing growth rate over the planning period through 2014.
City Water and Wastewater Master Plan
The city’s water and wastewater master plans are based on growth projections of 2%
annually. This growth rate is fiscally conservative, to ensure expansion and upgrades are not
dictated before capital improvement funds derived from development are available. The
Angels Camp 2020 General Plan                                                Land Use Element          I-4

                                                                                February 3, 2009
plans include provisions for monitoring the city’s population growth rate and for considering
adjustments to the water and wastewater master plans should growth exceed 2%.
Other Population Issues
As noted in the Public Facilities & Services Element and the Parks & Recreation Element of
the General Plan, the population of Angels Camp is not directly related to resident
population. Non-residents including weekday workers, shoppers and visitors also contribute
to the city’s total population and demands on various services (e.g., police, fire, parks and
recreation facilities, roads). As described in the Public Facilities & Services and Park and
Recreation Elements, this non-resident population can increase the city population to nearly
double (excluding special events such as the Frog Jump where the population may further
increase). Therefore, this general plan also must address the demands of a non-resident
population.
Summary and Conclusions
Historically, city growth rates have reached a high of 5.25%. Through 2020, Calaveras
County’s population is expected to increase by approximately 2.3% annually - although the
city’s growth rate has not always mirrored that of the county. The city’s housing needs
projections are based on regional figures indicating an annual growth rate of approximately
3.0%, although the 2007-2014 RHNA indicates a slowing growth rate through 2014. The
city’s water and wastewater management plans have most recently been based on a 2%
growth rate (with provisions for reassessing those growth rates). Growth rates based on
population estimates from the California Department of Finance indicate that city population
has averaged a growth rate of 3.3% between 2001 and 2005.
The planning horizon for Angels Camp 2020 General Plan is the year 2020 - a plan
addressing the next 15± years. Historically, the city annual average growth rate over a 20-
year period has been 3.2%. However, reflecting the effects of the recession beginning in
2008; the Angels Camp City Council has directed that the projected growth rate be 1.8% -
2.52% to better reflect current economic conditions. This growth rate will be updated
frequently to reflect changing conditions.
Population figures for planning services involving police, fire, roads, park and recreation
facilities and similar services used by both resident and non-resident population should rely
on population figures above those of the resident population projections.
Finally, the city intends to establish a Growth Management /Infrastructure Allocation
Program (Program 1.A.g). Preparation of that plan may result in further refinements to
growth projections provided herein.
Therefore, while the Angels Camp 2020 General Plan is based on a projected resident
population average annual growth rate between 1.8% - 2.52%. The following population
Angels Camp 2020 General Plan                                        Land Use Element         I-5

                                                                                         February 3, 2009
projections (Table 1-4) are provided as a guide for future refinements to resident population
projections and to address desirable service levels for services subject to the demands of both
a resident population and a non-resident population.
                                                Table 1-4
                           Projected 2020 Resident Population/a/
                                               % Annual              Projected 2020
                                                 Average               Population
                                              Growth Rate
                     Low Projection               1.80%                   4,622
                     General Plan
                     2020 Resident                2.16%                   4,874
                     Population
                     Projection
                     High                         2.52%                   5,138
                     Projection/b/
        /a/ Projected from 3,537 base population in 2005, California Department of Finance Population
        Estimates for Cities
        /b/ 2007 Regional Transportation Plan projected growth rate
Land Use
Land use designations within Angels Camp are described at the end of this element. Angels
Camp General Plan 2020 Land Use Map is Map 1A.
Planning Area
Angels Camp 2005 city limits are illustrated in Figure 1-1. The Angels Camp Primary
Sphere of Influence and advisory Secondary Sphere of Influence are found in Map 1B. The
Angels Camp Area of Interest / Comment is found in Map 1C.
Angels Camp 2020 General Plan                                               Land Use Element           I-6
                                                              February 3, 2009
                              Figure 1-1 City Limits
                               Angels Camp
                                 City Limits
Angels Camp 2020 General Plan                        Land Use Element       I-7
                                                                                  February 3, 2009
 GOALS, POLICIES AND IMPLEMENTATION PROGRAMS
General Land Use
Goals
1A-1        Provide a well-organized and orderly development pattern that maintains and
            enhances Angels Camp’s social, economic, cultural, environmental, and
            aesthetic resources while managing growth so that adequate facilities and
            services can be provided in pace with development.
1A-2        Encourage infill development that is compact, mixed use, pedestrian-friendly,
            transit-oriented and discourages or reduces auto-dependency. [2020
            GENERAL PLAN MITIGATION MEASURE, MM-AIR-03]
Policies
   1. A.1   Ensure an adequate amount of land planned to accommodate the anticipated
            population growth in areas where the appropriate level of services are or can
            be made available.
   1.A.2    Make efficient use of land and promote a functional development pattern with
            varied and compatible land uses.
   1.A.3    Ensure that the extent of development shall be related to the property’s
            environmental constraints.
   1.A.4    Protect the public, existing and planned land uses, and the environment from
            potential identified hazards.
Implementation Programs
   1.A.a    Establish, Maintain and Update Zoning Districts
            Establish and maintain new zoning districts and update existing zoning district
            regulations consistent with the density and intensity standards and purposes
            established in this element (See 2020 General Plan Tables 1-1, 1-2 and 1-5).
            Related Programs: 1Ab (Land Use), 1Ca (Land Use), 4Di (Conservation & Open Space),
            8Af (Cultural Resources), 8Ag (Cultural Resources), 10Ad (Economics), 11Ba (Community
            Identity), 11Da (Community Identity)
Angels Camp 2020 General Plan                                         Land Use Element          I-8

                                                                            February 3, 2009
  1.A.b     Continue to Conduct Reviews of the Angels Camp Municipal Code and
            General Plan for Consistency
            Continue to conduct reviews of the Angels Camp 2020 General Plan and
            Municipal Code once every three years to ensure consistency between the
            General Plan and the City of Angels Municipal Code.
            Related Programs: 1Aa (Land Use), 2Ba (Housing)
  1.A.c     Monitor Land Availability
            Monitor the supply of land available within the city for future development to
            ensure that there is an adequate supply available to implement the goals,
            policies and programs of the general plan. Monitoring may be accomplished
            by updating the city’s geographic information system land use files when
            rezoning or general plan amendments are approved. The city will achieve this
            objective through implementation of the following programs:
                a. Prepare a map of vacant parcels throughout the city and make the map
                    available for developers at the Angels Camp Community Development
                    Department public counter and/or on the city’s website
                b. Update the vacant parcels map at least once every three years
            Related Programs: 1Ea (Land Use), 10Aa (Economics)
  1.A.d     Establish Criteria for General Plan Amendments
            In reviewing an application to amend the General Plan 2020 Land Use Map,
            the Angels Camp Planning Commission and City Council shall consider the
            overall consistency of the proposal with the goals, objectives and policies of
            the general plan including, but not limited to:
                a. Physical, social, or economic factors that were not considered at the
                    time of general plan adoption, and the evaluation of the proposal based
                    on the new information
                b. Existing reasonable alternative sites in the vicinity that are planned for
                    the use and can accommodate the proposal
                c. The potential for the proposal to adversely affect community character
                d. The effect of the proposal on the fiscal health of the city
Angels Camp 2020 General Plan                                    Land Use Element          I-9

                                                                            February 3, 2009
  1.A.e     Maintain a Special Planning General Plan Land Use Designation and
            Establish Standards for and Require Specific Plans
            Adopt standards and guidelines for the contents of specific plans consistent
            with California Government Code Section 65450 et seq. for lands designated
            as Special Planning (SP) on the General Plan 2020 Land Use Map that are
            more than 20 acres in size and addressing, at a minimum:
                a. Proposed distribution, extent and uses of land including open space
                b. Proposed extent, intensity and distribution of major components of
                    public transportation, sewage, water drainage, solid waste disposal,
                    energy, water service, emergency services and other essential services
                c. Standards for approving development and for conservation of
                    resources
                d. Proposed program of implementation measures
                e. Statement describing the specific plan’s relationship to the general
                    plan
            Establish criteria for designating land annexed to the city as Special Planning
            (SP) and requiring preparation of a specific plan including, but not limited to:
                f. Annexations initiated by a private entity where a site development plan
                    has not already been approved on land exceeding 20 acres in size
                g. General plan amendments on sites exceeding 20 acres in size
            Related Program: 2Ac (Housing)
Angels Camp 2020 General Plan                                    Land Use Element        I-10

                                                                                      February 3, 2009
  1.A.f     Consider Establishing a Redevelopment Agency to Assist in the Provision
            of Affordable Housing, to Fund Infrastructure Improvements, and to
            Achieve Other City Goals Identified in the General Plan
            Consider establishing a redevelopment agency and plan, or similar
            mechanism, to assist in:
                a. The provision of affordable housing
                b. Funding infrastructure improvements that may be necessary for the
                      provision of affordable housing or economic development
                c. Funding water and wastewater infrastructure improvements
                d. Funding fire and medical protection infrastructure improvements (e.g.,
                      upgrading fire hydrants, increasing fire flow)
                e. Funding park infrastructure and related improvements (e.g., sidewalk
                      construction, facilities for low-impact modes of transportation)
                f. The provision of infrastructure improvements supporting public works
                      facilities (e.g., sidewalks, drainage facilities)
                g. The rehabilitation of historic properties
                h. Promoting economic development (e.g., undertaking commercial area
                      enhancements, improving and/or expanding parking facilities,
                      establishing a commercial/retail facade loan program, undertaking
                      gateway beautification projects, undertaking curb, gutter and sidewalk
                      replacement and repair, providing and/or improving restroom
                      facilities, conducting a historic inventory)
            The preceding activities are subject to redevelopment law restrictions and
            requirements. The city should hold at least one public forum to discuss the
            establishment of a redevelopment agency prior to 2009.
            Equivalent Programs: 2Cf (Housing), 7Ab (Public Facilities & Services), 7Bc (Public
            Facilities & Services), 7Cb (Public Facilities & Services), 7Eb (Public Facilities & Services),
            7Fa (Public Facilities & Services), 7Ha (Public Facilities & Services), 8Bp (Cultural
            Resources), 10Al (Economic Development), 12Ea (Parks & Recreation)
Angels Camp 2020 General Plan                                             Land Use Element             I-11
                                                                            February 3, 2009
  1.A.g     Establish a Growth Management /Infrastructure Allocation Program
            [2020 GENERAL PLAN MITIGATION MEASURE – MM-LAND-03,
            MM UTILITY-04, MM-CIRCULATION-01, MM-UTILITY-04]
            Establish a growth management program, including adoption of a growth
            management ordinance, to:
                a. Encourage a cohesive pattern of urbanization that balances competing
                    interests, including the need for additional housing and related
                    development, and the community desire to maintain community
                    character, ensure adequate public facilities, and provide public open
                    spaces for recreation, economic development and maintenance of
                    scenic resources
                b. Ensure all new development provides the necessary infrastructure and
                    public facilities required to support the development
                c. Provide the framework to phase and pace growth so as to minimize its
                    fiscal and environmental impacts, and ensure concurrency between
                    growth, infrastructure and services
                d. Provide for the accommodation of the city's fair-share housing
                    allocations to meet the needs of all segments of the community
                e. Establish a growth management program that is consistent with the
                    general plan
                f. Assure that the rate of population growth will not exceed the average
                    annual growth rates established in the general plan, so that new
                    development occurs concurrently with necessary infrastructure and
                    public service improvements
                g. Ensure that adequate wastewater facilities and services are available to
                    meet the needs of existing and new development
                h. Provide sufficient quantities of water for residents and businesses
                i. Establish limits for new water and wastewater connections consistent
                    with the anticipated timing of capital improvements necessary to
                    provide sufficient capacity as identified in the adopted Water and
                    Wastewater Management Plans, as that plan may be amended.
Angels Camp 2020 General Plan                                     Land Use Element       I-12

                                                                                        February 3, 2009
                 j. Revise water and wastewater master plans based on a range of
                      population growth (e.g. 1.8%-2.52%).
                 k. Identify Benefit Basins for new local roadways included in the 2020
                      General Plan and commence formation of the Benefit Basins in
                      anticipation of new development within the Basins
            In conjunction with this program, prepare a growth allocation study,
            jobs/housing balance study to determine a healthy balance between job
            growth, labor force, affordable housing, wages and the appropriate allocation
            of water and sewer connections necessary to achieve this balance. In addition,
            include an economic implementation program to assure that all aspects of the
            program are accomplished.
            The program should be completed in coordination with the collaborative
            UPLAN (Partnership in Integrated Planning) modeling efforts being
            undertaken by the Calaveras Council of Governments to assist in anticipating
            future growth and development and the demand on city and county
            infrastructure and resources.
            Within 30 months of adopting General Plan 2020, draft a growth management
            plan addressing projected population growth (ranging from a low of 1.8% to
            at least 2.52%) and available infrastructure (water and wastewater services, at
            a minimum)
            Equivalent Program: 7Ae (Public Facilities & Services), 7Bl (Public Facilities & Services)
            10Ae (Economic Development)
            Related Programs: 2Bf (Housing), 2Bh (Housing), 4Gh (Conservation & Open Space), 6Ef
            (Safety), 7Ba (Public Facilities), 7Bh (Public Facilities), 7Bk (Public Facilities), 7Bj (Public
            Facilities)
  1.A.h     Consider the Use of a General Plan Consistency Checklist to Assist
            Developers with Project Design Consistent with the General Plan
            Consider developing and using general plan consistency checklists to assist
            developers in designing projects consistent with the general plan. A sample
            consistency checklist is included in 2020 General Plan Appendix 1A.
Angels Camp 2020 General Plan                                              Land Use Element              I-13
                                                                                     February 3, 2009
Land Use Compatibility
Goal 1B         Minimize conflicts between adjacent land uses as necessary to maintain
                natural, scenic, recreational and cultural resources, rural character and the
                quality of life in Angels Camp while recognizing the economic, social, health
                and safety needs of the community.
Policies
   1.B.1        Protect significant mineral resources from incompatible land uses and
                promote their efficient use consistent with the requirements of state law while
                maintaining the natural, scenic, recreational and cultural resources and rural
                character of Angels Camp.
   1.B.2        Protect life and property from identified flood hazards.
   1.B.3        Continue to identify and implement land use strategies to protect life and
                property from fire hazards.
   1.B.4        Protect public facilities from encroachment by incompatible land uses.
   1.B.5        Continue to recognize the opportunities and constraints created by public
                lands3 in and around Angels Camp and integrate these elements into the city’s
                land use planning decisions.
   1.B.6        Discourage new development in the wildland/urban interface.
                [2020 GENERAL PLAN MITIGATION MEASURE, MM-AIR-03]
Implementation Programs
   1.B.a.       Maintain Compatible Land Uses
                Continue to avoid locating noise-sensitive land uses near major noise sources
                when updating the general plan, evaluating general plan land use amendments,
                adopting implementing ordinances and when updating the goals, policies and
                implementation programs of the Angels Camp General Plan’s Noise (Chapter
                5), Circulation (Chapter 3), Housing (Chapter 2) and Conservation and
                Open Space (Chapter 4) Elements.
                Equivalent Program: 5Ah (Noise)
3
    Examples of public lands in and around Angels Camp include: U.S. Bureau of Reclamation (New
   Melones), fairgrounds, U.S. Bureau of Land Management
Angels Camp 2020 General Plan                                             Land Use Element        I-14

                                                                               February 3, 2009
  1.B.b     Create and Maintain Mineral Resources Maps and Database
            Create and maintain mineral resource maps and a database, for the city’s
            sphere of influence, identifying significant mineral resources as designated by
            the California Geological Survey pursuant to the statewide mineral
            classification system. Update land use maps as new information becomes
            available from the California Geological Survey relative to mineral resources
            in and around the city.
            Equivalent Program: 4Aa (Conservation and Open Space)
            Related Programs: 1Bc (Land Use), 1Bd (Land Use), 4Ab (Conservation and Open Space),
            4Ac (Conservation and Open Space), 4Ad (Conservation and Open Space)
  1.B.c     Promote Compatibility Between Significant Mineral Resource Areas and
            Nearby Non-Mining Land Uses
            The city shall strive to reduce conflicts between Significant Mineral Resource
            Areas and non-mining uses through the implementation of the following:
                a. Review and comment on all county surface mining and reclamation
                    plans and applications for mining-related activities located within the
                    city’s area of interest.
                b. Revise Title 17 of the City of Angels Municipal Code to increase the
                    minimum acreage required for mining activities from 5 acres to 40
                    acres, unless otherwise exempted pursuant to Public Resources Code
                    2714 (Surface Mining and Reclamation Act of 1975 - Public
                    Resources Code 2710 et seq)
                c. Revise Title 17 and Chapter 8.36 of the City of Angels Municipal
                    Code to require a conditional use permit for mining activities within
                    the city limits, with an exception for tourist-related mining activities
                    (e.g., minor gold panning activities)
                d. Establish minimum setbacks between significant mineral resource
                    areas and non-mineral resource lands
                e. Require discretionary review of non-mining uses on designated
                    significant mineral resource areas
            Mitigate impacts of mine operations on planned and existing city roads
            Equivalent program: 4Ab (Conservation and Open Space)
            Related Programs: 1Bb (Land Use), 1Bd (Land Use), 4Aa (Conservation and Open Space),
            4Ac (Conservation and Open Space), 4Ad (Conservation and Open Space)
Angels Camp 2020 General Plan                                       Land Use Element        I-15

                                                                               February 3, 2009
  1.B.d     Coordinate with the California Geological Survey and Calaveras County
            to Avoid Adverse Impacts Associated with the Designation of Mineral
            Resource Zones (MRZ-2) Within or Adjacent to the City
            The city shall continue to keep appraised of new studies from the California
            Geological Survey regarding the classification of mineral lands in Calaveras
            County. Should Calaveras County’s mineral resource lands be formally
            evaluated and should the State Geologist propose to designate land within or
            adjacent to the city as Significant Mineral Resource Areas, then the city
            should review such proposals for compatibility with its existing and proposed
            land uses and coordinate with the state to refine proposed designations of
            significant mineral resource areas that could clearly conflict with existing or
            planned land uses within or adjacent to the city.
            Equivalent Program: 4Ac (Conservation and Open Space)
            Related Programs: 1Bb (Land Use), 1Bc (Land Use), 4Aa (Conservation and Open Space),
            4Ab (Conservation and Open Space), 4Ac (Conservation and Open Space), 4Ad
            (Conservation and Open Space)
  1.B.e     Designate Identified Flood Hazard Areas as Resource Management/Open
            Space
            Designate flood hazard areas, as identified by the Federal Emergency
            Management Agency or as refined through local studies, as Resource
            Management (“RM” general plan) and Open Space (“OS” zoning).
            Equivalent Program: 4Ha (Conservation & Open Space)
            Related Program: 1Be (Land Use), 4Ha (Conservation & Open Space), 6Bd (Public Safety)
  1.B.f     Designate Resource Management & Open Space Setbacks Along Creeks
            Establish an open space setback encompassing designated flood hazard areas
            along Angels Creek and Six Mile Creek. Designate these areas as Resource
            Management (RM) on the city’s general plan maps and as Open Space (OS)
            on the city’s zoning maps. Establish similar setbacks along other drainages
            within the city (e.g., China Gulch) or along drainages in areas that may be
            annexed into the city in the future.
            Equivalent Programs: 4Dd (Conservation & Open Space), 4Gc (Conservation & Open
            Space), 6Bg (Public Safety), 11Bb (Community Identity)
            Related Programs: 1Be (Land Use), 4Dc (Conservation & Open Space), 4Ha (Conservation
            & Open Space)
Angels Camp 2020 General Plan                                       Land Use Element        I-16

                                                                                 February 3, 2009
  1.B.g     Identify Solid Waste Facilities
            Continue to identify existing and planned solid waste facilities in the county
            within or adjacent to the city’s sphere of influence on the general plan land
            use diagrams and designate land around these facilities for compatible land
            uses, recognizing that some potentially incompatible land uses may already
            exist.
            Equivalent Program: 7Gd (Public Facilities & Services)
  1.B.h     Protect the City’s Wastewater Treatment Facility from Conflicts with
            Incompatible Land Uses
            Designate and maintain compatible land uses surrounding the city’s
            wastewater treatment facilities, including spray fields. Coordinate with
            Calaveras County to initiate necessary changes to the county general plan to
            accomplish this purpose. Compatible county land use designations are those
            consistent with zoning districts requiring minimum parcel sizes of five acres
            or larger. Establish a boundary map surrounding the wastewater treatment
            plant indicating those areas that could affect or be affected by the treatment
            plant. Identify properties within this zone of potential effect and record
            notices to property owners recognizing the treatment plant’s right to exist and
            detailing the potential for objectionable odors (or other effects) that may be
            present as a result of living in close proximity to the treatment plant.
            Equivalent Programs: 4He (Conservation & Open Space), 7Bf (Public Facilities &
            Services)
            Related Programs: 1Hc (Land Use)
            See also: Map 1B (Angels Camp Primary and Secondary Spheres of Influence)
  1.B.i     Seek Compatible County General Plan Land Use Designations Within the
            City’s Sphere of Influence
            Request that the county amend the Calaveras County General Plan Land Use
            Designations to reflect the designations indicated in 2020 General Plan Map
            1C (Angels Camp 2020 General Plan Primary and Secondary Spheres of
            Influence) for those parcels located within the city’s sphere of influence to
            encourage land use compatibility.
            Related Programs: 1Bh (Land Use), 1Hc (Land Use), 4He (Conservation & Open Space)
            See Also: Map 1B (Angels Camp Primary and Secondary Spheres of Influence); Map 1C
            (Angels Camp 2020 General Plan Primary and Secondary Spheres of Influence)
Angels Camp 2020 General Plan                                      Land Use Element           I-17

                                                                                February 3, 2009
  1.B.j     Make Available Fire Protection Standards
            Publish the city’s adopted development standards in booklet form or on-line to
            allow for easy access to this information by the public. Alternatively, amend
            the municipal code to include a separate title for the city’s adopted fire
            protection standards including, but not limited to:
                a. The city’s adopted standards for the urban/wildland interface including
                    provisions for defensible space, secondary access and other fire-
                    protection related standards
                b. Adopted standards for fire flow for commercial, residential, industrial
                    and other land use categories
                c. Standards for installing fire sprinklers
                d. Standards for fire protection systems
                e. Standards for placement of propane tanks and facilities
                f. Standards of coverage for fire and emergency medical response as may
                    be established pursuant to Program 7.C.a
            Equivalent Program: 1Gc (Land Use), 7Ce (Public Facilities & Services)
            Related Programs: 1Ge (Land Use), 3Ab (Circulation)
Angels Camp 2020 General Plan                                       Land Use Element         I-18

                                                                                   February 3, 2009
  1.B.k        Recognize Opportunities and Constraints of Public Land Uses
               Continue to recognize the opportunities and constraints created by public
               lands4 in and around Angels Camp and integrate these elements in the city’s
               land use planning decisions.
               Planning opportunities associated with public lands include:
                   a. Providing buffers between communities to assist in retaining
                        individual community character
                   b. Providing recreational opportunities for residents and visitors
                   c. Providing open space for conserving natural resources
                   d. Providing defined public lands boundaries that may be integrated into
                        the established boundaries of the city’s sphere of influence
                   e. Providing defined public lands boundaries that may be integrated into
                        established city limit boundaries
               Planning constraints that may be associated with public lands include:
                   f. Increased demands on the city’s police and fire services
                   g. Generating significant noise levels (e.g., concerts at the fairgrounds)
                   h. Increased traffic through the city (e.g., recreational vehicles, boats)
               Equivalent Program: 7Ic (Public Facilities & Services)
               Related Programs: 3Bk (Circulation), 12Af (Parks & Recreation), 12Ag (Parks &
               Recreation)
4
  Examples of public lands in and around Angels Camp include: U.S. Bureau of Reclamation (New
  Melones), fairgrounds, U.S. Bureau of Land Management
Angels Camp 2020 General Plan                                           Land Use Element        I-19

                                                                               February 3, 2009
  1.B.l     Evaluate the Need for a Right-to-Farm Ordinance
            Consult with local agricultural interests to determine the need for a right-to-
            farm ordinance within the city or for landowners adjacent to the city. If
            pursued, the ordinance should include provisions for notifying landowners
            that they live adjacent to an agricultural operation and disclosing the nature of
            impacts that may be present and will be protected by the ordinance (e.g., dust,
            smell). 2020 General Plan Appendix 4G provides sample ordinances.
            Equivalent Programs: 4Eb (Conservation & Open Space), 11Ae (Community Identity)
            Related Programs: 4Ec (Conservation & Open Space), 5Al (Noise), 12Am (Parks &
            Recreation)
  1.B.m     Undertake a “Standard of Coverage” Process Study/Assessment
            Secure a technical assistance grant, or similar funding, and undertake a
            “Standard of Coverage” process study/assessment (aka Standard of Response
            Coverage Assessment). The “Standard of Coverage” assessment is a
            community-driven, self-assessment study evaluating fire response, emergency
            medical response and establishing standards for fire protection and medical
            response. Guidelines and examples of assessments and the study process are
            provided in 2020 General Plan Appendix 7E. The assessment should
            identify areas within the existing city limits and within the city’s sphere of
            influence where new development in the wildland/urban interface has the
            potential to significantly hinder the city’s ability to achieve its adopted
            standard of coverage. [2020 GENERAL PLAN MITIGATION
            MEASURE, MM-FIRE-04, MM-AIR-03]
            Equivalent Program: 7.C.a (Public Facilities & Services)
            Related Programs: 7.C.n (Public Facilities & Services)
Angels Camp 2020 General Plan                                        Land Use Element       I-20

                                                                          February 3, 2009
Community Design
Goal 1C     Preserve and enhance the natural, scenic and cultural resources and rural
            character of Angels Camp.
Policies
   1.C.1    Encourage development that complements and blends in with its
            surroundings.
   1.C.2    Include aesthetic considerations when reviewing development proposals.
   1.C.3    Enhance and maintain the unique character of each of the city’s commercial
            regions visible from State Routes 4 and 49 as necessary to avoid the
            appearance of strip commercial development and maintain and enhance the
            city’s community character.
   1.C.4    Retain the rural community character of the city.
Angels Camp 2020 General Plan                                  Land Use Element        I-21

                                                                               February 3, 2009
Implementation Programs
   1.C.a    Establish and Maintain Four Distinct Commercial Districts
            Establish and maintain a general plan land use designation and consistent
            zoning districts as necessary to distinguish four distinct commercial areas in
            the city:
                a. A Historic Commercial District (HC) encompassing the city’s core
                    historic district and extending to the southernmost boundary of the
                    city’s Community Commercial District (CC)
                b. A Community Commercial District (CC) emphasizing commercial
                    service uses which serve the city’s residents and job creation
                    extending from the Historic District (HC) to the northern intersection
                    of State Routes 4 and 49
                c. A Shopping Center Commercial District (SC) emphasizing heavy
                    commercial uses extending north from the northern intersection of
                    State Routes 4 and 49
                d. A Visitor Serving Commercial District (VC) emphasizing commercial
                    services catering to visitors encompassing: a) commercially -
                    designated land south and outside of the Historic Commercial District
                    (HC) along State Route 49 to the south city limits and b) commercial
                    areas located along State Route 4 east outside of the Historic
                    Commercial District (HC) and east of the southern junction of State
                    Routes 4/49
                Ensure that zoning districts and associated development standards for each
                of the preceding land use designations and the design guidelines adopted
                in Program 1C.b are consistent with respect to mass, scale and placement
                of buildings that may be built.
                Equivalent Program: 11Da (Community Identity)
                Related Programs: 1Aa (Land Use), 1Cb (Land Use), 4Di (Conservation & Open
                Space), 8Af (Cultural Resources), 10Ad (Economics), 11Ba (Community Identity), 11Db
                (Community Identity)
Angels Camp 2020 General Plan                                         Land Use Element          I-22

                                                                               February 3, 2009
  1.C.b     Establish Design Guidelines for Each of the City’s Distinct Commercial
            Districts
            Adopt design guidelines for each of the city’s distinct commercial districts
            [i.e., Historic Commercial District (HC), Community Commercial District
            (CC), Shopping Center Commercial District (SC) and Visitor Serving
            Commercial District (VC) as described in Program 1.C.a] as necessary to
            visually distinguish each district as a separate district. In addition to adopting
            building design criteria, design guidelines should address, but not be limited
            to: the use of street tree species and other landscaping distinct to each of the
            four districts; sign designs distinct to each of the four districts; lighting; art in
            public places; site design; parking; building form, materials and design; and
            architectural features that may be used to distinguish the city’s four distinct
            commercial districts.
            Ensure that the Design Guidelines are consistent with the zoning districts and
            development standards adopted in Program 1.C.a, with respect to mass, scale
            and placement of buildings that may be built.
            Equivalent Program: 11Db (Community Identity)
            Related Programs: 1Ca (Land Use), 11Da (Community Identity)
  1.C.c     Consider Establishing Scenic Gateways/Scenic Corridors
            Evaluate the potential benefits and constraints associated with designating
            portions of the primary transportation routes entering into the city as scenic
            gateways or scenic corridors as a means of establishing good “first-
            impressions” for visitors. Consider adopting development standards for these
            areas that encourage new development while addressing landscaping,
            vegetation retention, sign design, outdoor storage, architecture, traffic-
            calming, preservation of the city’s visual character and similar design issues.
            Equivalent Programs: 3Ea (Circulation), 4Ca (Conservation & Open Space), 11Bi
            (Community Identity), 11Cf (Community Identity)
            Related Programs: 8Bw (Cultural Resources)
Angels Camp 2020 General Plan                                       Land Use Element         I-23

                                                                                 February 3, 2009
  1.C.d     Develop a Master Plan for Context Sensitive Solutions - Caltrans
            Coordination
            Use Caltrans’ policy regarding Context Sensitive Solutions for projects
            involving the planning, design, maintenance and operation of State Routes 4
            and 49, in order to integrate and balance community, aesthetic, historic and
            environmental values with transportation safety, maintenance and
            performance goals. Identify locations throughout the city that might benefit
            from the application of context sensitive solutions including, but not limited
            to, plans for:
                a. Type, size, location and planting technique for street trees
                b. Location and design of bulbouts and pedestrian crossings
                c. Location and design of parking
                d. Locations for civic buildings and other public facilities and amenities
                e. Approaches to restoring historic buildings
                f. Location and design of transit stops and ride-share centers
                g. Lighting
                h. Street lighting
                i. Similar programs
            Equivalent Programs: 3Eb (Circulation), 8Ch (Cultural Resources), 11Ce (Community
            Identity)
Angels Camp 2020 General Plan                                       Land Use Element          I-24

                                                                                 February 3, 2009
  1.C.e     Draft a Hillside Management Ordinance
            Draft a hillside management ordinance establishing acceptable hillside slope-
            related densities and alternatives for hillside construction standards that
            reduce grading and other adverse environmental impacts. The ordinance
            should address infill development on city lots (in particular, those lots
            established prior to the adoption of the city’s development standards for
            creating new parcels) and the appropriateness of setbacks, lot sizes, road
            widths, road-related facilities (e.g., bike ways, sidewalks), parking standards
            and related development standards.
            Provisions of a Hillside Management Ordinance should be combined with
            those of a Grading Ordinance to the maximum extent feasible. [2020
            GENERAL PLAN MITIGATION MEASURE, MM-SCENIC-02, MM-
            WATER QUALITY-02, MM-GEOLOGY-02, MM-COMMUNITY-02]
            In the absence of a Hillside Management Ordinance, or equivalent,
            applications for new development of one acre or more on slopes averaging
            10% or greater, will, at a minimum, be accompanied by a grading plan
            indicating, at a minimum, the amount of soil to be disturbed; a tree plan
            indicating the number, size, species and location of trees to be removed and
            proposals for replacing trees; a vegetation management plan and revegetation
            plans. [2020 GENERAL PLAN MITIGATION MEASURE, MM-
            SCENIC-02, MM-WATER QUALITY-02, MM-GEOLOGY-02, MM-
            COMMUNITY-02]
            Equivalent Programs: 2Bj (Housing), 3Ec (Circulation), 6Aj (Public Safety), 11Bd
            (Community Identity)
Angels Camp 2020 General Plan                                       Land Use Element          I-25

                                                                             February 3, 2009
  1.C.f     Prepare a Grading Ordinance/Promote Best Management Practices
            Prepare a grading ordinance addressing: When a grading permit is required,
            when a grading plan shall be prepared, required contents of a grading plan,
            anticipated grades before and after construction, the total amount of soil to be
            removed, location and design of retaining walls, erosion control standards,
            preparation of erosion control plans, recommended erosion control methods,
            soil disposal, vegetation retention, revegetation, drainage, requirements for
            erosion and sediment control plans and other elements, as identified. The
            ordinance, or a companion publication (either prepared as an original
            publication or adopted from existing publications), should be prepared/
            adopted in conjunction with the grading ordinance and illustrate best
            management practices. Resources for Best Management Practices are listed
            in Angels Camp 2020 General Plan Appendix 4C.
            The ordinance should further establish that no grading permit or permits to
            allow grading or vegetation removal of more than ten percent of a parcel shall
            be issued until a site plan, development plan, building permit or other
            entitlement has been issued for a specific development project unless
            otherwise necessary for reasons of health and safety as declared by the city.
            [2020 GENERAL PLAN MITIGATION MEASURE MM-SCENIC-01,
            MM-WATER QUALITY-01, MM-GEOLOGY-01, MM-COMMUNITY-
            01]
            The grading ordinance should further specify that applications for
            discretionary entitlements for development of one acre or more on slopes
            averaging 10% or greater, will, at a minimum, be accompanied by a grading
            plan indicating, at least, the amount of soil to be disturbed; a tree plan
            indicating the number, size, species and location of trees to be removed and
            proposals for replacing trees; a vegetation management plan and revegetation
            plans.     [2020 GENERAL PLAN MITIGATION MEASURE MM-
            SCENIC-01, MM-WATER QUALITY-01, MM-GEOLOGY-01, MM-
            COMMUNITY-01]
            Provisions of a Grading Ordinance should be combined with those of a
            Hillside Management Ordinance to the maximum extent feasible. [2020
            GENERAL PLAN MITIGATION MEASURE MM-SCENIC-01, MM-
            WATER QUALITY-01, MM-GEOLOGY-01, MM-COMMUNITY-01]
            Equivalent Programs: 4Cf (Conservation & Open Space), 4Ga (Conservation & Open
            Space), 6Al (Public Safety), 11Ac (Community Identity)
Angels Camp 2020 General Plan                                      Land Use Element        I-26
                                                                               February 3, 2009
  1.C.g     Establish a Resources Management (RM) Land Use Designation and
            Maintain and Update the City’s Open Space Zoning District
            Establish a Resources Management (RM) General Plan Land Use Designation
            in the city’s general plan that is compatible with an Open Space (OS) zoning
            district. The city’s municipal code should use the Open Space (OS) zoning
            district to provide for conservation of biological, scenic and cultural resources.
            Alternative zoning districts may be developed consistent with the Resources
            Management (RM) General Plan Land Use Designation to address flood
            protection, recreation and similar uses.
            Update the city’s Open Space (OS) zoning district to address permitted and
            conditional uses, use of native plants, trail construction, and similar uses in the
            Open Space (OS) zoning district.
            Equivalent Programs: 4Di (Conservation & Open Space), 11Ba (Community Identity)
            Related Program: 1Aa (Land Use)
  1.C.h     Update Development Standards for the Historic District
            Revise existing development standards in the historic district as necessary to
            achieve compatibility with the character, scale and architectural style of the
            district. Revisions should include, but not be limited to, a review of
            dimensional limitations (e.g., building height).
            Equivalent Programs: 8Bh (Cultural Resources), 11Ed (Community Identity)
            Related Programs: 1Ci (Land Use), 11Ec (Community Identity), 8Bg (Cultural Resources),
            8Bi (Cultural Resources), 8Bj (Cultural Resources)
Angels Camp 2020 General Plan                                      Land Use Element           I-27

                                                                                 February 3, 2009
  1.C.i     Prepare Design Guidelines for the Preservation of Historic Resources
            Prepare and adopt illustrated Angels Camp Historic Design Guidelines that
            articulate the design goals for the preservation of historic resources, including
            historic districts, and ensure that development within the historic district is
            designed to be compatible with the character, scale and architectural style of
            the district. Provide guidance that will ensure the maintenance of the historic
            and architectural character and integrity of the resources and surrounding
            areas. The design guidelines should include the following:
                a. Guidelines that specifically address the character and design of
                    specific building types as well as neighborhoods and districts
                b. Adoption of the Secretary of the Interior’s Standards for the
                    Treatment of Historic Properties as a guide for evaluating
                    development proposals including, but not limited to, restoration,
                    rehabilitation, or alteration of, and additions to, existing historic
                    structures (2020 General Plan Appendix 8A)
                c. Adoption of design criteria for landscaping, lighting, signage, and the
                    design of new buildings and structures located within a historic district
                    or located outside of a historic district but adjacent to a cultural
                    resource.
            Equivalent Program: 8Bg (Cultural Resources), 11Ec (Community Identity)
            Related Programs: 8Bh (Cultural Resources), 8Bi (Cultural Resources), 8Bj (Cultural
            Resources)
Angels Camp 2020 General Plan                                        Land Use Element           I-28

                                                                                February 3, 2009
  1.C.j     Draft a Creek Corridor Preservation & Management Plan for Angels
            Creek
            Identify potential funding sources to prepare and draft a creek corridor
            preservation and management plan for Angels Creek to include, but not be
            limited to:
                a. Access points tying the historic commercial district to the creek
                    corridor
                b. A trail along the creek through the city limits (with potential future
                    links to trails extending along the creek beyond the city limits)
                c. Creek crossing(s) from the State Route 4 city parking lot to the
                    Historic Commercial District (HC)
                d. Trailhead(s) with picnic and bathroom facilities
                e. Maintenance of native vegetation and scenic and biological resources
                f. Maintenance of water quality
                g. Design guidelines providing a cohesive architectural theme for all
                    creek improvements and including a trail design that minimizes
                    impacts to the creek and private residences to the maximum extent
                    feasible
                h. Interpretive features highlighting the creek’s biology, natural history
                    and historic resources
                i. Criteria for the dedication of resource management easements to
                    accommodate the planned creek corridor management plan
            Resources that may assist in the preparation of the plan are included in 2020
            General Plan Appendix 4F.
            Equivalent Program: 4Dc (Conservation & Open Space)
            Related Programs: 1Be (Land Use), 1Bf (Land Use), 3Bg (Circulation), 3Bh (Circulation),
            4Gc (Conservation & Open Space), 4Ha (Conservation & Open Space), 6Bg (Public Safety),
            11Bb (Community Identity), 12Bg (Parks & Recreation), 12Ca (Parks & Recreation), 12Cc
            (Parks & Recreation), 12Ce (Parks & Recreation)
Angels Camp 2020 General Plan                                        Land Use Element          I-29

                                                                            February 3, 2009
Residential
Goals
1D-1        Provide for a wide variety of housing types in a quality living environment for
            city residents.
1D-2        Encourage infill development that is compact, mixed use, pedestrian-friendly,
            transit-oriented and discourages or reduces auto-dependency.
            [2020 GENERAL PLAN MITIGATION MEASURE, MM-AIR-03]
Policies
   1.D.1    Protect the integrity and character of established residential neighborhoods.
   1.D.2    Encourage higher density housing in areas served by a full range of urban
            services, preferably along collector and arterial streets, and within walking
            distance of shopping areas.
   1.D.3    Recognize the need to supply affordable housing in close proximity to
            commercial centers to serve the city’s and county’s high number of service-
            oriented, minimum-wage workers.
   1.D.4    Continue to provide a wide variety of housing suitable to all income levels.
   1.D.5    Encourage compact development patterns suitable for public transportation,
            pedestrian movement, use of low-speed vehicles (LSVs), and bicycles
            between high and medium density residential developments.
Implementation Programs
   1.D.a    Establish Medium and High-Density Residential Land Use Designations
            Near the City’s Commercial Centers
            Establish and maintain the High Density Residential (HDR) and Medium
            Density Residential (MDR) General Plan Land Use Designations and their
            compatible zoning districts on vacant land within walking distance (i.e., ¼ ±
            mile) of the city’s commercial centers so development is readily accessible to
            pedestrians, low-speed vehicles (LSVs), bicycles and similar low-impact
            modes of transportation.
            Equivalent Program: 2Ad (Housing)
Angels Camp 2020 General Plan                                     Land Use Element       I-30

                                                                                        February 3, 2009
  1.D.b     Continue to Implement a City Services Impact Mitigation Fee Program
            Continue to implement a City Services Impact Mitigation Fee Program, or
            equivalent, to support the continued provision of city services that benefit city
            residents and visitors. Continue to maintain a community services impact
            mitigation fee for new development to assist in the provision of adequate
            recreational, fire, medical, police and other community services, as applicable.
            Update fees as necessary to ensure adequate funding.
            Equivalent Programs: 7Cc (Public Facilities & Services), 7Da (Public Facilities &
            Services), 7Ea (Public Facilities & Services)
            Related Programs: 2Bc (Housing), 4Cg (Conservation & Open Space), 7Bg (Public
            Facilities & Services), 7Ed (Public Facilities & Services), 12Ef (Parks & Recreation)
  1.D.c     Encourage Low-Impact Modes of Transportation
            Continue to designate land uses compatible with compact development
            patterns and incorporating sidewalk or trail systems that encourage access
            between residential, commercial, recreational and public facilities and public
            transportation stops using low-impact modes of transportation [e.g.,
            pedestrian, bicycle, low-speed vehicles (LSVs)].
            Equivalent Programs: 3Ba (Circulation), 4Bb (Conservation and Open Space), 9Af (Air
            Quality), 12Ba (Parks & Recreation)
            Related Programs: 3Bb (Circulation), 3Bc (Circulation), 3Bd (Circulation), 3Be
            (Circulation), 3Bf (Circulation), 3Bh (Circulation), 3bi (Circulation), 3Bj (Circulation), 3Bk
            (Circulation), 3Bl (Circulation), 3Ce (Circulation), 3Cf (Circulation), 4Bc (Conservation &
            Open Space), 4Bd (Conservation & Open Space), 12Bb (Parks & Recreation), 12Bc (Parks &
            Recreation), 12Bd (Parks & Recreation), 12Be (Parks & Recreation), 12Bf (Parks &
            Recreation), 12Bh (Parks & Recreation), 12Bi (Parks & Recreation), 12Cc (Parks &
            Recreation), 12De (Parks & Recreation)
  1.D.d     Update the City’s Mobile Home/Manufactured Housing Provisions
            Amend the City of Angels Municipal Code to comply with the provisions of
            California Government Code Section 65852.3 (as may be amended) to allow
            manufactured homes on single-family residential lots. Include provisions that
            prohibit the installation of mobile homes constructed prior to June 15, 1976
            within the city limits and to require all mobile homes constructed after June
            15, 1976 to be on a permanent foundation unless located within a mobile
            home park.
            Equivalent Program: 2Bl (Housing)
Angels Camp 2020 General Plan                                             Land Use Element              I-31

                                                                                 February 3, 2009
Commercial
See also Chapter 11 (Community Identity), Section 11D
Goal 1E       Encourage well-designed commercial development compatible with the rural
              character of the community that contributes positively to both the city’s
              economic base and the city’s jobs/housing balance.
Policies
   1.E.1      Recognize the economic impacts of new commercial development on existing
              businesses within the city limits.
   1.E.2      Require new commercial development to be designed to minimize the visual
              impact of parking areas and signs from public transportation routes.
   1.E.3      Continue to require new commercial development to contribute to the costs of
              providing adequate fire protection, adequate police protection and other
              community services.
   1.E.4      Continue to require new commercial construction to be served with public
              water with adequate fire flow and public sewer.
   1.E.5      Encourage compact development patterns suitable for public transportation
              and low-impact modes of transportation between high and medium density
              residential developments and commercial centers.
Implementation Programs
   1.E.a      Maintain Lists of Vacant Commercial and Business Attraction &
              Expansion Lands
              Facilitate economic development within the city by working in cooperation
              with the Economic Development Company of Calaveras County to maintain a
              list of vacant and underutilized Commercial and Business Attraction and
              Expansion (BAE) - designated and/or zoned lands to be made available to the
              public upon request. This program should be completed in conjunction with
              Program 1.A.c (Monitor Land Availability).
              Equivalent Program: 10Aa (Economic Development)
              Related programs: 1Ab (Land Use), 1Ac (Land Use), 1Fb (Land Use), 10Ac (Community
              Identity), 10Ad (Community Identity)
Angels Camp 2020 General Plan                                        Land Use Element         I-32

                                                                                  February 3, 2009
  1.E.b     Revise the City’s Sign Ordinance
            Amend the city’s sign ordinance to eliminate inconsistencies, emphasize
            cohesive design for commercial centers with multiple buildings, and to
            include design standards reflective of the city’s three distinct commercial
            districts [i.e., Historic Commercial District (HC), Community Commercial
            District (CC) and Shopping Center Commercial District (SC) as described in
            Programs 1.C.a and 11.D.a]. Specific changes include, but are not limited
            to: eliminating pole signs; requiring master sign plans for shopping centers;
            requiring master sign plans for multiple businesses in a single structure,
            establishing criteria for announcement signs (e.g., signs with scrolling text or
            changing copy), and eliminating flashing or glaring signs.
            Equivalent Programs: 4Ce (Conservation & Open Space), 11Cd (Community Identity)
            Related Program: 8Bu (Cultural Resources)
  1.E.c     Update the City’s Parking Standards
            Update the city’s parking standards to provide specific requirements for a
            wide variety of land uses and to include illustrations for parking design and
            landscaping techniques. Incorporate standards for the location and provision
            of bicycle spaces, motorcycle spaces, low-speed vehicle spaces, compact
            vehicle spaces, landscaping and lighting, pedestrian-friendly design and bus
            loading zones.
            Equivalent Programs: 3Da (Circulation), 7Fb (Public Facilities & Services), 11Cc
            (Community Identity)
            Related Programs: 3Db (Circulation), 7Fc (Public Facilities & Services), 7Fd (Public
            Facilities & Services)
Angels Camp 2020 General Plan                                         Land Use Element           I-33

                                                                               February 3, 2009
  1.E.d     Update the City’s Landscaping Provisions/Street Trees
            Update the city’s landscaping provisions to incorporate:
                a. Requirements for planting street trees consistent with the provisions of
                    Implementation Programs 1C.b, 1.C.d, 1.C.e and 11.B.f
                b. A list of appropriate plant species for Angels Camp (prepared in
                    consultation with local nurseries and the United States Department of
                    Agriculture Natural Resources Conservation Service) including trees,
                    shrubs, vines and ground covers, and including native grasses
                c. Provisions for replacing dead or dying vegetation required pursuant to
                    a city entitlement (including perpetual maintenance of landscaping by
                    landowner)
                d. Mulching standards for water retention
                e. Revegetating cut and fill slopes
                f. Hydroseeding
                g. Landscaping retaining walls 4 feet or higher
                h. Irrigation alternatives, including the use of reclaimed water and
                    “smart” irrigation systems.
                i. Oak tree protection standards
                j. Additional related measures
            Equivalent Program: 11Bh (Community Identity)
            Related Programs: 4Cb (Conservation & Open Space), 4Cc (Conservation & Open Space),
            4Cd (Conservation & Open Space), 4Fd (Conservation & Open Space), 4Gn (Conservation &
            Open Space), 9Am (Air Quality), 11Bf (Community Identity)
Angels Camp 2020 General Plan                                       Land Use Element         I-34

                                                                                February 3, 2009
  1.E.e     Establish Standards for Erosion and Dust Control
            Establish and adopt standards for erosion and dust control to be included as
            conditions of approval, conditions of site development or to be otherwise
            attached as requirements of entitlements issued by the city, as necessary to
            reduce dust and erosion during construction activities. Methods to be
            addressed include, but are not limited to:
                a. Revegetating cut and fill slopes
                b. Hydroseeding
                c. Re-vegetation using native grasses
                d. Use of on-site water trucks or similar devices during non-precipitation
                    periods to control dust emissions and maintain water quality during
                    demolitions, construction, or other dust - generating activities
                e. Installation of erosion control devices (e.g., silt fences, hay bales) prior
                    to the rainy season
                f. Measures for protecting soil stability (See Program 6Ak)
                g. Tire-washing stations for trucks leaving construction sites
            Equivalent Programs: 6Am (Public Safety), 9Ad (Air Quality), 11Ad (Community Identity)
            Related Program: 6Ak (Public Safety)
  1.E.f     Provide Job and Wage Projections for New Commercial Developments
            Amend the municipal code to require applications for commercial
            development (development size to be determined) to include the projected
            number of jobs to be created, the estimated salary range for those positions
            and the number of new local hires anticipated by the new commercial
            development. This information will be used in the city’s jobs/housing
            analysis.
            Equivalent Programs: 10Be (Economic Development)
            Related Programs: 10Ae (Economic Development), 10Bd (Economic Development)
Angels Camp 2020 General Plan                                      Land Use Element          I-35

                                                                              February 3, 2009
  1.E.g     Consider Adopting Bonding Standards for Non-Historic Large Retail
            Facilities
            Consider adopting a provision in the City of Angels Municipal Code to
            require bonding for large retail facilities sufficient to fund the removal of non-
            historic large, vacant retail space and adaptive reuse of large buildings and
            spaces should they become vacant.
            Equivalent Programs: 10An (Economic Development), 11Dd (Community Identity)
            Related Program: 10Am (Economic Development), 11De (Community Identity)
  1.E.h     Provide a Community Forum to Establish Large Retail Facility Design
            Guidelines
            Provide a public forum (i.e., public meeting or community committee) to
            address non-historic large retail facilities and identify guidelines for design,
            permitting and regulatory guidelines desirable for these facilities.
            Equivalent Program: 10Am (Economic Development), 11De (Community Identity)
            Related Programs: 1Ca (Land Use), 1Cb (Land Use), 10An (Economic Development),
            11Da (Community Identity), 11Db (Community Identity), 11Dd (Community Identity)
Angels Camp 2020 General Plan                                       Land Use Element        I-36
                                                                               February 3, 2009
Business Attraction and Expansion
See also Chapter 11 (Community Identity), Section 11D
Goals
1F-1          Encourage well-designed business attraction and expansion proposals which
              are compatible with the rural character of the community, contribute
              positively to the city’s economic base, and improve the city’s jobs/housing
              balance.
1F-2          Encourage the use of telecommuting to discourage travel by single-occupant
              motor vehicles. [2020 GENERAL PLAN MITIGATION MEASURE,
              MM-AIR-03]
Policies
   1.F.1      Protect heavy industrial uses from encroachment of incompatible land uses.
   1.F.2      Encourage the creation of living-wage jobs in the city that are compatible with
              adjoining land uses.
   1.F.3      Support infrastructure improvement plans compatible with the character of the
              city that promotes telecommuting.
Implementation Programs
   1.F.a      Facilitate Establishment of a City/County Industrial Park
              Approach the county to discuss the location of an industrial park outside of
              the city limits, preferably within ten miles of the city, to accommodate
              industrial uses that generate noise, odor, have outdoor storage, involve heavy
              equipment operation (especially outdoors), outdoor fabrication, or similar uses
              that may be incompatible with the compact development patterns of the city.
              Equivalent Program: 10Af (Economic Development)
              Related Program: 11De (Community Identity)
Angels Camp 2020 General Plan                                       Land Use Element        I-37

                                                                            February 3, 2009
  1.F.b     Establish and Maintain a Business Attraction and Expansion (BAE) Land
            Use Designation
            Establish and maintain a Business Attraction and Expansion (BAE) Land Use
            Designation within the city on lands suited to the development of industries
            identified in the following studies (and amendments to these and similar
            studies as may occur throughout the life of this general plan).
                    Community Assessment, Volume I: Business Attraction & Expansion
                    Study (Applied Development Economics; November, 1993)
                    Industrial and Commercial Market Analysis, Volume II: Business
                    Attraction & Expansion Study (Applied Development Economics;
                    November, 1993)
                    Economic Strategy and Implementation Plan, Volume III: Business
                    Attraction & Expansion Study (Applied Development Economics;
                    November, 1993)
                    Feasibility Study City-Owned Industrial Park City of Angels, (Applied
                        Development Economics; November 15, 2002)
            The BAE land use designation should allow a mixture of light industrial land
            uses with light commercial land uses servicing employees (e.g., small-scale
            food service, day care) with an emphasis on light manufacturing, processing,
            assembly, wholesale businesses and research and development activities in a
            campus-like business setting (e.g., extensive landscaping, integrated
            architectural design).
            Equivalent Program: 10Ac (Economic Development)
            Related Programs: 10Aa (Economic Development), 10Ad (Economic Development)
Angels Camp 2020 General Plan                                   Land Use Element         I-38
                                                                                 February 3, 2009
  1.F.c     Encourage Communications Infrastructure
            In evaluating applications for new communications infrastructure, the city will
            consider the following:
                a. How the proposed infrastructure will enhance the city’s ability to reach
                    its business attraction and expansion goals (as established in the
                    studies contained in Programs 1.F.b and 10.A.c)
                b. Consistency of the proposal with the city’s Wireless
                    Telecommunications Facilities Ordinance
            Equivalent Programs: 7Gc (Public Facilities & Services), 10Ag (Economic Development)
            Related Programs: 1Fb (Land Use), 6Ed (Public Safety), 6Ee (Public Safety), 10Ac
            (Economic Development), 10Ag (Economic Development)
  1.F.d     Maintain Provisions for Home Occupations
            Continue to allow home occupations pursuant to in-house permitting
            standards established in the City of Angels Municipal Code, encouraging
            professionals to work from their homes. Prepare and provide public handouts
            (or information on the city’s website) summarizing the requirements for home
            occupations. Update and refine standards to better identify uses that are
            appropriate as home occupations and establish necessary measures to be
            undertaken to ensure neighborhood compatibility.
            Equivalent Programs: 10Ah (Economic Development)
  1.F.e     Support Business Retention
            Support and encourage the establishment of organizations that promote the
            retention and growth of existing businesses within Angels Camp. Review the
            city’s municipal code to determine if there are provisions that may discourage
            retention and growth of existing businesses within Angels Camp; where
            appropriate propose amendments to the Municipal Code that will encourage
            the growth and retention of existing businesses.
            Equivalent Program: 10Cf (Economic Development)
Angels Camp 2020 General Plan                                         Land Use Element        I-39

                                                                           February 3, 2009
Public Facilities & Services
See Also Chapter 7: Public Facilities and Services
Goal 1G      Balance the demands of new development with the city’s ability to provide
             adequate public services.
Policy
   1.G.1     New development shall be served with adequate water, sewer, police, fire,
             roads and recreational services and facilities.
Implementation Programs
   1.G.a     Adopt Public Water Requirements
             Amend Section 14.75.010 of the municipal code to state that all new
             development on parcels within the city limits shall be served with public
             water. Exceptions may be granted for hardships by the City of Angels City
             Council pursuant to review on a case-by-case basis.
             Equivalent Program: 7Bd (Public Facilities)
   1.G.b     Adopt Public Sewer Requirements
             Amend Section 13.12.025 of the municipal code to state that all new
             development on parcels within the city limits shall be served with public
             sewer. Exceptions may be granted for hardships by the City of Angels City
             Council pursuant to review on a case-by-case basis.
             Equivalent Program: 7Be (Public Facilities)
Angels Camp 2020 General Plan                                    Land Use Element       I-40

                                                                                 February 3, 2009
  1.G.c        Make Available Fire Protection Standards
               Publish the city’s adopted development standards in booklet form or on-line to
               allow for easy access to this information by the public. Alternatively, amend
               the municipal code to include a separate title for the city’s adopted fire
               protection standards including, but not limited to:
                   a. The city’s adopted standards for the urban/wildland interface including
                       provisions for defensible space, secondary access and other fire-
                       protection related standards
                   b. Adopted standards for fire flow for commercial, residential, industrial
                       and other land use categories
                   c. Standards for installing fire sprinklers
                   d. Standards for fire protection systems
                   e. Standards for placement of propane tanks and facilities
                   f. Standards of coverage for fire and emergency medical response as may
                       be established pursuant to Program 7.C.a
               Equivalent Program: 1Bj (Land Use), 7Ce (Public Facilities)
               Related Programs: 1Ge (Land Use), 3Ab (Circulation)
  1.G.d        Identify and Implement Land Use Planning Techniques to Reduce Crime
               Incorporate land use planning techniques to identify potential high-crime land
               uses and to integrate design methods to deter crime (e.g., hours of operation,
               lighting consistent with community character; use of private patrols and
               security personnel in large residential and commercial development).5
               Equivalent Program: 7Db (Public Facilities)
5
      Recommended: SafeScape, Al Zelinka and Dean Brennan, 2000. APA Planners Press. Available
      through the Planners Book Service, American Planning Association.
Angels Camp 2020 General Plan                                           Land Use Element       I-41

                                                                                February 3, 2009
  1.G.e     Use and Make Available to the Public Adopted Roadway Design and
            Access Standards
            Publish the city’s adopted right-of-way, access and road development
            standards in booklet form or on-line to allow for easy access to this
            information by the public. Alternatively, amend the municipal code to include
            a separate title for the city’s adopted standards including, but not limited to:
                a. Adopted road improvement standards (e.g., right-of-way, road width,
                    shoulder width etc.) for arterial, collector, or local roads
                b. The city’s adopted standards for the urban/wildland interface including
                    provisions for secondary access and other fire-protection related
                    standards related to roadways and access
            Equivalent Program: 3Ab (Circulation)
            Related Programs: 1Bj (Land Use), 1Gc (Land Use), 3Aa (Circulation), 3Ac (Circulation)
  1.G.f     Establish Development Standards for and Inventory Local Legacy Roads
            Legacy roads are those streets typically located in the older and/or historic
            portions of the city that are narrow, windy, steep or otherwise do not meet
            current city standards, and normally were constructed prior to 1980. As
            funding permits, the city will:
                a. Pursue an inventory of streets within the city limits that are
                    substandard in width (and distinguishing between street widths and
                    traveled way) and identify other road-related constraints to
                    development served by those streets
                b. Create a partial list of feasible improvements that can improve street
                    safety, condition, and capacity for each road identified in paragraph A
                c. Identify funding mechanisms for upgrading legacy roads. Funding
                    mechanisms to be investigated include, but are not limited to:
                       Establishing local improvement districts, or similar devices, to
                        finance road improvements for infill within existing subdivisions
                        served by substandard local roads
                       Developer payment of a fair-share portion of improvements
                        necessary to bring the road to current standards, as identified in
                        paragraph B, in addition to payment of Traffic Impact Mitigation
                        Fees
Angels Camp 2020 General Plan                                      Land Use Element            I-42

                                                                               February 3, 2009
                        Acquisition or right-of-way, especially in locations adjacent to
                         undeveloped property
                d. Formulate a mechanism(s) for addressing new development within the
                     various neighborhoods served by these roadways. Mechanisms to be
                     considered include, but are not limited to: formation of community
                     service areas, development capacity standards for various districts
                     served by roadways, alternative roadway designs, and mediation
            Equivalent Programs: 3Al (Circulation), 3Ed (Circulation)
  1.G.g     Acquire and Develop Park and Recreation Facilities
            Acquire and develop at least 18.62± - 21.2± acres of park and recreation
            facilities to fulfill the city’s projected unmet needs based on a goal of 5 acres
            of recreational facilities per 1,000 residents and based on a city resident
            population projection of 4,622-5,138 by the year 2020.
            Equivalent Program: 12Aa (Parks & Recreation)
            Related Program: 7Ec (Public Facilities & Services)
  1.G.h     Coordinate with Cemetery Districts to Ensure Sufficient Land
            Consult with local cemetery districts to keep appraised of the districts’ future
            need for expanding cemeteries. Work with the districts to identify suitable
            land for expansion.
            Equivalent Program: 7.I.j (Public Facilities & Services)
Angels Camp 2020 General Plan                                         Land Use Element      I-43

                                                                            February 3, 2009
Sphere of Influence and Annexations
Goal 1H     Protect land adjoining, and in close proximity to, the city limits from
            development inconsistent with the city’s stated future goals, policies and
            programs.
Policies
   1.H.1    Ensure an adequate amount of land planned for urban development to
            accommodate projected population growth in areas where the appropriate
            level of services are or can be made available.
   1.H.2    Avoid problems and costs imposed on local government by development
            served with inadequate public services and facilities.
   1.H.3    Discourage annexations that may imperil the city’s long-term ability to
            finance, maintain, and operate facilities.
   1.H.4    Consider future annexations that will contribute to a positive revenue flow
            and/or further the implementation of the Angels Camp 2020 General Plan’s
            Goals, Policies and Implementation Programs.
   1.H.5    Consider city annexations that further the goals, policies and implementation
            programs of the city’s general plan while maintaining the city’s economic
            stability and ability to provide adequate public services.
Angels Camp 2020 General Plan                                    Land Use Element        I-44

                                                                                   February 3, 2009
Implementation Programs
   1.H.a    Establish an Annexation Plan
            Consider establishing an annexation plan that addresses policies for evaluating
            annexation priorities and that identifies potential annexation areas, to assist in
            the implementation of the general plan’s goals, policies and implementation
            programs.
            Consideration should be given to annexing areas encompassing the following:
                a. Transportation corridors, including planned future by-pass routes
                b. Major intersections
                c. Land with high potential for economic development
                d. Land providing recreation and open space opportunities
                e. Natural (i.e., physical) boundaries (e.g., rivers, roads, ridges)
                f. Scenic vistas
                g. Land providing affordable housing opportunities
            Decisions to pursue or not to pursue an annexation should involve
            consideration of potential impacts including, but not limited to:
                h. Availability and/or ability to provide water and sewer
                i. Potential to increase or decrease demands for affordable housing
                j. Ability to provide adequate police, fire, park and recreation and other
                    city services
                k. Impacts associated with potential traffic increases
            Equivalent Programs: 3Ee (Circulation), 10Ai (Economic Development), 11Af
            (Community Identity)
            Related Programs: 7Ck (Public Facilities & Services), 7Dc (Public Facilities & Services),
            7Ge (Public Facilities & Services), 7If (Public Facilities & Services)
            See Also: Map1B Angels Camp Primary and Secondary Spheres of Influence and Map 1C
            Angels Camp Area of Interest / Comment
Angels Camp 2020 General Plan                                             Land Use Element        I-45

                                                                                 February 3, 2009
  1.H.b     Continue to Review Development Proposals on Land Within the Primary
            and Secondary Spheres of Influence and City Area of Interest/Comment
            Continue to participate in land use decisions for development located outside
            of the city limits and within the city’s primary and secondary Sphere of
            Influence and area of interest/comment that directly or indirectly affect the
            city and its ability to provide adequate police, fire, transportation and other
            services.
            Adopt and submit to Calaveras County, a map of the Angels Camp Planning
            Review Area Boundaries (i.e., Areas of Interest/Comment) indicating those
            areas in which the City formally requests that the County undertake referrals
            and consultations with the City pursuant to California Government Code
            Section 65919.2 and as illustrated in 2020 General Plan Map 1C.
            Related Program: 1Hc (Land Use)
            See Also: 2020 General Plan Map 1B Angels Camp Primary and Secondary Spheres of
            Influence and 2020 General Plan Map 1C Angels Camp Area of Interest / Comment
  1.H.c     Pursue Amended Primary Sphere of Influence Boundaries
            Pursue adoption of amended Primary Sphere of Influence boundaries through
            LAFCO, using 2020 General Plan Map 1B as a guide, and in cooperation
            with Calaveras County and reflecting the following city goals:
                 a. Preserve the city as a distinct, separate community
                 b. Preserve the visual integrity of the city’s gateways
                 c. Protect land necessary for designated future transportation routes
                 d. Preserve land for future planned economic development activities
                 e. Provide input to the county on development proposals on land with
                     existing or planned uses that have or may have direct impacts on the
                     city’s ability to provide adequate services (e.g., fire, police, water,
                     sewer)
                 f. Maintain compatibility between city and adjacent county land uses
            Annexations will be pursued contingent upon identifying adequate water and
            wastewater capacity and contingent upon the availability of other public
            services.     The City will pursue a cooperative agreement with Calaveras
            County relative to boundaries, development standards and zoning that might
Angels Camp 2020 General Plan                                      Land Use Element           I-46

                                                                                   February 3, 2009
            be associated with a future annexation in advance of any efforts to pursue
            annexation. The City will assess potential impacts on special districts that
            may be affected by annexations (e.g., Altaville-Melones Fire District). In the
            interim, the City will work cooperatively with the County to designate land
            within the proposed Primary and, provide the County with proposed land use
            designations for the Secondary Spheres of Influence consistent with 2020
            General Plan Map 1B as amended per DEIR Table 8. [2020 GENERAL
            PLAN MITIGATION MEASURE MM-LAND-01]
            Equivalent Program: 3Ef (Circulation)
            Related Programs: 1Bi (Land Use), 1Hb (Land Use), 1Hc (Land Use), 4Db (Conservation
            & Open Space), 7Bf (Public Facilities & Services), 12Ac (Parks & Recreation), 12Ad (Parks
            & Recreation)
            See Also: Map 1B Angels Camp 2020 General Plan Primary and Secondary Spheres of
            Influence and Map 1C Angels Camp 2020 General Plan Area of Interest/Comment
Angels Camp 2020 General Plan                                          Land Use Element           I-47
                                                                                        February 3, 2009
Interagency Cooperation
Goal 1I     Strive to work cooperatively with county, state, federal, regional, public and
            quasi-public agencies to formulate and achieve common goals while avoiding
            or minimizing actions that conflict with community goals.
Policy
   1.I.1    Encourage development undertaken by other public agencies (e.g., county,
            state, federal, public and quasi-public agencies) to be compatible with the
            character of the city.
Implementation Programs
   1.I.a  Facilitate City Cooperation/Coordination with Other Agencies
          The city will seek input from county, state, federal, regional, public and quasi-
          public agencies regarding projects undertaken by the city with the potential to
          influence the interests of these agencies.
          Equivalent Program: 7Id (Public Facilities & Services)
          Related Programs: 2Aa (Housing), 2Dg (Housing), 3Bk (Circulation), 5Ak (Noise), 6Bh
          (Public Safety), 7Cj (Public Facilities & Services), 7Hd (Public Facilities & Services), 7Ig
          (Public Facilities & Services), 10Ab (Economic Development), 12Al (Parks & Recreation)
   1.I.b  Facilitate Agency Cooperation/Coordination with the City
          The city will contact local representatives of the county, state, federal, regional,
          public and quasi-public agencies within its Sphere of Influence, requesting that
          each agency notify the city and provide the city with an opportunity to provide
          input for projects with the potential to influence the interests of the city.
          Equivalent Program: 7Ie (Public Facilities & Services)
Angels Camp 2020 General Plan                                             Land Use Element             I-48
                                                                               February 3, 2009
General Plan Land Use Classifications
The Angels Camp 2020 General Plan Land Use Map is found in Map 1A.
The Angels Camp 2020 General Plan Primary and Secondary Spheres of Influence Map is
found in Map 1B.
Resources Management (RM)
   Purposes and Intent
          To conserve important areas of scenic, biological or cultural values
          To protect the city’s residents from natural hazards (e.g., flood zones, fault zones,
           areas of geological instability)
   Location
   Encompassing areas of the city including: important scenic or biological resources,
   significant natural areas, areas prone to geotechnical hazards or flooding and similar
   areas. Includes portions of Angels Creek, Six Mile Creek, Cherokee Creek, Greenhorn
   Creek and Indian Creek (limited recreational use may be permitted along some portions
   of these creeks).
   Minimum Design Standards
   Generally, development within these areas is limited in order to preserve open areas to
   protect resources or to avoid natural hazards.
          Maximum impervious surfaces: 5%. May be increased to 10% for parcels 5
           acres or less in size upon the review and approval of the City of Angels Planning
           Commission to accommodate minor facilities in support of passive recreational
           uses which may be compatible with resource management objectives.
Angels Camp 2020 General Plan                                      Land Use Element         I-49

                                                                              February 3, 2009
Parks and Recreation (PR)
   Purposes and Intent
          To provide for and maintain public and privately-owned parks, recreational and
           cultural facilities
          To protect the semi-rural character of Angels Camp
   Location
   Encompassing the city’s existing and planned publicly-owned parks and private parks,
   recreational and cultural facilities. Includes golf courses, common areas, or similar
   common-ownership areas maintained within private developments to be used for parks or
   recreation within those developments. Designation of common areas within private
   developments is encouraged as a means of clearly identifying planned future common-
   use facilities to property owners within private developments.
   Minimum Design Standards
   Generally, development within these areas is limited to preserve open areas for recreation
   or prohibited to avoid natural hazards. Some small, limited development (e.g., bath-
   rooms, park maintenance facilities, rest stops, snack hut) may occur within this area.
          Maximum impervious surfaces: 10%. Impervious surfaces totaling up to 20%
           may be permitted with review and approval of the City of Angels Planning
           Commission subject to site specifics, project needs and environmental constraints.
          For parcels adjoining or visible from highways, arterials or collectors, project
           design shall accommodate the provision of street trees.
Angels Camp 2020 General Plan                                      Land Use Element         I-50

                                                                             February 3, 2009
Rural Residential (RR) (Note: Located within Primary Sphere of Influence)
  Purposes and Intent
            To provide for single-family residential homes with some limited agricultural
             uses on large lots in a semi-rural environment.
            To provide for a transition between land use densities located within Angels
             Camp and less intensive densities within the Angels Camp Sphere of
             Influence.
            To maintain Angels Camp as a separate and distinct community from nearby
             communities and from the county.
            To provide a buffer between potentially incompatible land uses (e.g., between
             the sewer treatment plant and high density residential uses; between mineral
             extraction activities and residential uses, or between industrial and residential
             uses).
            To allow for limited residential development on slopes equal to or greater than
             20% where clustered development may be feasible on portions of the site.
            To protect land designated by the state as having a high commercial mineral
             value, requiring protection from commercial encroachment pursuant to state
             law.
           To provide opportunities for agricultural uses including, but not limited to:
             livestock production, crop production, and production of unprocessed
             agricultural products generally when the parcel is ten (10) acres gross or more
             in size. [2020 GENERAL PLAN MITIGATION MEASURE, MM-
             AGRICULTURE-02]
  Locational Criteria
  This designation is primarily confined to the Angels Camp Sphere of Influence. Within
  Angels Camp, the designation may be applied in areas with slopes equal to or greater
  than 20% where some clustered development may be feasible.
  Minimum Design Standards
         One dwelling unit per five gross acre minimum.
Angels Camp 2020 General Plan                                     Land Use Element        I-51

                                                                            February 3, 2009
        Maximum impervious surfaces: 15%. Impervious surfaces totaling up to 30%
         may be permitted with review and approval of the City of Angels Planning
         Commission subject to site specifics, project needs and environmental constraints.
        For parcels adjoining or visible from highways, arterials or collectors, project
         design shall accommodate the provision of street trees.
Angels Camp 2020 General Plan                                   Land Use Element          I-52

                                                                               February 3, 2009
Residential Estate (RE)
   Purposes and Intent
   To provide a residential alternative on relatively steep slopes that may not accommodate
   the city’s smallest residential lots (approximately 7,500 square feet). This land use
   designation is intended to accommodate residential developments for landowners
   desiring a more rural setting than may be available within a small-lot Single-Family
   Residential (SFR) subdivision.
   Location
   Generally located in areas with gentle slopes away from the central core of the city. The
   RE land use also provides opportunities for clustering on land with pockets of relatively
   gentle slopes (for clustering) mixed with relatively steep slopes (to be left as open space)
   and provides a transition between the less dense Rural Residential (RR) land use
   designation and the higher densities of the city.
   Minimum Design Standards
          One dwelling unit per one gross acre to one dwelling unit per three gross acres
           dependent upon on-site slopes.
          Maximum impervious surfaces: 20%. Impervious surfaces totaling up to 40%
           may be permitted with review and approval of the City of Angels Planning
           Commission subject to site specifics, project needs and environmental constraints.
          For parcels adjoining or visible from highways, arterials or collectors, project
           design shall accommodate the provision of street trees.
Angels Camp 2020 General Plan                                       Land Use Element        I-53

                                                                                February 3, 2009
Single-Family Residential (SFR)
   Purposes and Intent
           To preserve the integrity of existing single-family residential neighborhoods
           To reserve lands best-suited for future single-family development (i.e., land
            accessible by adequate roads, police, fire, water and sewer services on slopes
            generally averaging less than 15%)
   Location
   Variable, but restricted to those areas that can be served by adequate water, sewer, police,
   fire, roads and other public services on relatively gentle slopes in close proximity to city
   services.
   Minimum Design Standards
           Six dwelling units per gross acre density. Higher densities are possible through
            density bonuses granted for the provision of affordable housing for households of
            low or very low income in accordance with the general plan.
           Maximum impervious surfaces: 50%. Impervious surfaces totaling up to 60%
            are permitted for projects providing housing for low or very low income
            households in accordance with the general plan. Impervious surfaces totaling up
            to 60% may be permitted with review and approval of the City of Angels
            Planning Commission subject to site specifics, project needs and environmental
            constraints.
           For parcels adjoining or visible from highways, arterials or collectors, project
            design shall accommodate the provision of street trees.
Angels Camp 2020 General Plan                                        Land Use Element        I-54

                                                                                             February 3, 2009
Medium-Density Residential (MDR)
    Purpose and Intent
    To provide for a variety of housing needs throughout the City including both single-
    family and medium-density multi-family dwellings. Generally, MDR developments will
    include duplexes, although triplexes or fourplexes may be possible on large infill lots.
    Integrated condominium or townhouse developments also are encouraged on lands
    designated as Medium Density Residential.
    Location
    Typically, Medium Density Residential developments will be located close to
    commercial or other services and near major streets and thoroughfares for convenient
    access. Medium Density Residential developments will normally be located on in-fill
    sites scattered throughout the city, blending with the character of existing, established
    neighborhoods.
    Minimum Design Standards
            Ten dwelling units per gross acre density. Higher densities are possible through
             density bonuses granted for the provision of affordable housing for households of
             low or very low income in accordance with the general plan.
            Maximum impervious surfaces: 50%. Maximum impervious surfaces 60% for
             Cottage Residential zoning6 only. Impervious surfaces totaling up to 70% are
             permitted for projects providing housing for low or very low income households
             in accordance with the general plan.
            A minimum of 15% landscaping is required for this land use.
            For parcels adjoining or visible from highways, arterials or collectors, project
             design shall accommodate the provision of street trees.
6
  This proposed new zoning district is intended to allow for small single-family residences (cottages) on parcel
  sizes of 3,000 sq. ft. (minimum) and up to 5,000 sq. ft. (maximum)
Angels Camp 2020 General Plan                                                   Land Use Element            I-55

                                                                                             February 3, 2009
High-Density Residential (HDR)
     Purpose and Intent
     To provide for a variety of housing needs at all income levels throughout the city at a
     higher density than allowed in other residential districts. While single-family and two-
     family dwellings may be allowed, the High Density Residential designation is intended
     primarily for triplexes, apartments, dwelling groups, condominiums and townhouses,
     senior housing projects, and multi-family dwellings. Grouped or clustered single-family
     dwellings, including small lot (cottage) development also is appropriate. Cooperative
     housing developments and Tri-Level Living Communities also are encouraged on lands
     designated as High Density Residential.
     Location
     High Density Residential developments generally will be located close to commercial or
     other services and near major streets and thoroughfares for convenient access. High
     Density Residential developments typically will be located throughout the city and not
     concentrated in a single location.
     Minimum Design Standards
             Fifteen dwelling units per gross acre density. Higher densities are possible
              through density bonuses granted for the provision of affordable housing for
              households of low or very low income in accordance with the general plan.
             Maximum impervious surfaces: 60%. Maximum impervious surfaces 70% for
              Cottage Residential zoning7 only. Impervious surfaces totaling up to 75% are
              permitted for projects providing housing for low or very low income households
              in accordance with the general plan.
             A minimum of 20% landscaping is required for this land use. Landscaping may
              be reduced to 15% with the provision of housing for low or very low income
              households in accordance with the general plan.
             For parcels adjoining or visible from highways, arterials or collectors, project
              design shall accommodate the provision of street trees.
7
  This proposed new zoning district is intended to allow for small single-family residences (cottages) on parcel
  sizes of 3,000 sq. ft. (minimum) and up to 5,000 sq. ft. (maximum)
Angels Camp 2020 General Plan                                                   Land Use Element            I-56

                                                                             February 3, 2009
Community Commercial (CC)
  Purposes and Intent
        To provide a broad range of light-to-moderate intensity commercial uses for
         residents and visitors.
        Typical resident-serving uses include grocery and specialty stores, schools, public
         facilities, multi-family housing in association with commercial uses; professional
         offices including: real estate offices, medical offices, consulting services; small
         businesses; community recreational facilities
        Typical visitor-serving uses include hotels, motels, restaurants, visitor centers,
         museums, theaters, visitor-serving recreational facilities
        To provide live-work opportunities by allowing upper level residential uses above
         commercial establishments (e.g., mixed use)
  Location
  Generally located along major thoroughfares, particularly at city gateways.
  Minimum Design Standards
        Maximum impervious surfaces 80%.
        A minimum 15% landscaping is required for this land use. Landscaping may be
         reduced to 10% with the provision of housing for low or very low income
         households in accordance with the general plan.
        For parcels adjoining or visible from highways, arterials or collectors, project
         design shall accommodate the provision of street trees.
Angels Camp 2020 General Plan                                      Land Use Element        I-57

                                                                             February 3, 2009
Historic Commercial (HC)
   Purposes and Intent
         To provide a broad range of commercial uses for both residents and visitors.
          Typical uses include restaurants, hotels, specialty shops, bed and breakfasts,
          theaters and professional offices
         To maintain the character and integrity of the city’s designated historic district
         To provide live-work opportunities by allowing upper level residential uses above
          commercial establishments (e.g., mixed use)
   Location
   The city’s designated historic district.
   Minimum Design Standards
         Maximum impervious surfaces: 100%
         For parcels adjoining or visible from highways, arterials or collectors, project
          design shall accommodate the provision of street trees.
Angels Camp 2020 General Plan                                     Land Use Element          I-58

                                                                               February 3, 2009
Shopping Center Commercial (SC)
   Purpose and Intent
   To provide a broad range of commercial uses for both residents and visitors. Typical
   uses include shopping centers, hotels, motels, restaurants, bars, department stores,
   specialty stores and professional offices. In addition, this designation is intended to
   provide live-work opportunities by allowing upper level residential uses above, or in
   close association with, commercial establishments (e.g., mixed use) while maintaining
   the commercial use as the primary use.
   Location
   Generally located within urban areas and along major thoroughfares.
   Minimum Design Standards
          Maximum impervious surfaces: 80%
          A minimum 20% landscaping is required for this land use.
          Multi-family residential uses may conditionally be allowed at a minimum density
           of 15 dwelling units per acre and maximum density of 22 dwelling units per gross
           acre (excluding density bonus)
          For parcels adjoining or visible from highways, arterials or collectors, project
           design shall accommodate the provision of street trees.
Angels Camp 2020 General Plan                                       Land Use Element        I-59

                                                                               February 3, 2009
Business Attraction & Expansion (BAE)
   Purposes and Intent
          To provide for a mixture of light industrial land uses with light commercial land
           uses servicing employees (e.g., small-scale food service, day-care). This
           designation encourages light manufacturing, processing, assembly, wholesale
           businesses and research and development activities in a campus-like business
           setting (e.g., extensive landscaping, integrated architectural design)
          To provide land suited to the development of industries identified in the following
           studies (and amendments to these and similar studies as may occur throughout the
           life of this general plan):
                Community Assessment, Volume I: Business Attraction & Expansion Study
                (Applied Development Economics; November, 1993)
                Industrial and Commercial Market Analysis, Volume II: Business Attraction
                & Expansion Study (Applied Development Economics; November, 1993)
                Economic Strategy and Implementation Plan, Volume III: Business Attraction
                & Expansion Study (Applied Development Economics; November, 1993)
                Feasibility Study City-Owned Industrial Park City of Angels Camp,
                (Applied Development Economics; November 15, 2002)
   Location
   The Business Attraction and Expansion district will normally be buffered from residential
   uses and may be located within areas visible from major thoroughfares due to the special
   design considerations required pursuant to this land use designation. Under special
   circumstances, Business Attraction and Expansion areas designed to accommodate high
   tech or similar developments that do not generate noise, fumes or other deterrents to
   residential development, may incorporate High Density Residential Development
   offering live-work opportunities for employees. Development on lands designated as
   Business Attraction and Expansion shall be served by adequate roads, sewer, water and
   fire protection. This use should be limited to slopes of less than 15%.
Angels Camp 2020 General Plan                                       Land Use Element        I-60

                                                                            February 3, 2009
  Business Attraction & Expansion (BAE) – Continued
  Minimum Design Standards
        Maximum impervious surfaces: 65%. Impervious surfaces totaling up to 75%
         may be permitted with review and approval of the City of Angels Planning
         Commission for target industries identified in the city’s business attraction and
         expansion studies subject to site specifics, project needs and environmental
         constraints.
        A minimum 20% landscaping is required for this land use.
        For parcels adjoining or visible from highways, arterials or collectors, project
         design shall accommodate the provision of street trees.
Angels Camp 2020 General Plan                                     Land Use Element        I-61

                                                                                February 3, 2009
Industrial (I)
   Purpose and Intent
   To provide for manufacturing, processing, assembly, storage, distribution and other
   businesses including those that may require outdoor storage, and including auto repair
   facilities and similar uses. Generally, uses under this designation may be incompatible
   with other land uses due to noise, appearance, traffic, odors or similar characteristics.
   Location
   Generally, land designated as Industrial will be concentrated in industrial parks isolated
   from other land uses by topography, major thoroughfares or other natural barriers.
   Industrial land uses will be located in areas that are not highly visible from State Route 4,
   State Route 49 or other major thoroughfares. Those areas designated for Industrial use
   that are visible from major transportation routes shall require appropriate screening to
   reduce visibility.
   Minimum Design Standards
           Maximum impervious surfaces: 75%.
           A minimum 15% landscaping is required for this land use.
           For parcels adjoining or visible from highways, arterials or collectors, project
            design shall accommodate the provision of street trees.
Angels Camp 2020 General Plan                                       Land Use Element         I-62

                                                                                February 3, 2009
Special Planning (SP)
   Purposes and Intent
          To encourage unique developments with compatible mixed uses and an integrated
           design compatible with the physical characteristics of the property.
          To provide uniform development guidelines consistent with Specific Plan
           legislation pursuant to Government Code Section 65450 et seq. for mixed-use
           development proposals occurring on parcels totaling more than twenty acres in
           size.
          To allow for flexible development opportunities for mixed use developments on
           parcels totaling twenty acres or less in size.
   Location
   Properties that have unique or unusual characteristics due to location or topography and
   do not fit into the conventional zoning pattern including vacant land requiring unusually
   environmentally and aesthetically sensitive development are appropriate for the Special
   Planning designation. The Special Planning designation also includes large tracts of land
   under single ownership where the landowner has indicated future plans for a mixed use
   development with an integrated design.
   Minimum Design Standards
          For those projects subject to a Specific Plan, land use density and intensity of use
           shall be as specified in the Specific Plan. For those projects not subject to a
           Specific Plan (i.e., less than 20 acres in size), land use density and intensity of use
           shall be per the land use designation(s) most similar to the use or uses proposed
           on the site.
          A minimum of 30% open spaces (including landscaping, recreational uses without
           buildings and natural areas) is required for this land use for parcels subject to a
           Specific Plan. A minimum of 25% open spaces (including landscaping,
           recreational uses without buildings and natural areas) is required for this land use
           for parcels not subject to a Specific Plan.
          For parcels adjoining or visible from highways, arterials or collectors, project
           design shall accommodate the provision of street trees.
Angels Camp 2020 General Plan                                         Land Use Element        I-63

                                                                            February 3, 2009
        Lands designated as SP are expected to integrate and implement plans for the
         provision of water service and wastewater service and contribute to the cost of
         increasing the city’s capacity to serve deliver service to new SP developments.
         [2020 GENERAL PLAN MITIGATION MEASURE MM-LAND-04, MM-
         UTILITY-06]
Angels Camp 2020 General Plan                                     Land Use Element       I-64

                                                                                 February 3, 2009
Public & Quasi Public (P)
   Purpose and Intent
   To accommodate both public and quasi-public uses for those agencies that serve as their
   own Lead Agency when conducting environmental reviews (e.g., government buildings,
   schools, transportation facilities, public utilities, special districts).
   Location
   Government buildings, schools, transportation facilities, public utilities, special districts
   and similar uses. Public and quasi-public uses may be located throughout the city.
   Minimum Design Standards
         Maximum impervious surfaces: 75% or equal to requirements for adjoining land
          uses; whichever is less.
         A minimum 20% landscaping is required for this land use.
         For parcels adjoining or visible from highways, arterials or collectors, project
          design shall accommodate the provision of street trees.
Angels Camp 2020 General Plan                                           Land Use Element      I-65

                                                                                    February 3, 2009
                                          Table 1-5
                         General Plan Land Use Designations &
                       Compatible Title 17 Zoning Classifications
                            City Limits and Sphere of Influence
    General Plan Designation                               Compatible Zoning
RM: Resources Management             RM: Resources Management
                                     OS: Open Space
PR: Parks & Recreation               REC: Parks, Recreation
                                     P: Public
                                     RM: Resources Management
                                     OS: Open Space
RR: Rural Residential                RE-5: Residential Estate, five acre minimum
                                     P: Public
                                     OS: Open Space
RE: Residential Estate               RE-1: Residential Estate, one acre minimum
                                     RE-2: Residential Estate, two acre minimum
                                     RE-3: Residential Estate, three acre minimum
                                     P: Public
                                     OS: Open Space
SFR: Single-family residential       R-1: Single-family residential
                                     R-1/GHC: Single-family residential Greenhorn Creek
                                     P: Public
                                     OS: Open Space
MDR: Medium density residential      R-2: Medium-density residential
                                     RC: Residential Cottage /a/
                                     P: Public
                                     OS: Open Space
HDR: High density residential        R-3: High-density residential
                                     RC: Residential Cottage /a/
                                     P: Public
                                     OS: Open Space
HC: Historic Commercial              HC: Historic Commercial
                                     P: Public
                                     OS: Open Space
CC: Community Commercial             CC: Community Commercial
                                     VC: Visitor-Serving Commercial
                                     P: Public
                                     OS: Open Space
SC: Shopping Center Commercial       SC: Shopping Center Commercial
                                     VC: Visitor-Serving Commercial
                                     P: Public
                                     OS: Open Space
SP: Special Planning                 S: Specific Plan (20 acres or greater)
                                     PD: Planned Development (less than 20 acres)
                                     SP/R-1: Specific Plan, Single-family residential
                                     SP/R-2: Specific Plan, Medium-density residential
                                     SP/R-3: Specific Plan, High-density residential
                                     SP/CC: Specific Plan, Community Commercial
Angels Camp 2020 General Plan                                           Land Use Element         I-66
                                                                                            February 3, 2009
                                                   Table 1-5
                            General Plan Land Use Designations &
                        Compatible Title 17 Zoning Classifications
                               City Limits and Sphere of Influence
     General Plan Designation                                      Compatible Zoning
                                             SP/SC: Specific Plan, Shopping Center Commercial
                                             SP/VC: Specific Plan, Visitor-Serving Commercial
                                             PD/R-1: Planned Development, Single-family residential
                                             PD/R-2: Planned Development, Medium-density residential
                                             PD/R-3: Planned Development, High-density residential
                                             PD/CC: Planned Development, Community Commercial
                                             PD/SC: Planned Development, Shopping Center Commercial
                                             PD/VC: Planned Development, Visitor-Serving Commercial
                                             P: Public
                                             RM: Resources Management
                                             OS: Open Space
P: Public and Quasi-Public                   P: Public
                                             QP: Quasi Public (may include modifiers; e.g., QP/School;
                                                  QP/Utility)
                                             REC: Parks, Recreation
                                             OS: Open Space
BAE: Business Attraction & Expansion LC: Light Commercial
                                             BAE: Business Attraction & Expansion
                                             P: Public
                                             OS: Open Space
I: Industrial                                IND-1: Light Industrial
                                             IND-2: Heavy Industrial
                                             P: Public
                                             OS: Open Space
/a/ This proposed new zoning district is intended to allow for small single-family residence, or cottages, on
parcel sizes of 3,000 sq. ft. (minimum) and up to 5,000 sq. ft. (maximum)
Angels Camp 2020 General Plan                                                  Land Use Element              I-67
                                                                                          February 3, 2009
                                                    Table 1-6
                                          Combining Districts
                          (Compatible with all General Plan land use designations)
      :MRZ Mineral Reserve Combining District (reflecting state law)
      :D Design Review Combining District
      :H Historic Combining District
                                                   Table 1-7
               Distribution of General Plan Land Use Classifications
                             Angels Camp City Limits (Map 1A)
                                    by Acreage & Total Parcels
          Land Use Designation                             Acreage         Percentage        Number of
                                                          (Approx.)                            Parcels
Resources Management (RM)/a/                                          0                 0%               0
Park / Recreation (PR)                                             186              7.90%               16
Rural Residential (RR) /b/                                            0                 0%               0
Residential Estate (RE)                                            132              5.60%               27
Single-Family Residential (SFR)                                    497             21.09%           1443
Medium Density Residential (MDR)                                    50              2.12%               75
High Density Residential (HDR)                                     221              9.38%             188
Historic Commercial (HC)                                            21                .89%              85
Community Commercial (CC)                                          111              4.71%             157
Shopping Center Commercial (SC)                                     97              4.12%               52
Business Attraction & Expansion (BAE)                               83              3.52%               35
Industrial (I)                                                      32              1.36%               10
Special Planning (SP)                                              309             13.12%               39
Public & Quasi Public (P)                                          336             14.26%               57
Right-of-Way (R.O.W.)                                              279             11.84%             153
Pending General Plan Amendment                                        2               .09%               2
Applications (by owner)
TOTAL:                                                      2356 acres               100%    2339 parcels
/a/ Proposed for use in conjunction with evaluating future development proposals
/b/ Proposed for use outside the city limits, within the Angels Camp Sphere of Influence
Angels Camp 2020 General Plan                                                  Land Use Element        I-68
                                                                                      February 3, 2009
                                                       Table 1-8
                  Summary of Land Uses, Angels Camp City Limits
                                              2020 General Plan
                                                                           Percentage of
                    General Plan Land Use Designations
                                                                         Total Land Area
       Residential                                                                           38%
       (RR, RE, SFR, MDR, HDR)
       Commercial                                                                            10%
       (HC, CC, SC)
       Industrial, Business Attraction & Expansion                                             5%
       (I, BAE)
       Special Planning                                                                      13%
       (SP)
       Public, Right-of-Way                                                                  26%
       (P, ROW)
       Park & Recreation, Resources Management                                                 8%
       (PR, RM)
                                                                  Total               100.00%
                                                       Figure 1-2
               Distribution of Land Uses, Angels Camp City Limits
                                              2020 General Plan
                          Park &
                   Recreation/Resources
                     Management, 8%
                                                                                 Residential, 38%
     Public/R.O.W., 26%
         Special Planning, 13%
                                   Industrial/Business               Commercial, 10%
                                 Attraction & Expansion,
                                            5%
Angels Camp 2020 General Plan                                           Land Use Element           I-69
                                                                   Table 1-9
                                   Land Use Density and Intensity Standards, Design Standards
                             Angels Camp 2020 General Plan (City Limits & Sphere of Influence)
     General Plan            Maximum                                                            Maximum Impervious
       Land Use          Population Density    Dwelling Units (du)    Minimum Parcel Size/n/         Surfaces               Other
     Classification          per Acre/a/           per acre /b/                                   (% of Total Site)
Resources Management              --        0 du per 1 acre           No minimum parcel size           5% /c/                 --
(RM)
Parks & Recreation                --        1 caretaker residence     No minimum parcel size          10% /d/                 --
(PR)
Rural Residential (RR)  0.47 person/1 acre  1 du per 5 acres                   5 acres                  15%                   --
Residential Estate (RE) 2.34 persons/1 acre 1 du per 1 acre /k/               1 acre/k/               20% /e/                 --
                        1.17 persons/1 acre 1 du per 2 acres /k/             2 acres/k/
                        0.78 person/1acre   1 du per 3 acres /k/             3 acres/k/
Single-Family           14 persons/acre     6 du per 1 acre/b/              7,260 sq. ft.             50% /f/                 --
Residential (SFR)
Medium Density          23.4 persons/acre   10 du per 1 acre/b/             8,725 sq. ft.             50% /f/        Minimum 15%
Residential (MDR)                                                                                                    landscaping
                                                                      3,000 min – 5,000 sq. ft.
                                                                              max /o/
High Density            35.1 persons/acre   15 du per 1 acre/b/             8,725 sq. ft.             60% /g/        Minimum of 20%
Residential (HDR)                                                                                     70%/o/         landscaping /l/
                                                                      3,000 min – 5,000 sq. ft.
                                                                              max /o/
Historic Commercial     35.1 persons/acre   15 du per 1 acre/b/             5,000 sq. ft.              100%                   --
(HC)
Community               35.1 persons/acre   15 du per 1 acre/b/             5,000 sq. ft.               80%          Minimum 15%
Commercial (CC)                                                                                                      landscaping /m/
Shopping Center         35.1 persons/acre – 15 du per 1 acre               10,000 sq. ft.               80%          Minimum 20%
Commercial (SC)         51.48 persons/acre  minimum/b/                                                               landscaping
                                            22 du per 1 acre
                                            maximum/b/
Angels Camp 2020 General Plan                                                                              Land Use Element          I-70

                                                                               Table 1-9
                                         Land Use Density and Intensity Standards, Design Standards
                                  Angels Camp 2020 General Plan (City Limits & Sphere of Influence)
      General Plan                 Maximum                                                                       Maximum Impervious
        Land Use              Population Density          Dwelling Units (du)      Minimum Parcel Size/n/              Surfaces                    Other
      Classification              per Acre/a/                  per acre /b/                                        (% of Total Site)
Business Attraction and                 --             1 caretaker residence             10,000 sq. ft.                  65%/h/             Minimum 20%
Expansion (BAE)                                                                                                                             landscaping
Industrial (I)                          --             1 caretaker residence             10,000 sq. ft.                   75%               Minimum 15%
                                                                                                                                            landscaping
Special Planning (SP)        Per Specific Plan         Per similar land use           Per similar land use                 /i/                       /i/
                             based on similar land     classification                    classification
                             use classification
Public and Quasi                        --             0 du per 1 acre             No minimum parcel size                75%/j/             Minimum 20%
Public (P)                                                                                                                                  landscaping
/a/ “Population density” is the number of residential units permitted on a single parcel multiplied by the “average household size” as determined by the 2000
Census, which equals 2.34 persons per household.
/b/ Higher densities are possible through density bonuses granted for the provision of affordable housing for households of low or very low income in
accordance with the general plan.
/c/ May be increased to 10% for parcels 5 acres or less in size upon the review and approval of the City of Angels Planning Commission to accommodate minor
facilities in support of passive recreational uses that may be compatible with some resource management areas.
/d/ Impervious surfaces totaling up to 20% may be permitted with review and approval of the City of Angels Planning Commission subject to site specifics,
project needs and environmental constraints.
/e/ Impervious surfaces totaling up to 40% may be permitted with review and approval of the City of Angels Planning Commission subject to site specifics,
project needs and environmental constraints.
/f/ Impervious surfaces totaling up to 60% are permitted for projects providing housing for low or very low income households in accordance with the general
plan. Impervious surfaces totaling up to 60% may be permitted with review and approval of the City of Angels Planning Commission subject to site specifics,
project needs and environmental constraints.
Angels Camp 2020 General Plan                                                                                                  Land Use Element           I-71

/g/ Impervious surfaces totaling up to 75% are permitted for projects providing housing for low or very low income households in accordance with the general
plan.
/h/ Impervious surfaces totaling up to 75% may be permitted with review and approval of the City of Angels Planning Commission for target industries identified
in the city’s business attraction and expansion studies subject to site specifics, project needs and environmental constraints.
/i/ A minimum of 30% open spaces (including landscaping, recreational uses without buildings and natural areas) is required for this land use for parcels subject
to a Specific Plan. A minimum of 25% open spaces (including landscaping, recreational uses without buildings and natural areas) is required for this land use for
parcels not subject to a Specific Plan.
/j/ Public 75% or equal to requirements for adjoining land uses; whichever is less.
/k/ Dependent upon the on-site slopes and opportunities for clustering
/l/ Landscaping may be reduced to 15% with the provision of housing for low or very low income households in accordance with the general plan.
/m/ Landscaping may be reduced to 10% with the provision of housing for low or very low income households in accordance with the general plan.
/n/ Minimum parcel sizes should not be used to determine permitted density for parcels.
/o/ For Residential Cottage (RC) Zoning District only.
Angels Camp 2020 General Plan                                                                                                   Land Use Element             I-72

































































                                                                                  February 3, 2009
4. Conservation & Open Space
        “Smiley he went to the swamp and slopped around in the mud for a long time, and
        finally he ketched a frog, and fetched him in, …”
                                       The Celebrated Jumping Frog of Calaveras County, Mark Twain
Requirements
Both the Conservation Element and the Open Space Element are required elements of the
general plan. Because many of the requirements of these two elements overlap, they are
often combined into a single general plan element addressing all of the following:
Conservation Element
Government Code Section 65302(d) states that a conservation element shall be included in a
local general plan for the conservation, development, and utilization of natural resources
including water and its hydraulic force, forests, soils, rivers and other waters, harbors,
fisheries, wildlife, minerals, and other natural resources. That portion of the conservation
element including waters shall be developed in coordination with any county-wide water
agency and with all district and city agencies that have developed, served, controlled or
conserved water for any purpose for the county or city for which the plan is prepared.
Coordination shall include the discussion and evaluation of any water supply and demand
information described in Section 65352.5, if that information has been submitted by the
water agency to the city or county. The conservation element may also cover:
               The reclamation of land and waters
               Prevention and control of the pollution of streams and other waters
               Regulation of the use of land in stream channels and other areas required for
                the accomplishment of the conservation plan
               Prevention, control, and correction of the erosion of soils, beaches and shores
               Protection of watersheds
               The location, quantity and quality of the rock, sand and gravel resources
               Flood control
Angels Camp 2020 General Plan                  Conservation and Open Space Element IV-1

                                                                               February 3, 2009
Open Space Element
Government Code Sections 65302(e), 65563 and 65560 state that a general plan shall include
an open space element and an open-space plan for the “comprehensive and long-range
preservation and conservation of open space land within its jurisdiction.” For the purposes of
land use planning pursuant to this section, “Open-space land” is defined as any parcel or area
of land or water that is essentially unimproved and devoted to an open-space use as defined
in this section, and that is designated on a local, regional, or state open-space plan as any of
the following:
       Open space for the preservation of natural resources including, but not limited to,
        areas required for the preservation of plant and animal life, including habitat for fish
        and wildlife species; areas required for ecological and other scientific study purposes;
        rivers, streams, bays and estuaries; and coastal beaches, lake shores, banks of rivers
        and streams, and watershed lands.
       Open space used for the managed production of resources, including, but not limited
        to, forest lands, rangeland, agricultural lands and areas of economic importance for
        the production of food and fiber; areas required for recharge of ground water basins;
        bays, estuaries, marshes, rivers and streams that are important for the management of
        commercial fisheries; and areas containing major mineral deposits, including those in
        short supply.
       Open space for outdoor recreation, including, but not limited to, areas of outstanding
        scenic, historic and cultural value; areas particularly suited for park and recreation
        purposes, including access to lake shores, beaches, and rivers and streams; and areas
        that serve as links between major recreation and open-space reservations, including
        utility easements, banks of rivers and streams, trails, and scenic highway corridors.
       Open space for public health and safety, including, but not limited to, areas that
        require special management or regulation because of hazardous or special conditions
        such as earthquake fault zones, unstable soil areas, flood plains, watersheds, areas
        presenting high fire risks, areas required for the protection of water quality and water
        reservoirs and areas required for the protection and enhancement of air quality.
The Angels Camp General Plan addresses all of the preceding within a combined
Conservation and Open Space Element with those exceptions detailed in Table 4-1.
In addition to these requirements, California Government Code Section 65563(b) also
requires the preparation of an open-space inventory as part of the general plan’s open space
element. That inventory is found in 2020 General Plan Appendix 4K.
Finally, Section 65564 of the California Government Code requires that an action plan be
adopted to include specific programs to implement the goals and policies of the general
plan’s open space element. Components of the Angels Camp Open Space Action Plan are
found in the implementation programs contained in six separate elements of the Angels
Angels Camp 2020 General Plan                  Conservation and Open Space Element IV-2

                                                                                               February 3, 2009
Camp General Plan (Conservation and Open Space, Parks and Recreation, Cultural
Resources, Public Safety, Public Facilities and Services and Air Quality).                                      The
implementation programs from all of these elements, together, constitute the state-mandated
Open Space Action Plan. The locations of all required components of the Angels Camp
Open Space Action Plan within the Angels Camp General Plan are summarized in
Table 4-1.
                                                     Table 4-1
                Location of Open Space Action Plan Components in the
                                       Angels Camp General Plan
                              (California Government Code Section 65564)
                      Requirement                                       Location of Action Plan
                                                                     in Angels Camp General Plan
  Recreation. Open space for outdoor recreation          Parks and Recreation Element
  Cultural Resources. Open space including, but          Cultural Resources Element
  not limited to, areas of outstanding historic and
  cultural value
  Hazards. Health and Safety. Open space for             Conservation and Open Space Element
  health and safety including hazardous or special       Public Safety Element
  conditions such as earthquake fault zones,
  unstable soil areas, flood plains, watersheds, areas
  presenting high fire risks
  Timber. Open space used for the managed
                                                         Conservation and Open Space Element
  production of resources, including, but not limited
  to, forest lands, and areas of economic importance
  for the production of food and fiber
  Water. Protection of surface and ground water          Conservation and Open Space Element
  quality and supply is addressed in this                Public Facilities and Services Element/a/
  Conservation and Open Space Element
  Air Quality. Open space for public health and          Air Quality Element
  safety, including, but not limited to, areas required
  for the protection and enhancement of air quality
  Due to the absence of these open space resources within the city’s Sphere of Influence, the following are not
  addressed in the Angels Camp General Plan: bays, estuaries, harbors, beaches, shores
/a/ The efficiency of public water supply distribution infrastructure (e.g., fire flow) is addressed in detail in the
Public                      Facilities                  and                     Services                    Element
Angels Camp 2020 General Plan                           Conservation and Open Space Element IV-3

                                                                  February 3, 2009
Organization
This Conservation & Open Space element background discussion is divided into eight
subsections as follows:
Table 4-2
Organization of the Conservation & Open Space Element
       4A. Mineral Resources
       4B. Energy Resources
       4C. Scenic Resources
       4D. Biological Resources
       4E. Agricultural/Soil Resources
       4F. Timber Resources
       4G. Water Resources
       4H. Health & Safety
Angels Camp 2020 General Plan        Conservation and Open Space Element IV-4
                                                                             February 3, 2009
4A. Mineral Resources
Requirements: Mineral Resources
Pursuant to California’s Surface Mining and Reclamation Act (SMARA) as described in
Public Resources Code Section 2762, local jurisdictions must adopt mineral resource
management policies for designated significant mineral areas and:
      Recognize the mineral classification information of the California Department of
       Conservation, Division of Mines and Geology, including the classification maps and
       include the classification maps in its general plan.
      Assist in the management of land use that affects areas of statewide and regional
       significance.
      Emphasize the conservation and development of identified significant mineral
       deposits.
Pursuant to the California Code of Regulations, Section 3676, those mineral resource
management policies shall include, but not be limited to:
      Statements of policy in accordance with PRC Section 2762(a)
      Implementation measures including reference in the general plan to the location of
       identified mineral deposits and a discussion of those areas targeted for conservation
       and possible future expansion by the lead agency
      Use of overlay maps or inclusion of information on any appropriate planning maps to
       clearly delineate identified mineral deposits and those areas targeted by the lead
       agency for conservation and possible future extraction
The Mineral Resource Management Policy shall also include at least one of the following:
      Use special purpose overlay zones, mineral resource/open space zoning, or any other
       appropriate zoning that identifies the presence of identified mineral deposits and
       restricts the encroachment of compatible land uses in those areas that are to be
       conserved.
      Record, on property titles in the affected mineral resource areas, a notice identifying
       the presence of identified mineral deposits.
      Impose conditions upon incompatible land uses in and surrounding areas containing
       identified mineral deposits for the purpose of mitigating the significant land use
       conflicts prior to approving a use that would otherwise be incompatible with mineral
       extraction.
Angels Camp 2020 General Plan                 Conservation and Open Space Element IV-5

                                                                                February 3, 2009
Background and Setting: Mineral Resources
Minerals that have been commercially extracted within the Angels Camp Sphere of Influence
include: chromite, talc, gold (lode), gold (placer), sand and gravel, base stone, silica,
manganese, and limestone. 2020 General Plan Appendix 4A identifies general mineral
resources; Lode Gold Mines & Prospects, and Calaveras County Preliminary Mineral
Resource Area Designations within the Angels Camp Sphere of Influence.
In addition to these minerals, some mines produced a by-product of copper. Other, less-
publicized, minerals extracted within the Angels Camp Sphere of Influence include: altaite,
ankerite, calaverite (discovered in Calaveras County in 1861), chalcopyrite, coloradoite,
galena, hessite, melonite (discovered in Calaveras County in 1866), millerite, molybdenite,
opal, petzite, “Phengite var: Mariposite”, quartz, sylvanite, tellurium, and tetradymite.1
Since the identification of mineral resources in Calaveras County in 1962, the State of
California has undertaken more intensive classification efforts in some counties. State
classification of mineral resources is intended to assist counties in managing important
mineral resources within their jurisdiction. To date, only the San Andreas Quadrangle has
been evaluated in detail in Calaveras County. The California Geological Survey anticipates
that additional evaluations and classifications of mineral resource values within the county,
including the Angels Camp Sphere of Influence, in approximately 2005.
In the interim, Angels Camp may use Calaveras County mineral resource classifications
surrounding the city’s Sphere of Influence to gain some understanding of the importance of
the city’s mineral resources.
As indicated in 2020 General Plan Appendix 4A, the city may anticipate that the State of
California will designate significant mineral resources within the Angels Camp city limits,
within the city’s Sphere of Influence and, almost certainly, adjacent to the city’s Sphere of
Influence. It is anticipated that development of large mineral extraction activities undertaken
within or adjacent to the city’s Sphere of Influence could have significant adverse impacts on
existing residential and commercial development (e.g., noise, dust, traffic), could create
adverse impacts to visual quality, and could conflict with future land use plans including
public facility plans important to community and environmental health and safety.
The goals, policies and implementation programs contained within this general plan element
are intended to resolve potential future conflicts between existing development in the city
and future mining operations consistent with state law.
1 Source: www.mindat.org
Angels Camp 2020 General Plan                 Conservation and Open Space Element IV-6

                                                                               February 3, 2009
4B. Energy Resources
Background and Setting: Energy Resources
The following describes the programs and facilities within the Angels Camp Sphere of
Influence that contribute to the conservation and/or re-use of energy resources (e.g., oil, gas,
recyclable materials). In addition, this section describes facilities available for the disposal
of materials that cannot be recycled (e.g., household hazardous wastes).
Solid Waste Facilities
Solid waste facilities serving Angels Camp residents include:
Red Hill Transfer Station
This facility, located at 5198 Red Hill Road, is operated by Calaveras County. The station
provides recycling and biomass disposal opportunities for county residents accepting both
yard waste and general solid waste. Recycling opportunities are limited to some plastics,
aluminum cans, bottles, newspapers, magazines and similar products. Cardboard recycling
bins are a recent addition at the facility.
The facility does not currently accept widely-used household hazardous waste materials such
as latex paint. The county is investigating expanding the site to accept universal waste,
which would include acceptance of some classes of Household Hazardous Wastes.
20/20 Buy-Back
20/20 Buy-back facilities are located behind Savemart at the Savemart shopping center. This
facility accepts recyclable containers and both accepts and provides compensation for
beverage containers with a cash refund value (CRV).
SEI Solid Waste, Inc
SEI, Solid Waste, Inc. (formerly Struck Enterprises, Inc.) contracts with Angels Camp for
solid waste pick-up. SEI provides curbside pickup of household garbage for residents of
Angels Camp. Free curbside recycling also is offered, by arrangement, and includes curbside
pickup of newspapers, magazines, aluminum, tin, glass and some plastics. SEI also provides
recycling services for businesses, including pick-up of recyclables on site.
Some limited drop-off opportunities are available from SEI at their facility located at 1149
Dunbar Road, in Arnold.
Rock Creek Facility
This transfer station and county landfill is located off Hunt Road in Milton. The facility
provides disposal services for most types of solid waste materials.
Angels Camp 2020 General Plan                 Conservation and Open Space Element IV-7
                                                                             February 3, 2009
Household Hazardous Waste
Calaveras County offers an annual household hazardous waste drop-off day at the county
fairgrounds located just south of Angels Camp. This provides the only opportunity for
Angels Camp residents to dispose of household hazardous wastes without traveling a long
distance to the Rock Creek transfer station in Milton.
The county is investigating an expansion of the Red Hill facility to allow disposal of
Universal Waste, which would permit the site to accept some classes of household hazardous
wastes for city residents.
Used Motor Oil, Oil Filters, Automobile Batteries, Antifreeze
Calaveras County sponsors nine Used Oil Collection Centers (UOCCs). In Angels Camp,
Kragen Automotive accepts used motor oil, oil filters, automobile batteries and antifreeze
Monday thru Friday, 8 a.m. - 5 p.m.
Potential New Facilities
The county also is considering expansion of available solid waste disposal facilities in the
county, and is currently focused on providing a site in the high country, as no facilities
currently exist above Arnold.
Public Transportation
Public transportation in Angels Camp is currently provided by Calaveras Transit, which
offers both fixed route and Dial-A-Ride service. Dial-A-Ride is offered on Tuesdays in
Angels Camp between 11:00 a.m. and 3:00 p.m. Fixed route stops in Angels Camp are
located at the Angels Food Market, Save Mart and at the Visitor’s Center. Fixed route transit
is available to Columbia College, Arnold, San Andreas and other sites throughout Calaveras
and Tuolumne Counties.
Goals, policies and implementation programs of this general plan element are intended to
conserve the city’s energy resources to the maximum extent feasible.
Angels Camp 2020 General Plan                 Conservation and Open Space Element IV-8

                                                                               February 3, 2009
4C. Scenic Resources
Background and Setting
Angels Camp’s natural and cultural scenic resources include heritage trees, hillsides, hilltops,
scenic corridors, creeks, cultural resources, recreational resources and similar resources.
The goals, policies and implementation programs included in this general plan element are
intended to provide some programs for managing the city’s natural and cultural scenic
resources.
Angels Camp 2020 General Plan                  Conservation and Open Space Element IV-9

                                                                               February 3, 2009
4D. Biological Resources
Requirements
Pursuant to the California Government Code, general plans must address management of
biological resources. However, it is the requirements of the California Environmental
Quality Act (CEQA), the California Endangered Species Act (CESA), and the federal Clean
Water Act (CWA), the federal Endangered Species Act (FESA) and similar state and federal
laws that guide the formulation of the biological resource management programs found in
local general plans.
Similarly, a primary goal of this biological resources section of the Conservation and Open
Space Element is not only the conservation and management of biological resources, but also
compliance with state and federal laws and regulations governing impacts to special status
plants, fish and wildlife species and impacts to habitats of limited distribution which support
these species. For the purposes of this element, special status species include those plants,
fish or animals listed or designated as candidates for listing pursuant to the federal or state
endangered species acts; species designated as species of special concern by the California
Department of Fish and Game and the United States Fish and Wildlife Service; and plants
species designated as Category 1A, 1B or 2 by the California Native Plant Society (and
recognized by the California Department of Fish and Game and considered significant
biological resources pursuant to CEQA).
Background and Setting
Habitat/Vegetation Resources
The city’s Sphere of Influence includes the following habitat types:
Angels Camp 2020 General Plan                Conservation and Open Space Element IV-10

                                                                          February 3, 2009
                                           Table 4-3
             Habitat Types in the Angels Camp Sphere of Influence
                              Blue-oak foothill-pine woodlands
                                 Chaparral (mixed, chamise)
                            Pasture (irrigated and non-irrigated)
                               Cropland (primarily vineyards)
                                        Natural springs
                                       Reservoirs, Ponds
                                      Annual grasslands
                                     Blue-oak woodlands
                              Valley foothill riparian (streams)
                                    Valley oak woodlands
2020 General Plan Appendix 4D includes a detailed list of individual plant species found
within the city’s Sphere of Influence.
Waterways
The following streams are recognized by the United States Geological Survey (USGS) within
the Angels Camp Sphere of Influence:
Angels Camp 2020 General Plan                 Conservation and Open Space Element IV-11

                                                                                         February 3, 2009
                                              Table 4-4
                           Streams, Tributaries Within the
                Angels Camp Sphere of Influence and Area of Interest
                                USGS
    Stream Name           Classification/a/                  Headwaters                  Destination
Six Mile Creek        Perennial                       T3N, R14E, Sec 8              Melones Reservoir,
                                                      (just above Six Mile          Stanislaus River
                                                      Ranch)
Indian Creek          Intermittent                    T3N, R13E, Sec. 35, ---       Melones Reservoir,
                                                                                    Stanislaus River
Angels Creek          Perennial (portions)            T4N, R14E, Sec. 26            Melones Reservoir,
                      Intermittent (portions)                                       Stanislaus River
Greenhorn Creek       Intermittent                    T3N, R13E, Sec 28, 32, Melones Reservoir,
                                                      33                            Stanislaus River
Cherokee Creek        Perennial                       T3N, R13E, Sec. 20            Hogan Reservoir,
                                                                                    Calaveras River
Utica Ditch           Perennial                       North Fork of the             Murphys Forebay,
                                                      Stanislaus 21 miles above Angels Forebay
                                                      Murphys Forebay
Jupiter Ditch         Perennial                       T3N, R13E, Sec. 20            Utica Ditch
                                                      Reservoir
Lone Gulch            Intermittent                    T3N, R13E, Secs. 20, 30       T3N, R12E, Sec. 24
                                                                                    Reservoir to San
                                                                                    Domingo Creek and
                                                                                    Calaveras River
San Domingo Creek     Perennial (portions)            Stanislaus National Forest    South Fork of the
                      Intermittent (portions)         near Hathaway Pines.          Calaveras River to
                                                      T4N, R15E, Sec. 19            New Hogan Reservoir
                                                      A tributary originates west
                                                      of Avery in T4N, R15E,
                                                      Sec. 12
New Melones           --                              Headwaters of the             --
Reservoir                                             Stanislaus River and the
                                                      headwaters of multiple
                                                      creeks
/a/ Definitions
Perennial:             Normally flows almost year-round (usually at least into early summer)
Intermittent:          Normally flows in the spring, fall and winter during the rainy season
Ephemeral:             Flows primarily in association with a storm event
Angels Camp 2020 General Plan                    Conservation and Open Space Element IV-12
                                                                              February 3, 2009
Wildlife Resources
Special Status Species
As noted, biological resources planning normally focuses on specific programs and policies
for protecting special status species and habitats of limited distribution with broader, more
general programs for conserving common wildlife species and habitats.
Natural Diversity Database
Pursuant to a review of the California Natural Diversity Database for Angels Camp, a single
special status species occurrence record is found within the city’s Sphere of Influence - the
tricolored blackbird, Agelaius tricolor. The species was last recorded in 1994. Its preferred
habitat includes blackberry patches or similar substrate often adjacent to open pasture for
foraging. During the spring, this species may be found in large breeding colonies composed
of many thousands of birds.
                             Tricolored blackbird
A complete list of special status wildlife species that are expected to occur within the city’s
Sphere of Influence is found in 2020 General Plan Appendix 4D.
Special Considerations
Migratory Bird Treaty Act
In brief, this international law, enforced by the United States Fish and Wildlife Service,
makes it illegal to disturb the nest of any bird protected pursuant to the act. With the
exception of certain non-native birds (e.g., European starlings), all birds currently identified
in Calaveras County are protected pursuant to this act. Therefore, while many bird species
throughout the planning area are considered common bird species, special protections must
be considered during construction activities for new development when nesting birds are
present pursuant to federal law.
Angels Camp 2020 General Plan                Conservation and Open Space Element IV-13

                                                                               February 3, 2009
4E. Agricultural/Soil Resources
Background and Setting
The USDA Natural Resources Conservation Service is charged with the survey of soils
within each county. Calaveras County soils were last inventoried in 1966. An update to the
soils survey commenced in 2002 and completion is expected in the next few years. This
portion of the Conservation and Open Space Element should be revised upon completion of
revised soils maps for the county. In the interim, county soils have not been formally
classified by the state in terms of their agricultural productivity as prime, unique or
important.
Figure 4-4 illustrates the distribution of the various soil types present in the Angels Camp
Sphere of Influence pursuant to the “Report and General Soil Map Calaveras County,
California,” June, 1966, prepared by the USDA Soil Conservation Service (now USDA
Natural Resources Conservation Service).
General characteristics of the soils within the city’s Sphere of Influence are included in 2020
General Plan Appendix 4E.
Rangeland Values
Two soils identified within the city’s Sphere of Influence are classified as “best” for range
use while two soils are classified as having a potentially moderate value for range use. These
soils are detailed in 2020 General Plan Appendix 4E.
Cultivation
There are no soils identified within the city’s Sphere of Influence as important for cultivation
without irrigation. With irrigation, five soil types within the city’s Sphere of Influence are
considered potentially suitable for cultivation - although even with irrigation, use of these
soils for cultivation may be very limited with restrictions to choices of plants and requiring
careful management. The characteristics of these soils are detailed in 2020 General Plan
Appendix 4E.
Angels Camp 2020 General Plan                  Conservation and Open Space Element IV-14

                                                                             February 3, 2009
4F. Timber Resources
Background and Setting
Timberlands are defined by the California Department of Forestry as land that is available
for, and capable of, growing a crop of trees of any commercial species used to produce
lumber and other forest products, including Christmas trees. While much of the county’s
timber production is associated with harvesting at elevations above 2,500 feet, timber
production may also encompass the harvesting of hardwoods, including oaks, at lower
elevations.
Soil characteristics in the Angels Camp Sphere of Influence indicate the relative value of city
soils for timber production. The timber production values of soils within the Angels Camp
Sphere of Influence are detailed in 2020 General Plan Appendix 4H. As indicated in 2020
General Plan Appendix 4H, three soils within the city’s Sphere of Influence may have a
high potential for timber production given adequate size and cover. “Adequate size”, has
historically translated into parcel sizes of 20-40 acres, minimum. This timber value is likely
to reflect the presence of hardwoods (i.e., oaks) associated with these soil types. The
Calaveras County General Plan indicates that high capability timberlands (i.e., pine
timberlands) within the county are located at elevations above Angels Camp.
Angels Camp 2020 General Plan                  Conservation and Open Space Element IV-15

                                                                                        February 3, 2009
4G. Water Resources
Background and Setting
Water Quality
Angels Camp is located in the Upper Stanislaus and Upper Calaveras River Watersheds
(United States Geological Survey Unit Numbers 18040010 and 18040011, respectively).
Water quality within Angels Camp is regulated by the State Regional Water Quality Control
Board’s Central Valley Region 5b. There are currently no waters designated as impaired
pursuant to Section 303(d) of the Federal Clean Water Act within either the Upper Stanislaus
or Upper Calaveras River Watersheds either above or immediately below Angels Camp or its
sphere of influence. 2
Primary waterways identified by the United States Geological Survey (USGS) within the
city’s Sphere of Influence include:
                                                Table 4-5
                                        Primary Waterways
                Angels Camp Sphere of Influence and Area of Interest
                                             Six Mile Creek
                                              Angels Creek
                                              Indian Creek
                                           Greenhorn Creek
                                            Cherokee Creek
                                               Lone Gulch
                                               Utica Ditch
                                              Jupiter Ditch
                                          San Domingo Creek
                                        New Melones Reservoir
2
  February 4, 2003, State Water Resources Control Board - 2002 Clean Water Act Section 303(d) List of Water
Quality Limited Segments and 2002 Monitoring List - Region 5
Angels Camp 2020 General Plan                       Conservation and Open Space Element IV-16

                                                                                     February 3, 2009
Other water bodies within the city’s planning area include:
            The City’s Water Treatment Plant (off Murphys Grade Road)
            The City’s Wastewater Treatment Plant (off Centennial Road)
            Union Public Utility District Water Treatment Plant
            Ross Reservoir
            Holman Reservoir
Sewage Disposal
Private septic systems are regulated through the Calaveras County Environmental Health
Department and are of limited distribution within the city limits. Age is the primary reason
for septic system failure within the city. Most of these older failing systems have been
replaced with public sewer service.
Angels Camp provides public sewer service to the majority of the city. The city operates a
wastewater treatment plant in the southern portion of the city limits. The city’s wastewater
treatment plant capacity is 0.6 million gallons per day (MGD), or 600,000 gallons per day
(GPD) with a peak flow of 1.9 mgd. The peak influent wet weather flow expected is 3.1 mgd.
Disposal of the treated wastewater is accomplished via spray irrigation. The disposal of chlorine
disinfected tertiary effluent is accomplished via spray irrigation of 110 acres on the Greenhorn Creek
Golf Course. Currently, the disposal of secondary effluent is accomplished by irrigation of 61 out of
235 acres available within the boundaries of the wastewater treatment facility due to various physical
and regulatory constraints. At present, during winter months, input at the facility may exceed
the facility’s capacity to clarify and digest the input. This “overflow” has resulted in a
limited number of spills into Angels and Six Mile Creeks. In addition to planned facility
capacity expansion, the city pursued and was issued a discharge permit from the Regional
Water Quality Control Board in May, 2007 (NPDES NO. CA0085201) and extending
through May, 2012, allowing the discharge of up to 1.9 mgd tertiary treated effluent into
Angels Creek between November 15 and May 15 of each year with completion of the
following:
        Construct an outfall and diffuser to Angels Creek
        Install an ultraviolet light (UV) disinfection system.
Issuance of the 2007 discharge permit and completion of the two improvements above will
allow for the facility to provide for an additional 1,299± residential equivalent service
connections—sufficient to serve already-approved development and future development
projected through 2028 and assuming a growth rate of 2% pursuant to the City’s Waste
Water Master Plan (WWMP, 2002).
However, the wastewater distribution system feeding the treatment plant is failing in some
portions of the city. The bulk of city lands located north of SR 4 have reached the maximum
Angels Camp 2020 General Plan                     Conservation and Open Space Element IV-17

                                                                              February 3, 2009
capacity of the wastewater distribution system. Increasing service connections in those
locations would exceed wastewater service capacity due to an inadequate wastewater
distribution system—a potentially significant adverse impact identified in the Draft EIR for
2020 General Plan and addressed by the incorporation of Implementation Program 7.B.m.
In response, the city is proposing construction of a new sewer line to serve the North End of
Angels Camp (north of SR 4) including all sewer lines currently served by the Altaville Lift
Station. The project would include rerouting the discharge from the Altaville Lift Station to
the new line thereby freeing up capacity in the Altaville Sewer Line which has been
identified as "at capacity" by the City. The route of the new sewer line will be established by
the study which is currently commencing. The City would cover the cost of construction thru
bonds or some other means of financing and create a Benefit Basin to recapture the costs
over time. All parcels which would connect into the new line or in areas served by the
current Altaville Lift Station would be included in the Benefit Basin.
Based on a review of the Angels Camp 2020 General Plan 2020 Land Use Map, the city
would require waste water capacity accommodating 657,261 gpd to meet demands at 100%
buildout under 2020 General Plan. In comparison, the 1995 General Plan Land Use Map
demand was slightly higher, at 670,579 gpd.
Non-point Source Pollution
Non-point source pollution includes contaminants that enter surface or ground water through
runoff and/or filtration. Sources of these discharges are normally multiple and/or widely
spread. In comparison, point source pollution includes contaminants that enter surface or
ground water from a specific known (usually single) source (e.g., an accidental discharge
from a wastewater treatment facility).
Sources and types of non-point source discharges common in urban runoff that could be
present in city’s waterways as runoff are detailed in 2020 General Plan Appendix 4J. They
include: fecal coliform bacteria, phosphorous, insecticides, herbicides, pesticides, DDT,
chlordane, dieldrin, volatile organic compounds, traces of cadmium, traces of lead, traces of
zinc, traces of mercury, polycyclic aromatic compounds (PAHs), organochlorine compounds
and PCBs.
Water quality sampling within the city limits is limited and primarily limited to monitoring
the city’s water treatment and wastewater treatment facilities. Water quality information
from these sources provides information regarding drinking water quality and the condition
of water quality in a small segment of Angels Creek (above and below the wastewater
treatment plant). These studies do not, however, provide information relative to pollutants
entering surface waterways as urban runoff. Currently, such information is not gathered.
Angels Camp 2020 General Plan                 Conservation and Open Space Element IV-18

                                                                               February 3, 2009
Water Quantity
The water supply for Angels Camp originates from the North Fork of the Stanislaus River
watershed. During the winter months, water is stored in four reservoirs in the High Sierra
near Ebbetts Pass Highway. These reservoirs are: Alpine, Utica, Union, and Spicer, which
have a combined storage of 13,643 acre feet. Water from these reservoirs is released down
the North Fork of the Stanislaus River and its tributaries, where it is diverted into the
Collierville Tunnel at McKay’s Point Reservoir. Some of the water from the Collierville
Tunnel is delivered into the Utica Ditch which enters Hunter Reservoir. Angels Camp and
Murphys receive water from Hunter Reservoir in amounts limited annually per agreement
with the Northern California Power Authority (NCPA). From Hunter Reservoir, water
continues back into the Utica Ditch, a 21-22 mile ditch system that terminates at the Murphys
Forebay. The water in the forebay then enters the Murphys Penstock and is used for
generating electric power at the Murphys Powerhouse, which is located on the eastern edge
of the town of Murphys.
After the water passes through the Murphys Powerhouse, it enters Angels Creek (aka
Murphys Creek) and is diverted into the Angels Ditch just below Murphys. This 5.5± mile
ditch delivers water through Ross Reservoir to the Angels Forebay, which is the raw water
take out point for the Angels Water Treatment Plan. Water not used by the Angels Water
Treatment Plant is used for power generation through the Angels Powerhouse.
The city provides public water to its residents. The city maintains a water treatment and
storage facility north of the city limits off of Murphys Grade Road. With the completion of
planned improvements, the City’s existing water treatment and storage facility is expected to
provide approximately 4 million gallons of water per day. The 2001-2015 Water Master
Plan (WMP), identifies improvements as necessary to supply new water connections to
supply the city through 2027 assuming a growth rate of 2%.
The passage of time is necessary to accommodate the acquisition of sufficient funds for
improvements to the water system as necessary to accommodate projected growth through
2027. This means that two key improvements are required to support projected growth:
            Addition of a 4th filter at the treatment plan between 2012-2013
            Addition of a sludge removal system at the treatment plan between 2006-2010
             (related to operations and maintenance and not to plant capacity)
Failure to complete either of the preceding could jeopardize the city’s ability to provide water
necessary to accommodate projected growth through 2027.
Current water treatment plant capacity [with 3 filters and 2.5 million gallons per day (MGD)
storage] is at approximately 1,440 gpm or 2.07 MGD. This translates into a facility that can
Angels Camp 2020 General Plan                    Conservation and Open Space Element IV-19

                                                                               February 3, 2009
support approximately 2,359 residential equivalent connections (WMP, 2002). The addition
of a 4th filter is needed to increase capacity to approximately 2,160 gpm or 3.1 MGD
(approximately 3,046 residential equivalent connections—sufficient to serve the city through
2027).
The WMP projects that the water treatment plant will reach a capacity of 2.07 MGD in
2009—approximately equal to plant capacity with three filters and sufficient to serve the
city’s needs through 2009. However, due to the storage capacity at the city’s water treatment
facility, additional capacity is recognized for the city’s system allowing the city to grow to a
capacity of at least 2.268 MGD—or sufficient to provide new water connections in the city
through 2013 (when infrastructure improvements will increase the system capacity to 3.1
MGD).
These conclusions are based on a growth rate of 2%.           If new development exceeds a 2%
rate of growth without an offsetting decline in growth, the city may find it necessary to add a
4th filter to increase capacity at the water treatment plant before 2013.
If the city’s growth rate continues to exceed 2%, the city may find it necessary to pursue
supplemental funding or to otherwise accelerate funding to supply new water connections
sufficient to meet its affordable housing objectives. Alternatively, the city could consider
rearranging facility improvement priorities placing improvements resulting in increased plant
capacity above other facility improvement projects if the city’s growth exceeds 2%.
In addition to the preceding, the WMP includes provisions to construct a new 2 million
gallon storage facility at a new location approximately 800’ north of the intersection of
Highway 4 and Angel Oaks Drive. Together, the city’s existing and planned water treatment
and storage facilities would provide the city with up to four million gallons of treated water
per day plus 4.5 million gallons of water storage capacity.
In addition to water availability and water storage, sufficient water delivery and conveyance
infrastructure is necessary to adequately supply water in the city.         As with the city’s
wastewater delivery system, the water distribution system is failing in some portions of the
city due to age. Increasing service connections in those locations would exceed water service
capacity due to an inadequate water distribution system—a potentially significant adverse
impact. However, the city has obtained funding and is currently working to acquire
easements necessary upgrade that portion of the water delivery system necessary to maintain
an adequate water supply for the city.
Based on a review of the Angels Camp 2020 General Plan 2020 Land Use Map, projected
water needs for the city will reach 3,695,422 gallons per day with 100% buildout. In
comparison, the demand under the 1995 General Plan at 100% buildout would have been
slightly larger at 3,876,400 gallons per day.
Angels Camp 2020 General Plan                    Conservation and Open Space Element IV-20

                                                                              February 3, 2009
Special Programs
Resource Conservation Districts
The United States Department of Agriculture Natural Resource Conservation Service
(formerly the Soil Conservation Service) provides technical support for local non-profit
community - outreach and education organizations called Resource Conservation Districts
(RCDs). RCDs are special districts composed of volunteer board members appointed by
local governments. RCDs stress resource conservation without government regulation.
Calaveras County is not currently included in a Resource Conservation District (although it is
part of a Resource Conservation & Development area, a different organization performing
some services similar to those of the RCD and also sponsored by the USDA). RCD’s have a
long history of working cooperatively with local agricultural interests and, increasingly, with
other resource conservation interests, particularly communities interested in watershed
management and maintenance of water quality. Watershed planning and watershed
stewardship programs are being increasingly facilitated and implemented by RCDs
throughout California. As a result, California, at the urging of the California Association of
Resource Conservation Districts, recently passed legislation which provides funding for
hiring watershed planners and coordinators.
In short, RCDs can provide special assistance for resource conservation planning and
implementation programs, especially for those related to the conservation and management
of water resources. In addition, RCDs have access to special funding sources for these
activities unavailable to many governmental agencies. And, given the RCDs non-
governmental status and emphasis on voluntary stewardship, RCDs are increasingly
succeeding in accomplishing resource conservation on private property in cooperation with
landowners and with the preservation of private property rights - an area where government
regulatory program have frequently failed.
Angels Camp 2020 General Plan               Conservation and Open Space Element IV-21

                                                                            February 3, 2009
4H. Health & Safety
Background and Setting
Flooding
The Federal Emergency Management Agency mapped flood boundaries in portions of the
city’s Sphere of Influence in 1997. The boundaries of these designated flood zones are
illustrated in 2020 General Plan Appendix 4I.
The goals, policies and implementation programs of this general plan element are intended to
preserve these identified potential flood hazard areas in open space.
Geotechnical
Please refer to the Public Safety Element (Chapter 6) for details relative to geotechnical
hazards including erosion hazard, seismic hazards and similar health and safety issues.
Household Hazardous Wastes
Please refer to the Energy Resources section of this element for a discussion of household
hazardous wastes.
Angels Camp 2020 General Plan                 Conservation and Open Space Element IV-22

                                                                              February 3, 2009
GOALS, POLICIES AND IMPLEMENTATION PROGRAMS
4A. Mineral Resources
Goal 4.A    Minimize potential conflicts between existing and future mining activities
            within or adjacent to the city and existing and planned land uses in the city.
Policies
   4.A.1    Recognize that large mining operations may be incompatible with existing and
            planned land uses within the city limits.
   4.A.2    Protect existing and planned city land uses from future conflicts with mining
            of state-designated, commercially valuable minerals within the city’s area of
            interest, while preserving existing mining operations.
   4.A.3    Protect commercially valuable mineral resource areas located in the city’s
            Sphere of Influence from future encroachment by, or conflicts with, city land
            uses.
Implementation Programs
   4.A.a    Create and Maintain Mineral Resources Maps and Database
            Create and maintain Mineral Resource Maps and a database, for the city’s
            Sphere of Influence, identifying significant mineral resources as designated by
            the California Geological Survey pursuant to the California mineral land
            classification system. Update land use maps as new information becomes
            available from the California Geological Survey relative to mineral resources
            in and around the city.
            Equivalent Program: 1Bb (Land Use)
            Related Programs: 1Bc (Land Use), 1Bd (Land Use), 4Ab (Conservation & Open Space),
            4Ac, (Conservation & Open Space), 4Ad (Conservation & Open Space)
Angels Camp 2020 General Plan               Conservation and Open Space Element IV-23

                                                                               February 3, 2009
  4.A.b     Promote Compatibility Between Significant Mineral Resource Areas and
            Nearby Non-Mining Land Uses
            The city shall strive to reduce conflicts between Significant Mineral Resource
            Areas and non-mining uses through the implementation of the following:
                a. Review and comment on all county surface mining and reclamation
                    plans and applications for mining-related activities located within the
                    city’s area of interest.
                b. Revise Title 17 of the City of Angels Municipal Code to increase the
                    minimum acreage required for mining activities from five acres to
                    forty acres, unless otherwise exempted pursuant to Public Resources
                    Code 2714 (Surface Mining and Reclamation Act of 1975 - Public
                    Resources Code 2710 et seq.).
                c. Revise Title 17 and Chapter 8.36 of the City of Angels Municipal
                    Code to require a conditional use permit for mining activities within
                    the city limits, with an exception for tourist-related mining activities
                    (e.g., minor gold panning activities)
                d. Establish minimum setbacks between significant mineral resource
                    areas and non-mineral resource lands
                e. Require discretionary review of non-mining uses on designated
                    significant mineral resource areas
                f. Mitigate impacts of mine operations on planned and existing city roads
            Equivalent program: 1Bc (Land Use)
            Related Programs: 1Bb (Land Use), 1Bd (Land Use), 4Aa (Conservation and Open Space),
            4Ac (Conservation and Open Space), 4Ad (Conservation and Open Space)
Angels Camp 2020 General Plan                Conservation and Open Space Element IV-24

                                                                               February 3, 2009
  4.A.c     Coordinate With the California Geological Survey and Calaveras County
            to Avoid Adverse Impacts Associated With the Designation of MRZ-2
            Zones Within or Adjacent to the City
            The city shall continue to keep appraised of new studies from the California
            Geological Survey regarding the classification of mineral lands in Calaveras
            County. Should Calaveras County’s mineral resource lands be formally
            evaluated and should the State Geologist propose to designate land within or
            adjacent to the city as Significant Mineral Resource Areas, then the city
            should review such proposals for compatibility with its existing and proposed
            land uses and coordinate with the state to refine proposed designations of
            significant mineral resource areas that could clearly conflict with existing or
            planned land uses within or adjacent to the city.
            Equivalent Program: 1Bd (Land Use)
            Related Programs: 1Bb (Land Use), 1Bc (Land Use), 4Aa (Conservation & Open Space),
            4Ab (Conservation & Open Space), 4Ad (Conservation & Open Space)
  4.A.d     Review and Update the City’s Surface Mining and Reclamation
            Regulations
            Regularly review and update Chapter 8.36 of the City of Angels Municipal
            Code for consistency with the Surface Mining and Reclamation Act (Surface
            Mining and Reclamation Act of 1975 - Public Resources Code 2710 et seq.).
            Related Programs: 1Bb (Land Use), 1Bc (Land Use), 1Bd (Land Use), 4Aa (Conservation
            & Open Space), 4Ab (Conservation & Open Space), 4Ac (Conservation & Open Space)
Angels Camp 2020 General Plan               Conservation and Open Space Element IV-25

                                                                             February 3, 2009
  4.A.e     Support and Promote Events Celebrating the City’s Culture, History,
            Industries, Recreational Opportunities and Natural Resources
            Continue to support and promote public activities and events celebrating the
            city’s culture, history, industries, recreational opportunities, arts and natural
            resources. Support and promote events that bring visitors and residents
            downtown, further the economic development objectives of the city, and are
            compatible with the city’s community character including, but not limited to:
                a. Events recognizing and celebrating the city’s historic sites, structures,
                    people, culture and events
                b. Events recognizing the city’s literary history
                c. Calaveras County Frog Jump
                d. Fishing tournaments (e.g., bass tournaments), triathlons, fun-runs,
                    biking tournaments and other recreational events
                e. Events recognizing the city and region’s historic industries (e.g.,
                    mining, timber harvesting)
            Equivalent Programs: 4Fc (Conservation & Open Space), 8Cd (Cultural Resources), 10Cd
            (Economic Development), 11Ee (Community Identity)
            Related Programs: 2Aa (Housing), 3Cd (Circulation), 10Ab (Economic Development),
            10Ao (Economic Development), 11Ea (Community Identity)
Angels Camp 2020 General Plan              Conservation and Open Space Element IV-26

                                                                               February 3, 2009
4.A.f       Establish Policies for Identifying and Managing Target Mineral Lands
            within the City Limits and its Sphere of Influence
            [2020 General Plan Mitigation Measure MM-LAND-02, MM-MINE-01]
            In conjunction with Implementation Programs 4.A.a, 4.A.b and 4.A.c and in
            coordination with Calaveras County’s General Plan update, establish policies
            for identifying and managing target mineral lands with the city limits and its
            sphere of influence as follows: Any classified mineral lands that meet all of
            the following criteria (i.e., are not in conflict or potential conflict with existing
            or planned land uses) will be designated as Mineral Preserve Zone
            Combining District (:MPZ) through application of a combining district:
            1.      The site has been classified by the California Geological Survey as
                    Mineral Resource Zone (MRZ-2a or MRZ-2b) under the State
                    Classification System
            2.      The property does not have over 25% of its area zoned as an urban
                    level residential zoning district (i.e., allowing one acre or less), or over
                    25% of its area designated as HDR, MDR, SFR, ER, HC, C, CC, SC,
                    SP, P or PR by the General Plan.
            3.      There are no concentrations of 20 acres of more of property designated
                    as HDR, MDR, SFR, ER, HC, C, CC, SC, SP, P or PR by the General
                    Plan within 600 feet of the property
            4.      There are no high occupancy structures (i.e., those accommodating
                    more than six persons) such as schools, health care facilities, skilled
                    nursing facilities, residential care homes, hotels or motels within 600
                    feet of the site.
            A Notice of Action shall be recorded on those lands meeting the preceding
            criteria in conjunction with establishing the Mineral Preserve (MPZ)
            combining district on qualifying properties.
            Coordinate with Calaveras County in conjunction with its General Plan
            Update to reflect the preceding policies (or equivalent policies) within the
            Angels Camp Sphere of Influence as reflect in the Angels Camp 2020 General
            Plan.
            Related Programs: 4.A.a, 4.A.b and 4.A.c (Conservation and Open Space)
Angels Camp 2020 General Plan                Conservation and Open Space Element IV-27

                                                                           February 3, 2009
4B. Energy Resources
Goal 4.B    Promote the efficient use of energy resources.
Policies
   4.B.1    Promote the establishment and use of non-motorized transportation facilities.
   4.B.2    Encourage recycling of products and materials.
   4.B.3    Encourage the use of energy-conserving designs and materials.
   4.B.4    Continue to participate in regional efforts to reduce solid waste and recycle in
            compliance with adopted regional implementation plans. [2020 GENERAL
            PLAN MITIGATION MEASURE, MM-ENERGY-01]
Implementation Programs
   4.B.a    Encourage Use of Energy-Conserving Designs, Materials and Equipment
            Promote residential and commercial construction design that incorporates
            active and passive solar heating, supplemental solar water heaters, energy
            efficient lighting, additional weather-stripping, green and heat reflecting roofs
            compatible with the city’s visual character, additional insulation and similar
            energy-conserving features. Use of energy-conserving designs and materials
            also should be incorporated into additions and remodeling projects requiring a
            building permit. Use of energy-conserving construction equipment (e.g.,
            biodiesel) also should be encouraged. Promote incentive programs for
            projects that incorporate these features at a level that contributes to the
            maintenance of the area’s air quality.
            Equivalent Program: 9Ae (Air Quality)
            Related Program: 2Cl (Housing)
Angels Camp 2020 General Plan              Conservation and Open Space Element IV-28

                                                                                      February 3, 2009
  4.B.b      Encourage Low-Impact Modes of Transportation
            Continue to designate land uses compatible with compact development
            patterns and incorporating sidewalk or trail systems that encourage access
            between residential, commercial, recreational and public facilities and public
            transportation stops using low-impact modes of transportation [e.g.,
            pedestrian, bicycle, low-speed vehicles (LSVs)]
            Equivalent Programs: 1Dc (Land Use), 3Ba (Circulation), 9Af (Air Quality), 12Ba (Parks
            & Recreation)
            Related Programs:        3Bb (Circulation), 3Bc (Circulation), 3Bd (Circulation), 3Be
            (Circulation), 3Bf (Circulation), 3Bh (Circulation), 3Bi (Circulation), 3Bj (Circulation), 3Bk
            (Circulation), 3Bl (Circulation), 3Ce (Circulation), 3Cf (Circulation), 4Bc (Conservation &
            Open Space), 4Bd (Conservation & Open Space), 12Bb (Parks & Recreation), 12Bc (Parks &
            Recreation), 12Bd (Parks & Recreation), 12Be (Parks & Recreation), 12Bf (Parks &
            Recreation), 12Bh (Parks & Recreation), 12Bi (Parks & Recreation), 12Cc (Parks &
            Recreation), 12De (Parks & Recreation)
  4.B.c     Implement the City’s Low-Impact Modes of Transportation Plan
            Implement the city’s Low-Impact Modes of Transportation Plan identifying
            specific locations and routes planned for sidewalks, bicycle lanes and low-
            speed vehicle paths based on the plan included in 2020 General Plan
            Appendices 3E and 12A. The plan should integrate with the Calaveras
            County Master Bikeway Plan (2020 General Plan Appendices 3E and 12A)
            and emphasize connections between residential, commercial, recreational and
            public facilities within the city. The plan also should incorporate the findings
            of the Angels Camp sidewalk study and target sidewalk gaps identified in that
            study.
            Equivalent Programs: 3Bb (Circulation), 3Ce (Circulation), 9Ag (Air Quality), 12Bb (Parks
            & Recreation)
            Related Programs: 1Dc (Land Use), 3Ba (Circulation), 3Bc (Circulation), 3Bd
            (Circulation), 3Be (Circulation), 3Bf (Circulation), 3Bh (Circulation), 3Bi (Circulation), 3Bj
            (Circulation), 3Bk (Circulation), 3Bl (Circulation), 3Cf (Circulation), 4Bb (Conservation &
            Open Space), 4Bd (Conservation & Open Space), 12Ba (Parks & Recreation), 12Bc (Parks &
            Recreation), 12Bd (Parks & Recreation), 12Be (Parks & Recreation), 12Bf (Parks &
            Recreation), 12Bh (Parks & Recreation), 12Bi (Parks & Recreation), 12Cc (Parks &
            Recreation), 12De (Parks & Recreation)
Angels Camp 2020 General Plan                   Conservation and Open Space Element IV-29

                                                                                      February 3, 2009
  4.B.d     Require New Development to Construct Facilities Integrating With the
            City’s Low-Impact Modes of Transportation Plan
            As conditions of project approval, require:
                a. New commercial development to provide low-impact transportation
                     facilities connecting to routes identified in the city’s Low-Impact
                     Modes of Transportation Plan or otherwise facilitate the use of Low-
                     Impact Modes of Transportation to and from residential developments
                     within ½ mile of new commercial development
                b. New residential developments of 20 or more lots to provide low-
                     impact modes of transportation facilities connecting to routes
                     identified within the city’s Low-Impact Modes of Transportation Plan
                     or otherwise facilitate the use of Low-Impact Modes of Transportation
                     to and from commercial developments, schools, recreational areas, or
                     similar destination sites within ½ mile of the new residential
                     development
                c. New commercial and business developments to install and maintain
                     bicycle racks near entrances for employees and customers
                d. New development including employment centers, schools, and
                     commercial centers with access to the city’s Low-Impact Modes of
                     Transportation routes to provide support facilities for those using
                     Low-Impact Modes of Transportation including bicycle racks, personal
                     lockers, showers at appropriate locations (e.g., park and ride facilities)
                e. Small parking spaces to accommodate low speed vehicles
            Equivalent Programs: 3Bh (Circulation), 12Bh (Parks & Recreation)
            Related Programs: 1Dc (Land Use), 3Ba (Circulation) 3Bb (Circulation), 3Bc (Circulation),
            3Bd (Circulation), 3Be (Circulation), 3Bf (Circulation), 3Bi (Circulation), 3Bj (Circulation),
            3Bk (Circulation), 3Bl (Circulation), 3Ce (Circulation), 3Cf (Circulation), 4Bb (Conservation
            & Open Space), 4Bc (Conservation & Open Space), 4Bd (Conservation & Open Space), 4Dc
            (Conservation & Open Space), 12Ac (Parks & Recreation), 12Ba (Parks & Recreation), 12Bb
            (Parks & Recreation), 12Bc (Parks & Recreation), 12Bd (Parks & Recreation), 12Be (Parks &
            Recreation), 12Bf (Parks & Recreation), 12Bg (Parks & Recreation), 12Bi (Parks &
            Recreation), 12Ca (Parks & Recreation), 12Cc (Parks & Recreation), 12Ce (Parks &
            Recreation)
Angels Camp 2020 General Plan                  Conservation and Open Space Element IV-30

                                                                           February 3, 2009
  4.B.e     Continue to Support & Promote Alternatives to Open Burning for
            Biomass Disposal
            Continue to support and promote alternatives to open burning of yard debris
            and construction clearing. Efforts should include, but are not limited to:
                a. Supporting the efforts of the Calaveras Foothills Fire Safe Council
                    including providing letters and resolutions of support for grant
                    applications made by the council to continue door-to-door chipping
                    services
                b. Promoting the efforts of the Calaveras Foothills Fire Safe Council by
                    providing a link to the agency through the city website and/or assisting
                    the council in creating a page on the city’s website to promote the
                    availability of its programs
                c. Supporting efforts to maintain a biomass disposal site near the city
                    (e.g., Red Hills Road facility)
                d. Continuing to seek grant funding and/or the use of contracting services
                    for biomass disposal activities within the city limits
                e. Continuing, as feasible, twice-yearly yard waste pick-up and the use of
                    mulched yard debris for city landscaping projects
            Equivalent program: 9Ah (Air Quality)
            Related Program: 9Ao (Air Quality)
  4.B.f     Expand Opportunities for Recycling in the City Including E-Cycling
            Support the establishment of new or expansion of existing recycling facilities
            in or near the city limits that encourage recycling of a wide variety of
            resources, including recycling of electronic wastes (e-cycling).
            Equivalent Program: 6Df (Public Safety)
            Related Program: 4Bg (Conservation & Open Space)
Angels Camp 2020 General Plan               Conservation and Open Space Element IV-31

                                                                            February 3, 2009
  4.B.g     Update Title 17 of the City of Angels Municipal Code to Promote
            Recycling
            Establish a standard condition to require submission of a design for refuse and
            recyclables storage facilities within project boundaries for new, remodeling or
            expansion projects requiring a building permit. For the purposes of this
            program, “projects” should exclude construction of single-family homes
            unless five or more are being constructed.
            Related Program: 4Bf (Conservation & Open Space)
  4.B.h     Coordinate with the County to Promote Efficient Use of Energy
            Resources
            To the maximum extent feasible, coordinate land use planning activities with
            the county for land uses involving the location of new, rural commercial
            development. Planning should ensure that such developments are not
            duplicated in close proximity and are easily accessible to and located in close
            proximity to target residential populations.
  4.B.i     Continue to Support the Calaveras Fire Safe Council to Reduce Fire
            Hazard Through Organic Recycling
            Support the efforts of the Calaveras Foothills Fire Safe Council including, but
            not limited to:
                a. Providing letters and resolutions of support for grant applications
                    made by the fire safe council to continue door-to-door chipping
                    services, lot clearing for seniors and disabled for fire safe clearances,
                    clearing road rights-of-way to reduce fire hazard
                b. Investigate promoting the efforts of the Calaveras Foothills Fire Safe
                    Council by providing a link to the agency through the city website
                    and/or assisting the council in creating a page on the city’s website to
                    promote the availability of its programs
Angels Camp 2020 General Plan              Conservation and Open Space Element IV-32

                                                                           February 3, 2009
   4.B.j    Continue to Participate in Regional Plans to Support Adequate Solid
            Waste Disposal Capacity
             [2020 GENERAL PLAN MITIGATION MEASURE, MM-ENERGY-02]
            Continue to participate in the planning process for updates of the Calaveras
            County Source Reduction and Recycling Element as required by the state.
            Continue to implement the element, or its equivalent, within the city.
            Continue to participate in planning efforts to update the county’s solid waste
            parcel fee. Continue to participate in the solid waste parcel fee program or an
            equivalent method of paying the city’s fair share in support of a regional solid
            waste facility.
4C. Scenic Resources
NOTE:    See also the Community Identity Element (Chapter 11) and Cultural Resources
         Element (Chapter 8) of the General Plan for issues related to community design
         and management of archaeological, architectural and historic resources.
Goal 4.C    Maintain and, where feasible, enhance the city’s appearance.
Policies
   4.C.1    Promote the maintenance and enhancement of the city’s rural, Main Street
            character as viewed from the city’s major roadways.
   4.C.2    Recognize the contribution of trees to the city’s scenic values.
   4.C.3    Recognize that buildings and other man-made structures are the primary
            scenic resource visible from the city’s major roadways; hence, enforcement of
            design standards reflective of the city’s rural, Main Street character are
            essential to the continued promotion of economic development and
            preservation of the city’s sense of community.
   4C.4     Encourage retention and expansion of vegetative cover to assist in
            counteracting the effects of global warming. [2020 GENERAL PLAN
            MITIGATION MEASURE, MM-AIR-03]
Angels Camp 2020 General Plan              Conservation and Open Space Element IV-33

                                                                              February 3, 2009
Implementation Programs
   4.C.a    Consider Establishing Scenic Gateways/Scenic Corridors
            Evaluate the potential benefits and constraints associated with designating
            portions of the primary transportation routes entering into the city as scenic
            gateways or scenic corridors as a means of establishing good “first-
            impressions” for visitors. Consider adopting development standards for these
            areas that encourage new development while addressing landscaping,
            vegetation retention, sign design, outdoor storage, architecture, traffic-
            calming, preservation of and compatibility with the city’s visual character and
            similar design issues.
            Equivalent Programs: 1Cc (Land Use), 3Ea (Circulation), 11Bi (Community Identity), 11Cf
            (Community Identity)
            Related Programs: 8Bw (Cultural Resources)
   4.C.b    Investigate Establishing a City Street Tree Program
            Investigate establishing a city Street Tree Program that considers at least the
            following elements:
                a. Funding sources for long-term maintenance
                b. Identification of streets and highways subject to the city Street Tree
                    Program
                c. Tree varieties with suitable growth patterns, that are easily maintained,
                    minimize potential root damage to sidewalks and other infrastructure,
                    and avoid risks to health and safety
                d. Participation by new development located along streets and highways
                    included in the program
                e. Working with local non-profit agencies, service clubs and other
                    volunteer organizations to assist with plantings and/or maintenance
                f. Membership in Tree City, USA and potential publicity that such
                    participation might generate
            Equivalent Programs: 9Am (Air Quality), 11Bf (Community Identity)
            Related Programs: 1Ed (Land Use), 11Bh (Community Identity)
Angels Camp 2020 General Plan              Conservation and Open Space Element IV-34

                                                                              February 3, 2009
  4.C.c     Consider a Tree Management Program
            Work with the community to develop a heritage tree program addressing the
            conservation of landmark trees within the city limits and including provisions
            for health and safety should such trees become hazards. Consider including
            trees of exceptional size, trees important in the history of Angels Camp, trees
            representing the oldest of their kind or similar unique attributes as heritage
            trees. Consider a voluntary program in which residents may enroll heritage
            trees with recognition by the city. In addition, consider providing information
            at the Angels Camp Community Development Department counter regarding
            best construction practices around oaks and other tree management guidelines.
            Equivalent Programs: 9An (Air Quality), 11Be (Community Identity)
            Related Programs: 1Ed (Land use)
  4.C.d     Consider a Vegetation & Oak Woodlands Management Program
            Draft an ordinance to retain significant stands of oak woodlands, clusters of
            native shrubs and clusters of trees that contribute to defining the city’s
            character. The program should establish thresholds addressing when a city
            permit is required for vegetation removal and provide guidance for conserving
            movement corridors for resident wildlife species or those with established
            migratory wildlife corridors and addressing timing for tree removal to
            minimize potential impacts to native wildlife nursery and nesting sites. [2020
            GENERAL PLAN MITIGATION MEASURE, MM-BIOLOGY-02]. The
            program should apply to all new development requiring a discretionary
            entitlement from the city. This program should not apply to vegetation
            removal required for fire safety as determined by the Angels Camp Fire
            Department or to vegetation removal required for reasons of public health and
            safety as determined by city officials.
            Equivalent Programs: 4Dj (Conservation & Open Space), 4Fd (Conservation & Open
            Space), 11Bg (Community Identity)
            Related Programs: 1Ed (Land Use), 4Cc (Conservation & Open Space)
Angels Camp 2020 General Plan                Conservation and Open Space Element IV-35

                                                                           February 3, 2009
  4.C.e     Revise the City’s Sign Ordinance
            Amend the city’s sign ordinance to eliminate inconsistencies, emphasize
            cohesive design for commercial centers with multiple buildings, and to
            include design standards reflective of the city’s three distinct commercial
            districts [i.e., Historic Commercial District (HC), Community Commercial
            District (CC) and Shopping Center Commercial District (SC) as described in
            2020 General Plan Programs 1.C.a and 11.D.a]. Specific changes include,
            but are not limited to: eliminating pole signs; requiring master sign plans for
            shopping centers; requiring master sign plans for multiple businesses in a
            single structure, establishing criteria for announcement signs (e.g., signs with
            scrolling text or changing copy), and eliminating flashing or glaring signs.
            Equivalent Programs: 1Eb (Land Use), 11Cd (Community Identity)
            Related Program: 8Bu (Cultural Resources)
  4.C.f     Prepare a Grading Ordinance/Promote Best Management Practices
            Prepare a grading ordinance addressing: when a grading permit is required,
            when a grading plan shall be prepared, required contents of a grading plan,
            anticipated grades before and after construction, the total amount of soil to be
            removed, location and design of retaining walls, erosion control standards,
            preparation of erosion control plans, recommended erosion control methods,
            soil disposal, vegetation retention, revegetation, drainage, requirements for
            erosion and sediment control plans and other elements, as identified. The
            ordinance, or a companion publication (either prepared as an original
            publication or adopted from existing publications), should be prepared in
            conjunction with the grading ordinance and illustrate best management
            practices. Resources for Best Management Practices are listed in Angels
            Camp 2020 General Plan Appendix 4C.
            The ordinance should further establish that no grading permit or permits to
            allow grading or vegetation removal of more than ten percent of a parcel shall
            be issued until a site plan, development plan, building permit or other
            entitlement has been issued for a specific development project unless
            otherwise necessary for reasons of health and safety as declared by the city.
            [2020 GENERAL PLAN MITIGATION MEASURE MM-SCENIC-01,
            MM-WATER QUALITY-01, MM-GEOLOGY-01, MM-COMMUNITY-
            01]
            The grading ordinance should further specify that applications for
            discretionary entitlements for development of one acre or more on slopes
            averaging 10% or greater, will, at a minimum, be accompanied by a grading
            plan indicating, at least, the amount of soil to be disturbed; a tree plan
Angels Camp 2020 General Plan               Conservation and Open Space Element IV-36

                                                                                     February 3, 2009
            indicating the number, size, species and location of trees to be removed and
            proposals for replacing trees; a vegetation management plan and revegetation
            plans.     [2020 GENERAL PLAN MITIGATION MEASURE, MM-
            SCENIC-01, MM-WATER QUALITY-01, MM-GEOLOGY-01, MM-
            COMMUNITY-01].
            Provisions of a Grading Ordinance should be combined with those of a
            Hillside Management Ordinance to the maximum extent feasible. [2020
            GENERAL PLAN MITIGATION MEASURE MM-SCENIC-01, MM-
            WATER QUALITY-01, MM-GEOLOGY-01, MM-COMMUNITY-01]
            Equivalent Programs: 1Cf (Land Use), 4Ga (Conservation & Open Space), 6Al (Public
            Safety), 11Ac (Community Identity)
  4.C.g     Continue to Consider the Impacts of New Residential Development on the
            City’s Recreational Facilities
            Continue to maintain and implement the provisions of California Government
            Code Section 66477 (Quimby Act) to address the impacts of new residential
            developments on the city’s recreational facilities.
            Equivalent Program: 12Ef (Parks & Recreation)
            Related Programs: 1Db (Land Use), 2Bc (Housing), 7Bg (Public Facilities & Services),
            7Cc (Public Facilities & Services), 7Da (Public Facilities & Services), 7Ea (Public Facilities
            & Services), 7Ed (Public Facilities & Services)
  4.C.h     Propose Regulations for Outdoor Lighting
            [2020 GENERAL PLAN MITIGATION MEASURE, MM-SCENIC-03,
            MM-COMMUNITY-03]
            Propose regulations for outdoor lighting promoting a safe and pleasant
            environment for residents and visitors; protecting and improving safe travel
            for all modes of transportation; preventing nuisances resulting from
            unnecessary light intensity, direct glare or light trespass; protecting the ability
            to view the night sky by regulating unnecessary upward light projection;
            phasing out non-conforming fixtures; and promoting lighting practices and
            systems that conserve energy. Guidance of such guidelines may be found at
            the International Dark Sky Association http://www.darksky.org/
Angels Camp 2020 General Plan                   Conservation and Open Space Element IV-37

                                                                            February 3, 2009
4D. Biological Resources
Goal 4.D    Conserve and, where feasible, enhance the city’s biological resources.
Policies
   4.D.1    Recognize the city’s biological resources as a major contributor to the city’s
            scenic quality, visual character, and quality of life.
   4.D.2    Facilitate compliance with state and federal natural resource protection laws.
   4.D.3    Recognize and maximize the multiple beneficial uses of open spaces.
   4.D.4    Encourage retention and expansion of vegetative cover to assist in
            counteracting the effects of global warming. [2020 GENERAL PLAN
            MITIGATION MEASURE, MM-AIR-03]
Implementation Programs:
   4.D.a    Identify Biological Resources
            Identify locations of known biological resources including plants, fish,
            animals, wetlands, wildlife movement corridors and other biological resources
            that are subject to state and federal agency regulations (e.g., wetlands, etc.) to
            be used in a comprehensive database, map or similar “one-stop” reference for
            environmental reviews.
   4.D.b    Inventory Potential Biological Resource Mitigation Sites Within the
            City’s Sphere of Influence
            Map stands of native oaks, creek corridors, elderberry shrubs, wetlands and
            similar biological resources located within the city’s Sphere of Influence that
            may serve as mitigation sites for future large-scale public and private
            development (e.g., State Route 4 North Angels Bypass, planned arterials and
            collectors). Approach landowners to designate these sites as Resource
            Management (RM) or to otherwise develop the sites for potential mitigation
            banking sites in anticipation of future development.
            Related Program: 1Hc (Land Use)
Angels Camp 2020 General Plan              Conservation and Open Space Element IV-38

                                                                              February 3, 2009
  4.D.c     Draft a Creek Corridor Preservation & Management Plan for Angels
            Creek
            Identify potential funding sources to prepare and draft a creek corridor
            preservation and management plan for Angels Creek to include, but not be
            limited to:
                a. Access points tying the historic commercial district to the creek
                    corridor
                b. A trail along the creek through the city limits (with potential future
                    links to trails extending along the creek beyond the city limits)
                c. Creek crossing(s) from the State Route 4 city parking lot to the
                    Historic Commercial District (HC)
                d. Trailhead(s) with picnic and bathroom facilities
                e. Maintenance of native vegetation and scenic and biological resources
                f. Maintenance of water quality
                g. Design guidelines providing a cohesive architectural theme for all
                    creek improvements and including a trail design that minimizes
                    impacts to the creek and private residences to the maximum extent
                    feasible
                h. Interpretive features highlighting the creek’s biology, natural history
                    and historic resources
                i. Criteria for the dedication of resource management easements to
                    accommodate the planned creek corridor management plan
            Resources that may assist in the preparation of the plan are included in 2020
            General Plan Appendix 4F.
            Equivalent Program: 1Cj (Land Use)
            Related Programs: 1Be (Land Use), 1Bf (Land Use), 3Bg (Circulation), 3Bh (Circulation),
            4Gc (Conservation & Open Space), 4Ha (Conservation & Open Space), 6Bg (Public Safety),
            11Bb (Community Identity), 12Bg (Parks & Recreation), 12Ca (Parks & Recreation), 12Cc
            (Parks & Recreation), 12Ce (Parks & Recreation),
Angels Camp 2020 General Plan                 Conservation and Open Space Element IV-39

                                                                              February 3, 2009
  4.D.d     Designate Resource Management & Open Space Setbacks Along Creeks
            Establish an open space setback encompassing designated flood hazard areas
            along Angels Creek and Six Mile Creek. Designate these areas as Resource
            Management (RM) on the city’s general plan maps and as Open Space (OS)
            on the city’s zoning maps. Establish similar setbacks along other drainages
            within the city (e.g., China Gulch) or along drainages in areas that may be
            annexed into the city in the future.
            Equivalent Programs: 1Bf (Land Use), 4Gc (Conservation & Open Space), 6Bg (Public
            Safety), 11Bb (Community Identity)
            Related Programs: 1Be (Land Use), 1Cj (Land Use), 4Dc (Conservation & Open Space),
            4Ha (Conservation & Open Space)
  4.D.e     Support Minimum Creek Flows in Angels Creek
            Support actions or proposals (e.g., respond to requests for comments, provide
            letters of support) that encourage the maintenance of a stream flow in Angels
            Creek.
            Related Programs: 1Cj (Land Use), 4Dc (Conservation & Open Space)
  4.D.f     Provide Guidance to Developers for Assessing/Addressing/Avoiding
            Adverse Impacts to Biological Resources
            Maintain reference materials, contact numbers and a consultants list to assist
            developers in contacting the appropriate regulatory agency necessary for
            facilitating environmental reviews for new development in the city and to
            inform developers of current state and federal regulations pertaining to
            biological resources. Sample information may include, but is not limited to:
            websites for wetlands regulations including polices related to no net loss of
            wetlands and , measures consistent with Section 404 of the federal Clean
            Water Act addressing filling, removal or hydrological alteration of wetlands
            and other waters of the United States; regulations pertaining to California Fish
            and Game Code Section 1600 related to work undertaken in or near a river,
            stream or lake flowing at least intermittently through a bed or channel and
            including ephemeral streams and water courses (e.g. diversions, flow changes,
            extracting materials from, disposal of debris, waste or other materials into any
            river, stream or lake etc.) and addressing these possible impacts through use of
            Lake or Streambed Alteration Agreements (LSAA), valley elderberry
            longhorn beetle guidelines, California Department of Fish and Game (CDFG)
            wildlife biologist for Calaveras County, representatives from CDFG charged
            with issuing streambed alteration permits in Calaveras County, and
            representatives of the United States Army Corps of Engineers issuing wetland
            permits in Calaveras County. [2020 GENERAL PLAN MITIGATION
            MEASURE, MM-BIOLOGY-01]
Angels Camp 2020 General Plan                Conservation and Open Space Element IV-40

                                                                             February 3, 2009
  4.D.g     Promote the Use of Designs and Materials that Mimic Natural States for
            Projects Involving Drainages
            Encourage the use of natural materials in the design of flood control projects,
            for bank stabilization, erosion control or restoration efforts along city creeks.
            Discourage the use of concrete channeling of existing creeks and streams.
            2020 General Plan Appendix 4C offers a list of resources for best
            management practices for stream rehabilitation, repair and restoration.
            Equivalent Program: 11Bc (Community Identity)
            Related Programs: 1Ee (Land Use), 6Ak (Public Safety), 6Am (Public Safety), 9Ad (Air
            Quality), 11Ad (Community Identity)
  4.D.h     Integrate Coordinated Resources Management Principles in Open Space
            Management Planning Efforts
            To the maximum extent feasible, integrate design features in support of all of
            the following when undertaking open space management planning efforts
            (e.g., creek corridor management plans):              flood protection, increased
            recreational opportunities, biological resources conservation, water quality
            protection and enhancement, cultural resource protection, educational
            opportunities, erosion and sediment control, economic opportunities,
            community character preservation and enhancement, and similar community
            benefits.
  4.D.i     Establish a Resources Management (RM) Land Use Designation and
            Maintain and Update the City’s Open Space (OS) Zoning District
            Establish a Resources Management (RM) General Plan Land Use Designation
            in the city’s general plan that is compatible with an Open Space (OS) zoning
            district. The city’s municipal code should use the Open Space (OS) zoning
            district to provide for conservation of biological, scenic and cultural resources.
            Alternative zoning districts may be developed consistent with the Resources
            Management (RM) General Plan Land Use Designation to address flood
            protection, recreation and similar uses.
            Update the city’s Open Space (OS) zoning district to address permitted and
            conditional uses, use of native plants, trail construction, and similar uses in the
            Open Space (OS) zoning district.
            Equivalent Programs: 1Cg (Land Use), 11Ba (Community Identity),
            Related Programs: 1Aa (Land Use), 1Ca (Land Use), 4Di (Conservation & Open Space),
            8Af (Cultural Resources), 10Ad (Economic Development), 11Ba (Community Identity), 11Da
            (Community Identity)
Angels Camp 2020 General Plan                 Conservation and Open Space Element IV-41

                                                                              February 3, 2009
  4.D.j     Consider a Vegetation & Oak Woodlands Management Program
            Draft an ordinance to retain significant stands of oak woodlands, clusters of
            native shrubs and clusters of trees that contribute to defining the city’s
            character. The program should establish thresholds addressing when a city
            permit is required for vegetation removal and provide guidance for conserving
            movement corridors for resident wildlife species or those with established
            migratory wildlife corridors and addressing timing for tree removal to
            minimize potential impacts to native wildlife nursery and nesting sites [2020
            GENERAL PLAN MITIGATION MEASURE, MM-BIOLOGY-02] .
            The program should apply to all new development requiring a discretionary
            entitlement from the city. This program should not apply to vegetation
            removal required for fire safety as determined by the Angels Camp Fire
            Department or to vegetation removal required for reasons of public health and
            safety as determined by city officials.
            Equivalent Program: 4Cd (Conservation & Open Space), 4Fd (Conservation & Open
            Space), 11Bg (Community Identity)
            Related Programs: 1Ed (Land Use), 4Cc (Conservation & Open Space)
      4.D.k Facilitate Compliance with State Streambed Alteration Regulations
            [2020 GENERAL PLAN MITIGATION MEASURE, MM-BIOLOGY-
            03]
            Facilitate compliance with state streambed alteration regulations by requiring
            the following for all projects involving work in and adjacent to waterways:
            a. Protect and maintain riparian, wetland, stream or lake systems to ensure a
                “no-net-loss” of habitat value and acreage. Vegetation removal should
                not exceed the minimum necessary to complete operations.
            b. Provide protection for fish and wildlife resources at risk by considering
                their various life stages, maintaining migration and dispersal corridors,
                and protecting essential breeding (i.e., spawning, nesting) habitats.
            c. Delineate non-structural buffers along streams and wetlands to provide
                adequate protection to aquatic resources. No grading or construction
                activities should be allowed within these buffers.
            d. Place construction materials, spoils or fill, so that they cannot be washed
                into a stream or lake.
            e. Prevent downstream sedimentation and pollution.                Provisions may
                include, but not be limited to oil/grit separators, detention ponds, buffering
Angels Camp 2020 General Plan                Conservation and Open Space Element IV-42

                                                                            February 3, 2009
                filter strips, silt barriers, etc., to prevent downstream sedimentation and
                pollution.
            f. Restoration plans must include performance standards such as the types of
                vegetation to be used, the timing of implementation, and contingency
                plans if the replanting is not successful. Restoration of disturbed areas
                should use native vegetation.
4E. Agricultural/Soil Resources
Goal 4.E    Reduce conflicts between urban and agricultural uses.
Policy
   4.E.1    Recognize that agricultural uses are important to the economy and character
            of the region and that existing agricultural uses should be protected from
            potential land use conflicts with nearby urban uses.
Implementation Programs
   4.E.a    Identify Prime, Unique, and Important Farmlands
            Update the city’s general plan land use maps, as necessary and appropriate, to
            recognize prime, unique or important farmland as may be identified in
            conjunction with the release of United States Department of Agriculture
            Natural Resources Conservation Service’s updated soil survey currently
            underway.
   4.E.b    Evaluate the Need for a Right-to-Farm Ordinance
            Consult with local agricultural interests to determine the need for a right-to-
            farm ordinance within the city or for landowners adjacent to the city. If
            pursued, the ordinance should include provisions for notifying landowners
            that they live adjacent to an agricultural operation and disclosing the nature of
            impacts that are present and will be protected by the ordinance (e.g., dust,
            smell). 2020 General Plan Appendix 4G provides sample ordinances.
            Equivalent Programs: 1Bl (Land Use), 11Ae (Community Identity)
            Related Programs: 4Ec (Conservation & Open Space), 5Al (Noise), 12Am (Parks &
            Recreation)
Angels Camp 2020 General Plan                 Conservation and Open Space Element IV-43

                                                                            February 3, 2009
   4.E.c    Update Title 17 of the City of Angels Municipal Code to Address Farm
            Animals in Urban Areas
            Coordinate with the local farm bureau, 4-H and other stakeholders to update
            Title 17 of the City of Angels Municipal Code to establish parameters for
            keeping farm animals (e.g., livestock, poultry) in urban areas. Updates should
            address minimum parcel sizes appropriate for maintaining farm animals and
            standards for maintaining farm animals consistent with community health.
            Consideration should be given to the use of some farm animals in vegetation
            management and fire protection (e.g., through grazing).
            Related Programs: 4Eb (Conservation & Open Space), 5Al (Noise), 11Ae (Community
            Identity), 12Am (Parks & Recreation)
   4.E.d    Adopt Provisions for Agricultural Uses on Residential Estate-Zoned
            Parcels
            [2020       GENERAL          PLAN      MITIGATION         MEASURE,           MM-
            AGRICULTURE-01]
            In conjunction with the creation of the Residential Estate zoning district and
            Implementation Program 4.E.c, include the following provisions:
            For parcels zoned Residential Estate that are five acres or larger in size, the
            following agricultural uses are permitted: Agricultural activities including
            accepted ranching practices, accepted farming practices, private stables and
            domestic fowl raising (or similar agricultural uses as may be approved by the
            City). The City will consider including, as a permitted or conditional use:
            sale on the property of products produced thereon provided that such uses are
            carried on by a resident of the property, are incidental to the residential use
            thereof, and are not a nuisance to the contiguous properties.
4F. Timber Resources
Goal 4.F    Recognize the role that timber resources have played in the history of the city
            and accommodate existing timber harvesting operations located outside of the
            city limits while maintaining the rural, Main Street, character of the city.
Policies
   4.F.1    Evaluate the potential of new development to conflict with the commercial
            harvesting of timber resources within the city’s Sphere of Influence.
Angels Camp 2020 General Plan                 Conservation and Open Space Element IV-44

                                                                           February 3, 2009
   4.F.2    Provide adequate transportation facilities for trucks involved in tree harvesting
            and processing while maintaining the rural, Main Street, character of the city.
   4.F.3    Recognize the contribution of timber harvesting in the history of the city and
            the region.
Implementation Programs
   4.F.a    Establish Guidelines for Evaluating the Importance of Timber Resources
            within the City’s Sphere of Influence
            Establish and adopt guidelines for evaluating new development occurring on
            soils with potentially high timber value, as identified and mapped in 2020
            General Plan Appendices 4E and 4H, to determine if the new development
            will conflict with the commercial harvesting of potentially valuable timber
            resources. Guidelines should include, but are not limited to, establishing
            minimum parcel sizes necessary to preserve important timber resources for
            commercial harvesting and processing timber harvest plans.
Angels Camp 2020 General Plan             Conservation and Open Space Element IV-45

                                                                         February 3, 2009
  4.F.b     Retain and Enhance Historic District Vitality
            In cooperation with the Angels Camp Business Association (ACBA), or
            related organizations, prepare a plan to retain and enhance the vitality of the
            Angels Camp historic district. Identify potential funding sources and
            programs to encourage the continued vitality of the downtown district.
            Consider redevelopment to assist in funding programs. Specific activities
            should include, but not be limited to:
                a. Live entertainment
                b. Farmers’ Markets/Vintners’ Market
                c. Introducing a pedestrian mall to downtown (e.g., along Bird’s Way)
                d. Art in public places
                e. Enhancing pedestrian access to and along Angels Creek
                f. Attracting additional hotel/motel accommodations
                g. Retention or re-introduction of some community services and
                    traditional retail services to downtown (e.g., government services,
                    small grocery store, post office)
                h. Supporting programs to reduce the number of trucks traveling
                    through downtown
                    Equivalent Program: 11Ea (Community Identity)
Angels Camp 2020 General Plan              Conservation and Open Space Element IV-46

                                                                             February 3, 2009
  4.F.c     Support and Promote Events Celebrating the City’s Culture, History,
            Industries, Recreational Opportunities and Natural Resources
            Continue to support and promote public activities and events celebrating the
            city’s culture, history, industries, recreational opportunities, arts and natural
            resources. Support and promote events that bring visitors and residents
            downtown, further the economic development objectives of the city, and are
            compatible with the city’s community character including, but not limited to:
                a. Events recognizing and celebrating the city’s historic sites, structures,
                    people, culture and events
                b. Events recognizing the city’s literary history
                c. Calaveras County Frog Jump
                d. Fishing tournaments (e.g., bass tournaments), triathlons, fun–runs,
                    biking tournaments and other recreational events
                e. Events recognizing the city and region’s historic industries (e.g.,
                    mining, timber harvesting)
            Equivalent Programs: 4Ae (Conservation & Open Space), 8Cd (Cultural Resources), 10Cd
            (Economic Development), 11Ee (Community Identity)
            Related Programs: 2Aa (Housing), 3Cd (Circulation), 10Ab (Economic Development),
            10Ao (Economic Development), 11Ea (Community Identity)
  4.F.d     Consider a Vegetation & Oak Woodlands Management Program
            Draft an ordinance to retain significant stands of oak woodlands, clusters of
            native shrubs and clusters of trees that contribute to defining the city’s
            character. The program should establish thresholds addressing when a city
            permit is required for vegetation removal and provide guidance for conserving
            movement corridors for resident wildlife species or those with established
            migratory wildlife corridors and addressing timing for tree removal to
            minimize potential impacts to native wildlife nursery and nesting sites [2020
            GENERAL PLAN MITIGATION MEASURE, MM-BIOLOGY-02]. The
            program should apply to all new development requiring a discretionary
            entitlement from the city. This program should not apply to vegetation
            removal required for fire safety as determined by the Angels Camp Fire
            Department or to vegetation removal required for reasons of public health and
            safety as determined by city officials.
Angels Camp 2020 General Plan              Conservation and Open Space Element IV-47

                                                                              February 3, 2009
            Equivalent Program: 4Cd (Conservation & Open Space), 4Dj (Conservation & Open
            Space), 11Bg (Community Identity)
            Related Programs: 1Ed (Land Use), 4Cc (Conservation & Open Space)
4G. Water Resources
Goal 4.G    Ensure adequate water quality and quantity for the residents of and visitors to
            the city.
Policies
   4.G.1    Promote water conservation throughout the planning area.
   4.G.2    Provide leadership in conserving urban water resources.
   4.G.3    Preserve and enhance water quality.
   4.G.4    Provide an adequate supply of water for the city’s existing and anticipated
            future needs.
   4.G.5    Provide adequate wastewater facilities to serve the city’s existing and
            anticipated future needs.
   4.G.6    Equitably distribute the costs of maintaining existing and providing new water
            and wastewater facilities between existing users and new development.
Implementation Programs
   4.G.a    Prepare a Grading Ordinance/Promote Best Management Practices
            Prepare a grading ordinance addressing: when a grading permit is required,
            when a grading plan shall be prepared, required contents of a grading plan,
            anticipated grades before and after construction, the total amount of soil to be
            removed, location and design of retaining walls, erosion control standards,
            preparation of erosion control plans, recommended erosion control methods,
            soil disposal, vegetation retention, revegetation, drainage, requirements for
            erosion and sediment control plans and other elements, as identified. The
            ordinance, or a companion publication (either prepared as an original
            publication or adopted from existing publications), should be prepared in
            conjunction with the grading ordinance and illustrate best management
            practices. Resources for Best Management Practices are listed in 2020
            General Plan Appendix 4C.
Angels Camp 2020 General Plan                Conservation and Open Space Element IV-48

                                                                          February 3, 2009
            The ordinance should further establish that no grading permit or permits to
            allow grading or vegetation removal of more than ten percent of a parcel shall
            be issued until a site plan, development plan, building permit or other
            entitlement has been issued for a specific development project unless
            otherwise necessary for reasons of health and safety as declared by the city.
            [2020 GENERAL PLAN MITIGATION MEASURE MM-SCENIC-01,
            MM-WATER QUALITY-01, MM-GEOLOGY-01, MM-COMMUNITY-
            01]
            The grading ordinance should further specify that applications for
            discretionary entitlements for development of one acre or more on slopes
            averaging 10% or greater, will, at a minimum, be accompanied by a grading
            plan indicating, at least, the amount of soil to be disturbed; a tree plan
            indicating the number, size, species and location of trees to be removed and
            proposals for replacing trees; a vegetation management plan and revegetation
            plans. [2020 GENERAL PLAN MITIGATION MEASURE MM-
            SCENIC-01, MM-WATER QUALITY-01, MM-GEOLOGY-01, MM-
            COMMUNITY-01]
            Provisions of a Grading Ordinance should be combined with those of a
            Hillside Management Ordinance to the maximum extent feasible. [2020
            GENERAL PLAN MITIGATION MEASURE MM-SCENIC-01, MM-
            WATER QUALITY-01, MM-GEOLOGY-01, MM-COMMUNITY-01]
            Equivalent Programs: 1Cf (Land Use), 4Cf (Conservation &Open Space), 6Al (Public
            Safety), 11Ac (Community Identity)
  4.G.b     Promote and Support Activities to Reduce Non-Point Source Pollution
            Approach the Calaveras County Resource Conservation District to investigate
            the feasibility of initiating and overseeing a voluntary watershed stewardship
            program aimed at reducing non-point source pollution.
  4.G.c     Designate Resource Management & Open Space Setbacks Along Creeks
            Establish an open space setback encompassing designated flood hazard areas
            along Angels Creek and Six Mile Creek. Designate these areas as Resource
            Management (RM) on the city’s general plan maps and as Open Space (OS)
            on the city’s zoning maps. Establish similar setbacks along other drainages
            within the city (e.g., China Gulch) or along drainages in areas that may be
            annexed into the city in the future.
            Equivalent Programs: 1Bf (Land Use), 4Dd (Conservation & Open Space), 6Bg (Public
            Safety), 11Bb (Community Identity)
Angels Camp 2020 General Plan                Conservation and Open Space Element IV-49

                                                                                     February 3, 2009
            Related Programs: 1Be (Land Use), 1Cj (Land Use), 4Dc (Conservation & Open Space),
            4Ha (Conservation & Open Space)
  4.G.d     Provide Access to Waterways
            Provide access to waterways consistent with state law. Such access should be
            designed with consideration for private property rights.
            Related Programs: 1Cj (Land Use), 4Dc (Conservation & Open Space)
  4.G.e     Encourage Use of Treated Waste Water
            Continue to encourage and facilitate the use of treated waste water for
            irrigation.
            Related Program: 4Gl (Conservation & Open Space), 4Gn (Conservation & Open Space),
            6Eh (Public Safety)
  4.G.f     Update and Implement a Water Master Plan
            Continue to update and implement the city’s water master plan in compliance
            with state law including regular updates to the facility financing plan.
            Related Program: 7Bb (Public Facilities & Services)
  4.G.g     Continue to Maintain and Update the City’s Wastewater Master Plan
            Continue to update and implement the City’s wastewater master plan in
            compliance with state law including regular updates to the facility financing
            plan.
            Related Program: 7Bb (Public Facilities & Services)
  4.G.h     Continue to Monitor Water and Wastewater Facility Capacity
            Continue to monitor the ability of the city’s water and wastewater facilities to
            provide adequate service to the city’s existing and projected development and
            to reflect new regulations. Provide periodic capacity updates to the Angels
            Camp City Council for these systems including a report of the percent of total
            capacity at which the facilities are operating.
            Related Programs: 1Ag (Land Use), 2Bf (Housing), 2Bh (Housing), 6Ef (Public Safety),
            7Ba (Public Facilities & Services), 7Bh (Public Facilities & Services), 7Bk (Public Facilities
            & Services), 7Bj (Public Facilities & Services), 10Ae (Economic Development)
Angels Camp 2020 General Plan                   Conservation and Open Space Element IV-50

                                                                            February 3, 2009
  4.G.i     Consider Initiating a Citizen’s Water Quality Monitoring Program
            Investigate the feasibility of obtaining certification from the state for a citizen
            water quality monitoring program for natural waterways. Monitoring
            programs may include interested landowners adjacent to city waterways,
            students, or other interested citizens. Water quality data collected could be
            used by the city to identify potential areas of contamination, the nature of non-
            point source pollutants within the city and/or to measure improvements in
            water quality resulting from remedial actions.
  4.G.j     Maintain Information Pertaining to Water Resources in Mines,
            Underground Rivers and High-Production Wells
            Maintain the information contained in 2020 General Plan Appendix 4A
            relative to mine locations and information in 2020 General Plan Appendix
            6B relative to underground rivers. Map the locations of high-production wells
            throughout the city. This information should be used to identify potential
            water sources during emergencies.
            Equivalent Program: 6Eg (Public Safety)
  4.G.k     Pursue Preparation and Adoption of a Non-Point Source Pollution (NPS)
            Pollution Control Implementation Program
            Assist developers in complying with the Non-Point Source Pollution
            Implementation and Enforcement Policy adopted by the State Water
            Resources Control Board on May 20, 2004, by pursuing funding to prepare
            and implement a Non-Point Source Pollution (NPS) Pollution Control
            Implementation Program. Alternatively, the city may wish to adopt an
            existing program already approved by the state. The program should be
            endorsed or approved by the Regional Water Quality Control Board
            (RWQCB) and address, at a minimum, the following:
                a. Explicitly state the purpose of the plan and address NPS pollution
                    control in a manner that achieves and maintains water quality
                    objectives
                b. Describe management practices and other program elements expected
                    to be implemented, along with an evaluation program ensuring proper
                    implementation and verification
                c. Include a time schedule and quantifiable milestones, if required by the
                    RWQCB
Angels Camp 2020 General Plan               Conservation and Open Space Element IV-51

                                                                                  February 3, 2009
                 d. Include feedback mechanisms sufficient for the RWQCB, dischargers
                     and the public to determine if the implementation program is achieving
                     its stated purposes, or whether additional or differed management
                     practices or other actions are required
            Additional information may be found at:
            www.waterboards.ca.gov/waterquality
  4.G.l     Encourage City Use of Treated Water to Irrigate Landscaping at City
            Facilities
            Install infrastructure to facilitate the use of treated water for landscape
            irrigation when renovating or establishing new city facilities (including new
            city parks), where feasible.
            Equivalent Program: 12.D.f (Parks & Recreation), 7Eg (Public Facilities & Services)
            Related Program: 4Ge (Conservation & Open Space)
  4.G.m     Select Park and Facility Sites and Designs that Conserve Water
            Resources
            Design parks and facilities to reduce the need for irrigation and conserve
            water, where feasible (e.g., limiting areas of turf where appropriate, choosing
            plants that require minimal water, installing smart irrigation systems).
            Equivalent Programs: 12Dg (Parks & Recreation), 7Ef (Public Facilities & Services)
  4.G.n     Require New Development to Install Infrastructure to Facilitate the Use
            of Treated Water for Irrigation
            Establish a program requiring new development to install infrastructure to
            facilitate the use of treated water for landscape irrigation (including golf
            course irrigation) in those locations where installation of such infrastructure is
            feasible. The program should establish parameters for determining the
            feasibility of installing required infrastructure and establish a threshold for the
            nature and size of development subject to this requirement. The requirement
            to use treated waste water for irrigation purposes should apply to discretionary
            entitlements for new development.
            Related Programs: 1Ed (Land Use), 4Ge (Conservation & Open Space)
Angels Camp 2020 General Plan                Conservation and Open Space Element IV-52
                                                                               February 3, 2009
4H. Health & Safety
Note: See also Public Safety Element (Chapter 6)
Goal 4.H     Protect the health and safety of people and property in the city from natural
             and man-made hazards.
Policies
   4.H.1     Protect the health and safety of people and property in the city from natural
             hazards to the extent feasible.
   4.H.2     Protect the health and safety of people and property in the city from man-
             made hazards to the extent feasible.
   4.H.3     Protect sensitive land uses from encroachment by incompatible land uses.
   4.H.4     Increase citizen awareness of potential health and safety hazards in the city to
             the extent feasible.
Implementation Programs
   4.H.a     Designate Identified Flood Hazard Areas as Resource Management/Open
             Space
             Designate flood hazard areas, as identified by the Federal Emergency
             Management Agency or as refined through local studies, as Resource
             Management (“RM” general plan) and Open Space (“OS” zoning).
             Equivalent Program: 1Be (Land Use)
             Related Program: 1Be (Land Use), 4Ha (Conservation and Open Space)
             6Bd (Safety)
Angels Camp 2020 General Plan                Conservation and Open Space Element IV-53

                                                                                  February 3, 2009
  4.H.b     Coordinate with Appropriate Agencies and Private Landowners to
            Ensure Debris Removal in Streams to Reduce the Potential for Damage
            of Downstream Facilities (e.g., Bridges)
            Coordinate with appropriate local, state and/or federal agencies to ensure the
            removal of debris adjacent to bridges within the city limits that may result in
            damage and/or destruction of bridges, or damming at bridges, during flood
            events, thereby limiting emergency access into and out of the city. Update the
            city’s emergency response plan to address the emergency response priority
            associated with maintenance of the State Route 49 Bridge over Angels Creek.
            Consider preparation of standardized mitigation requirements on new
            development requiring management of stream debris in conjunction with
            monitoring vegetation clearances for fire safety. Consider facilitating
            acquisition of a master streambed alteration permit from the California
            Department of Fish and Game and/or obtain a Federal Clean Water Act
            Section 404 Permit to facilitate the removal of debris within drainage facilities
            adjacent to already developed private property to reduce the potential for
            damage to downstream facilities resulting from inadequate debris removal.
            Equivalent Programs: 6Bj (Public Safety), 7He (Public Facilities & Services)
            Related Programs: 6Be (Public Safety), 6Bf (Public Safety), 6Bh (Public Safety), 6Bj
            (Public Safety), 6Bk (Public Safety), 7Hb (Public Facilities & Services), 7Hd (Public
            Facilities & Services), 7He (Public Facilities & Services)
  4.H.c     Designate Areas Under High Voltage Power Lines as Resource
            Management - Open Space
            Designate areas under high voltage power lines as Resource Management
            (“RM” - General Plan) and Open Space (“OS” - Zoning). Consider
            incorporating these open spaces into the city’s recreation master plan for trails
            while maintaining private property rights.
  4.H.d     Identify Potential Construction Hazards
            Consolidate available information identifying areas that could present
            potential hazards during or after construction (e.g., unstable slopes, erosive
            soils, fault zones, fractured rock deposits, mine shafts or similar). This
            information should be illustrated on a single-source map for convenient
            reference.
Angels Camp 2020 General Plan                   Conservation and Open Space Element IV-54

                                                                                  February 3, 2009
  4.H.e     Protect the City’s Wastewater Treatment Facility from Conflicts with
            Incompatible Land Uses
            Designate and maintain compatible land uses surrounding the city’s
            wastewater treatment facilities, including spray fields. Coordinate with
            Calaveras County to initiate necessary changes to the county general plan to
            accomplish this purpose. Compatible county land use designations are those
            consistent with zoning districts requiring minimum parcel sizes of five acres
            or larger. Establish a boundary map surrounding the wastewater treatment
            plant indicating those areas that could affect or be affected by the treatment
            plant. Identify properties within this zone of potential effect and record
            notices to property owners recognizing the treatment plant’s right to exist and
            detailing the potential for objectionable odors (or other effects) that may be
            present as a result of living in close proximity to the treatment plant.
            Equivalent Programs: 1Bh (Land Use), 7Bf (Public Facilities)
            Related Programs: 1Hc (Land Use)
            See also: 2020 General Plan Map 1D: Proposed Changes to Calaveras County General
            Plan Land Use Designations within the Angels Camp Sphere of Influence
  4.H.f     Support the Expansion of Household Hazardous Waste Disposal
            Facilities
            Support the establishment of new or expansion of existing waste disposal
            facilities in or near the city limits that provide for the disposal of household
            hazardous wastes.
            Related Program: 6Dc (Public Safety)
  4.H.g     Pursue Preparation of Detailed Flood Zone Maps
            Identify funding sources and qualified agencies to prepare detailed flood zone
            maps establishing flood elevations throughout the city. Consider approaching
            the Resource Conservation & Development District to assist in preparing the
            maps.
            Equivalent Program: 6.B.m (Public Health & Safety)
            Related Programs: 6Bd (Public Safety), 6Bg (Public Safety), 6Bi (Public Safety)
Angels Camp 2020 General Plan                Conservation and Open Space Element IV-55

















                                                                                February 3, 2009
6.                Public Safety
        The snow lay deep on the Sierras, and every mountain creek became a river, and
        every river a lake. Each gorge and gulch was transformed into a tumultuous
        watercourse that descended the hillsides, tearing down giant trees and scattering its
        drift and debris along the plain. Red Dog had been twice under water, and Roaring
        Camp had been forewarned. ‘Water put the gold into them gulches,’ said Stumpy.
        ‘It’s been here once and will be here again’ And that night the North Fork suddenly
        leaped over its banks, and swept up the triangular valley of Roaring Camp.
                                              The Luck of Roaring Camp
                                              Francis Bret Harte (1836–1902)
Requirements
The Safety Element is a required element of the general plan. Pursuant to the California
Government Code Section 65302(g), the purpose of the Safety Element is to protect the
community from unreasonable risks associated with the effects of seismically induced
surface rupture, ground shaking, ground failure, tsunami, seiche, and dam failure; slope
instability leading to mudslides and landslides; and subsidence, liquefaction and other
seismic or geologic hazards known to the city. The element also must address flooding, and
wild land and urban fires.
The Safety Element must include mapping of known seismic and other geologic hazards,
address evacuation routes, military installations, peak load water supply requirements, and
minimum road widths and clearances around structures as those items relate to identified fire
and geologic hazards.
The element must be prepared after consultation with the Department of Conservation,
Division of Mines and Geology (now the California Geological Survey) and the Office of
Emergency Services. Prior to adoption, the Safety element must be submitted to the
California Geological Survey along with technical studies used in developing the element.
Angels Camp 2020 General Plan                                       Public Safety Element      VI-1

                                                                             February 3, 2009
Issues and Opportunities
Emergency/Disaster situations that could affect Angels Camp include:
   •  Geological Hazards (earthquakes, unstable slopes, collapsing mines, dissolving
      limestone, erosive soils, volcanic activity)
   •  Floods
   •  Hazardous Materials
   •  Fire
   •  Interruption or Contamination of Water Supply
   •  Transportation Accidents
   •  Severe Weather
   •  Agricultural Disasters
   •  Radiological Incidents
   •  Civil Disturbances
   •  Interruptions or Failures of Utilities or Other Infrastructure
Angels Camp 2020 General Plan                                    Public Safety Element      VI-2

                                                                                       February 3, 2009
Organization
For organizational purposes, this element is divided into the following sections:
                                            Table 6-1
                       Organization of Public Safety Element
Section             Issue                                        Description
6A        Geologic Hazards           Addresses seismically induced surface rupture, ground shaking,
                                     ground failure, tsunami, seiche, slope instability leading to
                                     mudslides and landslides, subsidence, liquefaction and other
                                     seismic or geologic hazards known to the City including those
                                     associated with collapsing mines. Volcanic activity also is
                                     addressed in this section.
6B        Flood Hazard and           Addresses the potential for flooding within the City and evaluates
          Dam Failure                the potential for dam failures to impact the City.
6C        Emergency Services         Addresses hospitals, ambulance (ground and air) services, and
          Plan & Emergency           evacuation routes.
          Services
6D        Hazardous Materials        Addresses those establishments identified within and near Angels
                                     Camp that store these materials and the potential for hazardous
                                     material spills.
6E        Water Supply,              Addresses peak load demand for Angels Camp and issues
          Utilities &                associated with water quality and water quantity during
                                     emergencies and addressing interruption of sewer services,
          Communications             electrical, communication, gas and other utility services.
6F        Transportation,            Addresses transportation accidents, severe weather, radiological
          Severe Weather,            incidents, and civil disturbances.
          Radiological
          Incidents, Civil
          Disturbances
   --     Fire Protection            Fire protection is addressed in the Public Facilities and Services
                                     Element of the Angels Camp General Plan (Chapter 7). That
                                     element addresses levels of service provided by the Angels Camp
                                     Fire Department and mutual aid agencies (e.g., California
                                     Department of Forestry and Fire Protection), including minimum
                                     road widths and clearances around structures.
   --     Law Enforcement            Law enforcement is addressed in the Public Facilities and Services
                                     Element of the Angels Camp General Plan (Chapter 7). That
                                     element addresses levels of service provided by the Angels Camp
                                     Police Department, Calaveras County Sheriff’s Department,
                                     California Highway Patrol and the County’s Court System.
   --     Military Installations     There are no military installations located in or near Angels Camp.
          Agricultural Disasters     Therefore, issues related to protection of military installations are
                                     not addressed herein. There are no commercial agricultural
                                     operations within the City, therefore, issues related to Agricultural
                                     disasters are not addressed herein.
Angels Camp 2020 General Plan                                          Public Safety Element               VI-3

                                                                             February 3, 2009
6A. Geologic Hazards
A. Seismic Hazards
Seismic hazards within Calaveras County include potential ground rupture, ground shaking,
and ground failure during earthquakes. Seismic hazards that could affect Angels Camp are
evaluated in the Calaveras County General Plan and summarized as follows:
Ground Rupture and Ground Shaking
Numerous fault systems have the potential to produce ground rupture and/or ground shaking
in Calaveras County and Angels Camp:
Sierran Frontal Fault System
The Sierran Frontal fault system is located along the eastern Sierra Nevada. The Carson
Valley fault, located within this system, passes within a few miles of the county’s highest
elevations and is considered capable of generating earthquakes of approximately magnitude
seven, which could be felt in Angels Camp.
Foothills Fault System
The Foothills Fault System extends across the lower elevations of Calaveras County between
Murphys and New Hogan Reservoir. The system includes two primary fault zones: the
Melones Fault Zone (along the eastern edge of the Foothill Fault System) and the Bear
Mountain Fault Zone (located on the western side of the Foothills Fault System). The
Melones Fault Zone is classified as active (i.e., has demonstrated displacement within the last
100,000 years). Based on historical data, the California Geologic Service determined that the
Melones Fault Zone is capable of generating a Richter 6.5 maximum credible earthquake
with an estimated recurrence of a strong quake along the fault to be on the order of 25,000
years (as compared to 250 years on the San Andreas Fault System).
San Andreas Fault System
All of the three primary branches of this fault system - the San Andreas Fault, the Hayward
Fault and the Calaveras Fault - are considered capable of affecting the county, primarily
through ground shaking.
Other Fault Systems
Less active faults existing between the Calaveras Fault and the western margin of the
Sacramento Valley include the Greenville Fault, which produced quakes of Magnitude 5.8
and 5.3 in January, 1980. Shaking from these quakes was felt in Calaveras County.
In summary, moderate rather than devastating quakes are likely to occur in the vicinity of
Angels Camp.
Angels Camp 2020 General Plan                                    Public Safety Element       VI-4

                                                                                 February 3, 2009
The International Conference of Building Officials (ICBO) designated all of the United
States into four zones based on likelihood of earthquake in the area. The larger the number
(1-4), the higher the likelihood of earthquake occurring. All of California is designated as
either Zone 3 or Zone 4. Calaveras County is located within Seismic Zone 3. The Uniform
Building Code (UBC) includes building standards for each zone with construction standards
for the strongest buildings able to withstand significant ground shaking required in Zone 4
with lesser standards for strength in Zone 1. Compliance with the construction standards of
the UBC (Current Edition) for Seismic Zone 3 reduces the likelihood of damage to structures
from ground shaking associated with moderate earthquakes in Angels Camp.
Typically, buildings constructed since the mid-1970s in accordance with modern codes have
performed well during earthquakes. However, many of the older buildings within Angels
Camp could be subject to damage as a result of earthquakes. Specifically:
    •   Concrete-frame structures, pre-1976. Angels Camp has relatively few buildings of
        this type and generally house industrial activities. Collapse of these buildings could
        create economic losses and potentially release hazardous materials. Strengthening
        these buildings is considered a relatively inexpensive procedure.
    •   Unreinforced Masonry Buildings. Many of these structures exist within the historic
        core of the city. Generally, retrofitting these buildings is expensive and requires
        special care to retain the historic integrity of the structure.
    •   Unbraced Parapets and Architectural Trim. While individual buildings may be
        structurally sound, architectural trim may present a hazard unless it is adequately
        attached or braced. Architectural trim is found on many of the structures within the
        city’s historic district.
Ground Failure
Ground shaking result in liquefaction, lateral spreading, lurching and differential settlement,
which may occur in unconsolidated, fine grained, water-saturated sediments typically found
in valleys. Based on the known geology and topography of the city, it is not anticipated that
these types of seismically-related ground failures would occur within the city unless
development has been located on incompetent fill materials. Soils disturbed by grading may
result in differential settlement of soils without proper implementation of engineered grading
plans.
Angels Camp 2020 General Plan                                        Public Safety Element      VI-5

                                                                  February 3, 2009
                                 Figure 6-1
                  Earthquake Shaking Potential for California
Angels Camp 2020 General Plan                         Public Safety Element      VI-6
                                                                             February 3, 2009
Seiches and Tsunami
Seiches are earthquake-generated waves within enclosed or restricted bodies of water such as
lakes or reservoirs. The waves are generated by oscillation or rocking back and forth (like
rocking in a bathtub until the “waves” grow large enough to spill out of the tub). Seiches are
most commonly observed in swimming pools during earthquakes (although swimming pools
normally hold insufficient water to create a threat to life and property from seiches). The
main body of the New Melones Reservoir is located nearly four miles south of the city and at
an elevation of more than 700 feet below that of Angels Camp. Therefore, even if a seiche
was generated within New Melones, is unlikely to present a hazard to Angels Camp. Further,
there is no evidence that seiches have ever occurred in lakes and reservoirs in the general
area. Therefore, seiches present an unlikely threat to Angels Camp.
Because Angels Camp has no land within proximity to a seacoast, there is no potential for
tsunami (i.e., tidal wave).
B. Geologic Hazards
Unstable Slopes/Landslides/Erosive Soils/Erosion
Soils within Angels Camp generally range between 12 and 100 inches deep, are well drained,
display moderately slow to moderately rapid permeability, and have a slight to moderate
erosion hazard. The potential for erosion of soils increases with the steepness of a slope.
Generally, slopes in excess of 30% present a high potential for slope failure/erosion. A few
of the areas within the City with slopes of 30% or greater are located along the banks of
Angels Creek and along Gold Cliff Road.
Grading activities remove natural vegetative cover that protects soils from erosion. As a
result, grading plans should include erosion control plans with a specified timeline for
implementation to reduce the erosion of soils.
Additional information pertaining to soils is found in the General Plan Conservation and
Open Space Element. 2020 General Plan Appendix 4E illustrates the distribution of the
various soil types present in the Angels Camp Sphere of Influence pursuant to the “Report
and General Soil Map, Calaveras County, California,” June, 1966, prepared by the USDA
Soil Conservation Service (now USDA Natural Resources Conservation Service). 2020
General Plan Appendices 4E and 4H describe characteristics of these soil types.
Angels Camp 2020 General Plan                                   Public Safety Element       VI-7

                                                                                   February 3, 2009
Subsidence and Differential Settlement – Mines
Subsidence is settling of the ground surface in response to fluid withdrawals, mine
excavations, solution cavity (i.e., cave) collapse or hyrdocompaction. Differential settlement
is a form of subsidence in which one soil mass settles at a different rate than an adjacent soil
mass.
Settlement due to fluid (e.g., oil, water) withdrawal is unlikely since oil deposits have not
been discovered in Calaveras County and sizeable withdrawals of groundwater by agriculture
does not exist on a large scale.
Past mining activity has created a subsurface system of miles of tunnels and shafts, primarily
excavated in hard rock. These tunnels and shafts have collapsed in the past and will continue
to collapse in the future as the tunnels and shafts continue to fill with water and supporting
timbers decay and crumble. It is likely that subsidence in the vicinity of water lines, sewer
lines, or drainage structures could also affect the ability of those facilities to function.
Limestone is found within the Angels Camp Sphere of Influence; however, it is believed
absent within the city limits. Limestone is a generic term for carbonate bedrock subject to
solution cavities (i.e., the formation of “caves”) when limestone is dissolved by groundwater.
If these “caves” are located near the ground surface, collapse can occur, resulting in sink
holes. Similarly, the location of private septic systems within limestone areas is problematic
due to the drainage of sewage into caves, with minimal leaching, and ultimately into
groundwater. Because new development within the city is required to connect to a public
sewer system, the threat of groundwater contamination from septic systems is unlikely.
Differential settlement occurs when a structurally incompetent man-made or natural fill area
is located adjacent to a competent fill or bedrock. Foundation loads spanning the two
differing soil masses may be supported unequally, resulting in uneven settling of the
foundation. This can be avoided through proper evaluation of soils prior to construction with
testing and foundation engineering employed to resolve the problem prior to construction.
Volcanic Activity
There are no active volcanoes identified in Calaveras County. However, volcanic eruptions
from Mammoth Lakes, located approximately 85 air miles (160± driving miles) southeast of
the city, could occur. Explosive eruptions would create volcanic ash or streams of hot ash
and rock mixed with hot gases into the air. Non-explosive eruptions could result in lava
flows and domes with associated gas emissions.
Angels Camp is most likely to be impacted by the clouds of volcanic ash that could result
from an eruption at Mammoth Lakes (an ash layer of up to a few inches and including
anything from fine dust to fist-size rocks). For comparative purposes, the eruption of Mount
St. Helens in 1980 spread ash over an area of 22,000 square miles with a one-inch layer of
Angels Camp 2020 General Plan                                      Public Safety Element          VI-8

                                                                            February 3, 2009
ash within a 60 mile radius downwind and a half-inch layer of ash within 300 miles of the
eruption. Large rock fragments are likely to blow only six miles from the volcano and
therefore are not expected to impact Angels Camp.
Ash from one-half to a few inches thick could:
    •   Halt traffic (clogging engines)
    •   Disrupt electrical services, transportation, business,          water   supply    and
        communications services
    •   Hamper visibility
    •   Create darkness (depending on severity of the eruption)
    •   Affect those with respiratory problems
    •   Muddy water
    •   Result in chemical contamination of water
    •   Cause rapid wearing of machinery
    •   Clog air filters
    •   Block drains and water intakes
    •   Injure vegetation
    •   Generate electrical storms (potentially starting fires         or  disrupting   radio
        communications)
    •   Short-circuit electrical systems (damp ash)
Unlike earthquake or wildland fires, for which many city residents have had some limited
experience, most city residents would be unlikely to know how to respond to a volcanic
eruption [e.g., close and lock windows and exterior doors; turn off fans, heating and air
conditioning systems; close the fireplace damper; go to an interior room without windows;
bring in pets; use duct tape and plastic sheeting (heavier than food wrap) to seal all cracks
around the door and vents into the room]. To assist in reducing panic and facilitating self-
help in emergency situations, the city should consider citizen preparedness in its emergency
response planning efforts.
Angels Camp 2020 General Plan                                   Public Safety Element       VI-9

                                                                                           February 3, 2009
6B. Flood Hazard & Dam Failure
Flooding may occur from heavy, prolonged rain and/or rapid spring thaw. Widespread or
localized flooding could involve extensive life and property loss, interruption of
transportation and communication systems, and similar facilities. Primary waterways within
the Angels Camp Sphere of Influence include:
                                                Table 6-2
                              Streams, Tributaries within the
                City of Angels Sphere of Influence and Area of Interest
    Stream Name                   USGS                         Headwaters                  Destination
                            Classification/a/
Six Mile Creek          Perennial                       T3N, R14E, Sec 8              Melones Reservoir,
                                                        (just above Six-mile          Stanislaus River
                                                        Ranch)
Indian Creek            Intermittent                    T3N, R13E, Sec. 25            Melones Reservoir,
                                                                                      Stanislaus River
Angels Creek            Perennial (portions)            T4N, R14E, Sec. 26            Melones Reservoir,
                        Intermittent (portions)                                       Stanislaus River
Greenhorn Creek         Intermittent                    T3N, R13E, Sec 28, 32,        Melones Reservoir,
                                                        33                            Stanislaus River
Cherokee Creek          Perennial                       T3N, R13E, Sec. 20            Hogan Reservoir,
                                                                                      Calaveras River
Utica Ditch             Perennial                       North Fork of the             Murphys Forebay,
                                                        Stanislaus 21 miles above     Angels Forebay
                                                        Murphys Forebay
Jupiter Ditch           Perennial                       T3N, R13E, Sec. 20            Utica Ditch
                                                        Reservoir
Lone Gulch              Intermittent                    T3N, R13E, Secs. 20, 30       T3N, R12E, Sec. 24
                                                                                      Reservoir to San
                                                                                      Domingo Creek and
                                                                                      Calaveras River
San Domingo Creek       Perennial (portions)            Stanislaus National Forest    South Fork of the
                        Intermittent (portions)         near Hathaway Pines.          Calaveras River to
                                                        T4N, R15E, Sec. 19            New Hogan Reservoir
                                                        A tributary originates west
                                                        of Avery in T4N, R15E,
                                                        Sec. 12
New Melones             --                              Headwaters of the             --
Reservoir                                               Stanislaus River and the
                                                        headwaters of multiple
                                                        creeks
/a/ Definitions
Perennial:               Normally flows almost year-round (usually at least into early summer)
Intermittent:            Normally flows in the spring, fall and winter during the rainy season
Ephemeral:               Flows primarily in association with a storm event
Angels Camp 2020 General Plan                                              Public Safety Element          VI-10
                                                                               February 3, 2009
Other water bodies within the city’s planning area include:
       The City’s Water Treatment Plant
       The City’s Wastewater Treatment Plant
       Union Public Utility District Water Treatment Plant
       Ross Reservoir
       Holman Reservoir
The flood potential of theses waterways and water bodies within Angels Camp was evaluated
by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) National Flood Insurance Program
in 1997 and resulted in the designation of the flood zones within the Angels Camp Sphere of
Influence (2020 General Plan Appendix 4I).
Dam Failure
Dam failure could occur in one of the many large or small dams in Calaveras County, which
could cause loss of life and property, flooding, interruption of transportation (in particular the
Highway 4/49 bridges at the southern end of the city), communication systems, etc.
Large dam failures that could ultimately inundate portions of the city include those at the
Utica Reservoir (formed by five small dams located upstream of the North Fork Diversion
Dam and holding 2,334 acre feet), Union Reservoir (located upstream of the Utica Reservoir
and formed by seven small dams and containing 3,130 acre feet), and Lake Alpine (a series
of five small dams forming a 4,117 acre-foot reservoir). These facilities are operated by the
Northern California Power Agency (NCPA) as part of NCPA’s Upper Utica Project, which is
located in the Stanislaus National Forest and managed by the U.S. Forest Service. These
reservoirs regulate water flows for downstream power generation.
The New Spicer Meadow Reservoir is part of the North Fork Stanislaus River Hydroelectric
Project, which is operated by the NCPA in cooperation with the licensee, the Calaveras
County Water District (CCWD). Failure of dams at this reservoir also could impact Angels
Camp. The facility holds 4,060 acre feet of water.
FERC regulations require the operators of these reservoirs to prepare an inundation map
indicating areas that could be affected by dam failure. Those maps indicate flooding would
occur within the existing Stanislaus River basin without overtopping the river banks, and
without impacts to Angels Camp.
Failure of the dam at Ross Reservoir has the potential to inundate French Gulch and the Utica
Ditch. The capacity of Ross Reservoir is unknown. An analysis of the potential threat to
people and property within Angels Camp from a failure of the Ross Reservoir Dam has not
been conducted.
Angels Camp 2020 General Plan                                     Public Safety Element         VI-11

                                                                               February 3, 2009
Failure of the dam at Holman Reservoir (the city’s wastewater treatment facility) would
result in flows into Angels Creek downstream of the city. While this failure would affect
water quality within Angels Creek, it is not anticipated to create a threat to life or property
within the city limits. Further, the city’s drinking water supply is located well up-stream of
the facility and is unlikely to be affected by failure of the Holman Reservoir dam.
Results of a failure of the dam at the Union Public Utility District Water Treatment facility
located near Murphys has not been studied, but could result in inundation of portions of the
city.
6C. Emergency Services Plan & Emergency Services
Emergency Operations Plan, Hazard Management Plan and Local Hazard Mitigation Plan
The Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) requires the preparation of three
primary emergency response plans as follows:
    •   The Emergency Operations Plan - which addresses the organizational structure of the
        local jurisdiction and how each component of the organization responds to
        emergencies
    •   The Local Hazard Mitigation Plan - which identifies the likely threats to the region
    •   Hazard Management Plan - which identifies how the local jurisdiction will respond to
        an emergency
The Multi-Agency Coordination Group (MAC) is a multi-agency, multi-jurisdictional team
that sets the objectives for emergency operations within the county and makes final decisions
relative to the preceding plans. The Angels Camp Police Chief represents the city on this
agency. The group meets monthly or bi-monthly.
The Calaveras County Office of Emergency Services is located at the county airport. The
operational area coordinator for emergency response for the county is a representative of the
Calaveras County Sheriff’s Offices.
Calaveras County prepared and adopted the Calaveras County Multihazard Function Plan
(aka Emergency Operations Plan) in 1992 with an update in 1999. Calaveras County is
working in cooperation with Angels Camp to complete a Hazard Management Plan (a new
component of emergency response planning required by FEMA). Angels Camp does not
currently have either an emergency operations plan or a local hazard mitigation plan to guide
Angels Camp 2020 General Plan                                     Public Safety Element       VI-12

                                                                            February 3, 2009
emergency situation response.
In addition, the 39th District Agricultural Association adopted an “Emergency Policy
Manual” in 1991 to guide emergency operations at the Calaveras County Fairgrounds in the
event of emergency.
Emergency Medical Services
Calaveras County has one hospital, located at 768 Mountain Ranch Road, San Andreas.
Mark Twain St. Joseph’s Hospital is a 48-bed hospital owned and operated by Catholic
Healthcare West. Four satellite medical centers are operated by the hospital. As of 2005, the
facility in Angels Camp is open seven days a week from 9:00 a.m. - 5:30 p.m.
Emergency medical response services are provided within the City by the Angels Camp Fire
Department and one private ambulance company. Ground ambulance service is provided in
Angels Camp by American Legion Ambulance Service. One ambulance is routinely
stationed in Angels Camp on Bush Street, near Utica Park. Ambulances are staffed by at
lease one paramedic per ambulance.
Air ambulance services are provided by multiple private air ambulance services transporting
patients to Modesto, Sacramento, University of California Davis Medical Center and other
hospitals.
American Red Cross
The American Red Cross provides disaster relief and recovery in Calaveras County and
within Angels Camp. The Red Cross is most frequently called upon to provide relief to
residents who have lost their home in a fire, although the agency also provides relief for
large-scale disasters.
The Red Cross also trains local volunteers, assisting in the development of Citizen
Emergency Response Teams (CERTs) and provides Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation (CPR),
Auto External Defibrillator (AED) and First Aid training for individuals and professionals.
Historically, there have been few or no citizens within the City Limits completing CERT
training and few residents in unincorporated Calaveras County have completed CERT
training. The existing CERT members are under the supervision of the Calaveras County
Office of Emergency Services. CERTs can be established to assist small populations such as
a residential subdivision, mobilehome parks, or even a city. Team members receive ongoing
training. There is no minimum number of individuals required to form a CERT.
Angels Camp 2020 General Plan                                  Public Safety Element        VI-13

                                                                               February 3, 2009
6D. Hazardous Materials
Hazardous materials that could be encountered as a result of a spill or release within the city
include:
    •    Herbicides
    •    Pesticides
    •    Chemicals in gaseous, liquid and solid form
    •    Flammable explosives
    •    Petroleum products
    •    Toxic Waste
    •    Radioactive substances
    •    Mining wastes
Hazardous materials may be associated with transportation accidents or occur in a fixed
production or storage facility. Both accidental and sabotage-related releases are possible as
are ones from clandestine drug labs. Countywide, the three highest risks from hazardous
materials have been identified as: hazardous waste from drug labs, roadside abandonment of
equipment containing hazardous materials from the San Joaquin Valley (in an effort to avoid
disposal costs), and the potential for chlorine gas leaks from water and wastewater treatment
facilities. Both short-term and long-term contamination of an affected area is possible
depending upon the situation.
In addition, historic mining activity included the treatment of extracted ore, the “tailings,”
with mercury, cyanide, and other hazardous materials. In addition, the processing of mined
ore tended to concentrate naturally occurring arsenic, copper, zinc and similar materials. The
processed “tailings” were typically discharged directly into creeks and streambeds and
sometimes into holding or settling ponds. Discharge points of processed mining waste
represent a potential hazard through activities that displace or dislodge these materials.
The Calaveras County Health Department, Division of Environmental Health is the Certified
Unified Program Agency (CUPA) with oversight of hazardous materials for Calaveras
County. The county also is responsible for review and approval of Hazardous Materials
Business Plans required of those businesses and facilities storing or using hazardous
materials. The city responds to calls related to hazardous material spills or releases and calls
on the Calaveras County Environmental Health Department for support, if needed. The
primary responder for hazardous material-related calls within the city is the Angels Camp
Fire Department with assistance from the Calaveras County Hazmat/OES for larger spills and
releases. The California Highway Patrol may assist with roadway spills of hazardous
materials.
Angels Camp 2020 General Plan                                     Public Safety Element       VI-14

                                                                            February 3, 2009
Household Hazardous Waste:
The City of Angels has adopted the Multi-Jurisdictional Household Hazardous Waste
Element, prepared in cooperation with Calaveras County in 1996. The goals of the
Household Hazardous Waste Element are to reduce the amount of household hazardous
waste generated through reuse and recycling; diversion of materials from landfills; promoting
alternatives to toxic household products; and educating the public regarding household
hazardous waste management.
Calaveras County offers an annual household hazardous waste drop-off day at the county
fairgrounds located just south of Angels Camp. This provides the only opportunity for
Angels Camp residents to dispose of household hazardous wastes without traveling a long
distance to the Rock Creek transfer station in Milton.
The county is investigating an expansion of the Red Hill facility to allow disposal of
universal waste, which would permit the site to accept some classes of household hazardous
wastes for city residents.
6E. Water Supply, Utilities & Communications
Water supply during non-emergency situations is addressed in the Public Facilities and
Services Element (Chapter 7) of the Angels Camp General Plan. Water supply during
emergency situations is addressed herein.
The water supply for Angels Camp originates on the watershed of the North Fork of the
Stanislaus River. During the winter months, water is stored in four reservoirs in the High
Sierra near Ebbetts Pass Highway (State Route 4). These reservoirs are: Alpine, Utica,
Union, and Spicer, which have a combined storage of 13,643 acre feet.
Water from these reservoirs is released down the North Fork of the Stanislaus River and its
tributaries, where it is diverted into the Utica Ditch. The Utica Ditch is a twenty-one mile
ditch system that terminates at the Murphys Forebay. The water in the forebay then enters
the Murphys Penstock and is used for generating electric power at the Murphys Powerhouse,
which is located on the eastern edge of the town of Murphys.
After the water passes through the Murphys Powerhouse, it enters Angels Creek (a.k.a.
Murphys Creek) and is diverted into the Angels Ditch just below Murphys. This 5.5 mile
ditch delivers water through Ross Reservoir to the Angels Forebay, which is the raw water
take-out point for the Angels Water Treatment Plan. Water not used by the Angels Water
Treatment Plant is used for power generation through the Angels Powerhouse.
Angels Camp 2020 General Plan                                  Public Safety Element       VI-15
                                                                                February 3, 2009
The city provides public water to its residents. The city maintains a water treatment and
storage facility northeast of the city limits off of Murphys Grade Road.
Emergency situations related to water supply are associated with water quantity and quality.
Water
The current peak load water demand for Angels Camp is approximately 2 million gallons per
day. A single water storage facility provides water for Angels Camp and is located outside
the city limits off Murphys Grade Road. The system stores 2.5 million gallons providing
between 1 and 1.25 days of water (peak demand) in the event of an emergency that disrupts
the water distribution system.
A failure of the county’s more than 21 miles of water supply ditches, damage to the city’s
water storage facility, contamination of water supplies within upstream reservoirs, or drought
could result in a full or partial loss of water supply to the city.
In September 2001, the Darby Fire burned through a wooden trestle and the Utica Flume,
supporting a portion of the Utica Ditch (a part of the Calaveras County water supply system)
nearly rendering Angels Camp without water (Ross Reservoir remained as a water supply
reserve for the city) and illustrating the vulnerability of water supply systems dependent upon
ditch distribution.
Drought occurs in approximately 7-to-11-year cycles in Calaveras County. Chapter 14.90 of
the City of Angels Municipal Code addresses emergency water conservation and was
originally intended to address drought situations. The chapter addresses Phase I conservation
(mandatory conservation with public notification) and Phase II conservation (restricted use of
potable water) including limits on watering gardens, washing vehicles, and water wasting.
Naturally occurring contamination (e.g., chemical, bacteriological, parasitic), accidental
spills or sabotage also could affect water quality.
Utility Failures
Utility facilities within the city include liquid petroleum, electricity, water (see above), and
sewage disposal. Interruptions to utility services delivered through above or below-ground
pipelines, ditches or electrical lines could suffer service interruptions from earthquakes,
floods, fire, wind storms, landslides, system (mechanical) failures, sabotage or similar events.
Angels Camp 2020 General Plan                                       Public Safety Element      VI-16

                                                                                   February 3, 2009
6F.       Transportation, Severe Weather, Radiological Incidents, Civil
       Disturbance
Transportation Accidents (including aircraft and rail accidents)
Major east-west commercial air transportation routes pass directly over parts of Calaveras
County. The Calaveras County Airport, located north of the city, serves the needs of private
aircraft. From June through mid-October, the California Department of Forestry and Fire
Protection operates firefighting aircraft out of the Columbia Airport Air Attack Base south of
the city.
Crash, derailment, or collision involving aircraft, truck, or other passenger or cargo vehicles
could occur within the city limits. Transportation accidents resulting in spills of hazardous
materials are addressed in the Hazardous Materials portion of this element.
Railroads
There are no major rail lines that pass in or near Angels Camp.
Severe Weather
Severe weather may occur in the form of wind, rain, snow, ice, extreme cold or heat and/or
thunder storms. Calaveras County (including Angels Camp) also has (on rare occasions)
been subject to tornado warnings. All of theses conditions could result in loss in life and
property, and interruption of transportation and communication systems.
Agricultural Disasters
Any natural or man-caused event interrupting the growing cycle is likely to adversely impact
agriculture in the county. Widespread agricultural damage could be caused by blight,
chemical spills, drought, fire, flood, hail, or infestations. Agriculture within the city limits is
minimal. Therefore, disasters affecting agriculture are unlikely to directly affect Angels
Camp.
Radiological Incidents
Radiological incidents may be caused by either a nuclear attack or peace-time emergency.
Calaveras County and Angels Camp would not likely experience any of the direct effects of
nuclear detonation (i.e., blast, shock, fires) as it lacks the military, industrial and commercial
facilities likely to be targeted. Also, the city is not located along a designated radiological
materials transportation route.
Civil Disturbances
Public demonstrations tied to conflicts focused towards government agencies or policies,
businesses involved in labor disputes, or religion-based disputes may occur in the county.
The San Andreas Government Center is recognized as one of the most likely locations for
civil disorder to occur. The location within the city limits most likely to support large
congregations of persons expressing civil disobedience is Utica Park.
Angels Camp 2020 General Plan                                       Public Safety Element         VI-17
                                                                            February 3, 2009
GOALS, POLICIES AND IMPLEMENTATION PROGRAMS
6A. Geologic Hazards
Goal 6.A    Protect persons and property from geologic hazards.
Policies
   6.A.1    Assess and keep appraised of the potential risks to persons and property from
            geological hazards within, or with the potential to affect the city.
   6.A.2    Reduce exposure to risks in hazardous areas by directing development away
            from these areas.
   6.A.3    Provide guidance to citizens regarding preparing for and responding to
            emergencies related to earthquakes, volcanic eruptions and other geological
            hazards that may affect the city.
   6.A.4    Make emergency preparedness a city priority and keep the city’s emergency
            response plan updated.
Implementation Programs
   6.A.a    Prepare an Emergency Operations Plan and Local Hazard Mitigation
            Plan for the City
            Using the guidelines provided by the State Office of Emergency Services and
            the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA), prepare an emergency
            operations plan and local hazard mitigation plan for Angels Camp. A draft
            plan should be completed by December 31, 2008. Anticipated contents of the
            Emergency Operations Plan may include, but are not limited to:
            Administration: including responsibilities of government during disaster,
            emergency plan authorities and references, comprehensive emergency
            management planning, the incident command system, continuity of
            government, and preservation of records.
            Management Functions and Responsibilities: including activation of the
            Emergency Service Plan, resource management, assignment of
            responsibilities, mutual aid, incident command system, emergency operations
            center, emergency alerting and broadcast system, emergency broadcast system
Angels Camp 2020 General Plan                                 Public Safety Element        VI-18

                                                                                  February 3, 2009
            procedures, emergency public information, evacuation, emergency shelter and
            feeding, donation management, medical care, public health, mass casualties,
            mass fatalities, and recovery.
            Hazard Specific Operations: including aircraft accidents, agricultural
            disasters, civil disturbance, earthquake, flood/dam failure, hazardous
            materials, major fire, radiological incidents, severe weather, utility failure,
            volcanic activities, water supply and impacts related to population influxes
            resulting from regional disasters.
            The Local Hazard Mitigation Plan should consider, but not be limited to
            consideration of, the following threats: provision of adequate water supply
            during emergency situations, identifying evacuation routes (including
            identification of evacuation routes in response to destruction of highway
            bridges), earthquakes, volcanic eruptions, flooding, inundation from dam
            failures (in particular local dams and reservoirs that are not regulated by the
            Federal Energy Regulatory Commission), transportation accidents (air and
            highway), civil disturbance, acts of terrorism, agricultural disaster, major fires,
            radiological incidents, severe weather, utility failures, contamination of water
            supply (biological or chemical), hazardous materials (including, in particular,
            hazardous materials associated with drug labs, roadside abandonments and the
            release of chlorine in association with water and wastewater treatment
            facilities) and other threats as may be identified. The plan should integrate
            with regional and state emergency plans.
            Equivalent Programs: 6Ba (Public Safety), 6Ca (Public Safety), 6Da (Public Safety), 6Ea
            (Public Safety), 6Fa (Public Safety)
            Related program: 6Cc (Public Safety)
  6.A.b     Continue to Participate in the Preparation and Implementation of the
            County/City Hazard Management Plan
            Continue to participate in the preparation and implementation of the
            county/city Hazard Management Plan.
            Equivalent Programs: 6Bb (Public Safety), 6Cb (Public Safety), 6Db (Public Safety), 6Eb
            (Public Safety), 6Fb (Public Safety)
  6.A.c     Investigate the Cost of Requiring New Development to Map Potential
            Underground Hazards
            Investigate the costs of requiring new development to map mines and tunnels
            beneath proposed new development. Evaluate whether or not the risk posed
            by potential subsidence is substantial enough that new development should
            incur the costs and routinely assess and mitigate these potential hazards.
            Related Programs: 6Ad (Public Safety), 7Hf (Public Facilities & Services)
Angels Camp 2020 General Plan                                     Public Safety Element          VI-19
                                                                                  February 3, 2009
  6.A.d     Acquire Maps of Areas Posing a Potential Hazard From Mine or Tunnel
            Collapse
            Acquire a set of maps of historical mines within the city limits to assist in
            identifying potential hazards to existing and new development. Examples of
            maps that may assist in identifying historic mines include: Government Land
            Office (GLO) maps, United States Geological Survey topographical maps,
            and Sanborn maps.
            Related Programs: 6Ac (Public Safety), 7Hf (Public Facilities & Services)
  6.A.e     Require New Development to Evaluate Geotechnical Hazards
            Require new development located within areas of unstable slopes, above
            underground tunnels, or within 100 feet of a fault rupture zone, or exhibiting
            evidence of significant subsidence, erosion potential or similar geologic
            hazard, to conduct an evaluation of potential geotechnical hazards. Adopt
            standards for consultants qualified to prepare such reports and content of
            reports.
  6.A.f     Require Geotechnical Hazard Evaluations for Critical Use and High
            Occupancy Structures
            Require developers of dams and critical use and high occupancy structures
            (e.g., schools, hospitals) to undertake geologic and seismic studies to locate all
            capable fault traces. Require development located within 100 feet of capable
            fault zones to demonstrate that project design and construction will
            accommodate an expected fault offset of the county’s design earthquake and
            continue to function.
  6.A.g     Continue to Enforce the Provisions of the Uniform Building Code
            Continue to enforce the provisions of the Uniform Building Code to ensure
            adequate building standards to withstand maximum credible earthquakes in
            the area.
Angels Camp 2020 General Plan                                     Public Safety Element          VI-20

                                                                               February 3, 2009
  6.A.h     Encourage Rehabilitation of Old Buildings
            Amend the City of Angels Municipal Code to address work undertaken on old
            buildings that require seismic stabilization (e.g., unreinforced masonry
            buildings) and the need to maintain the historic integrity of those buildings
            consistent with the Secretary of the Interior’s Standards for the Treatment of
            Historic Properties (2020 General Plan Appendix 8A). In addition, the
            amendment should address bracing or stabilizing, rather than removing,
            architectural features on buildings for seismic safety.
            The amendment should address the city’s policy towards Unreinforced
            Masonry Buildings (URMs) and voluntary versus non-voluntary measures that
            the city may request in conjunction with the rehabilitation of URMs consistent
            with California Government Code Section 8875 et seq., the 1997 National
            Earthquake Hazards Reduction Program Provisions for the Development of
            Seismic Regulations for New Buildings (NEHRP Provisions), the Uniform
            Building Code, Executive Order 12699 (Seismic Safety of Federal and
            Federally Assisted or Regulated New Building Construction), State Historic
            Building Code, and other applicable codes (See also 2020 General Plan
            Appendix 8I).
            Equivalent Program: 8By (Cultural Resources)
            Related Programs: 2Ca (Housing), 2Cg (Housing), 2Cm (Housing), 8Bd (Cultural
            Resources), 8Bt (Cultural Resources), 10Aj (Economic Development)
  6.A.i     Designate Identified Hazard Areas Through Appropriate Zoning Where
            Feasible
            Zone areas within 100 feet of capable fault areas or other identified geological
            hazard areas as Open Space (OS), Parks and Recreation (REC) or, if
            appropriate, Public (P) (e.g., land owned by the United States Bureau of
            Reclamation). Allow recreational uses without structures (e.g., trails) within
            hazard zones where appropriate.
Angels Camp 2020 General Plan                                      Public Safety Element      VI-21

                                                                               February 3, 2009
  6.A.j     Draft a Hillside Management Ordinance
            Draft a hillside management ordinance establishing acceptable hillside slope-
            related densities and alternatives for hillside construction standards that
            reduce grading and other adverse environmental impacts. The ordinance
            should address infill development on city lots (in particular, those lots
            established prior to the adoption of the city’s development standards for
            creating new parcels) and the appropriateness of setbacks, lot sizes, road
            widths, road-related facilities (e.g., bike ways, sidewalks), parking standards
            and related development standards.
            Provisions of a Hillside Management Ordinance should be combined with
            those of a Grading Ordinance to the maximum extent feasible. [2020
            GENERAL PLAN MITIGATION MEASURE, MM-SCENIC-02, MM-
            WATER QUALITY-02, MM-GEOLOGY-02, MM-COMMUNITY-02]
            In the absence of a Hillside Management Ordinance, or equivalent,
            applications for new development of one acre or more on slopes averaging
            10% or greater, will, at a minimum, be accompanied by a grading plan
            indicating, at a minimum, the amount of soil to be disturbed; a tree plan
            indicating the number, size, species and location of trees to be removed and
            proposals for replacing trees; a vegetation management plan and revegetation
            plans. [2020 GENERAL PLAN MITIGATION MEASURE, MM-
            SCENIC-02, MM-WATER QUALITY-02, MM-GEOLOGY-02, MM-
            COMMUNITY-02]
            Equivalent Programs: 1Ce (Land Use), 2Bj (Housing), 3Ec (Circulation), 11Bd (Economic
            Development)
  6.A.k     Require Engineering Studies for Development in Unstable Areas, Soil
            Testing for Expansive Soils
            [2020 GENERAL PLAN MITIGATION MEASURE, MM-GEOLOGY-
            03]
            Require engineering studies to evaluate development in unstable areas (e.g.,
            slopes exceeding 30%). Evaluate the effects of grading on slope stability
            including standards limiting fill slopes to 2:1 unless a registered civil engineer
            or certified engineering geologist can demonstrate that the fill slope will be
            stable and not prone to erosion. Require soil testing on soils with a moderate
            to high potential for expansion.        The city engineer may further require
            engineering studies on erosive soils of testing indicates that necessity.
            Related Programs: 1Ee (Land Use), 6Am (Safety), 9Ad (Air Quality), 11Ad (Community
            Identity)
Angels Camp 2020 General Plan                                   Public Safety Element          VI-22

                                                                             February 3, 2009
  6.A.l     Prepare a Grading Ordinance/Promote Best Management Practices
            Prepare a grading ordinance addressing: when a grading permit is required,
            when a grading plan shall be prepared, required contents of a grading plan,
            anticipated grades before and after construction, the total amount of soil to be
            removed, location and design of retaining walls, erosion control standards,
            preparation of erosion control plans, recommended erosion control methods,
            soil disposal, vegetation retention, revegetation, drainage, requirements for
            erosion and sediment control plans and other elements, as identified. The
            ordinance, or a companion publication (either prepared as an original
            publication or adopted from existing publications), should be prepared/
            adopted in conjunction with the grading ordinance and illustrate best
            management practices. Resources for Best Management Practices are listed
            in 2020 General Plan Appendix 4C.
            The ordinance should further establish that no grading permit or permits to
            allow grading or vegetation removal of more than ten percent of a parcel shall
            be issued until a site plan, development plan, building permit or other
            entitlement has been issued for a specific development project unless
            otherwise necessary for reasons of health and safety as declared by the city.
            [2020 GENERAL PLAN MITIGATION MEASURE MM-SCENIC-01,
            MM-WATER QUALITY-01, MM-GEOLOGY-01, MM-COMMUNITY-
            01]
            The grading ordinance should further specify that applications for
            discretionary entitlements for development of one acre or more on slopes
            averaging 10% or greater, will, at a minimum, be accompanied by a grading
            plan indicating, at least, the amount of soil to be disturbed; a tree plan
            indicating the number, size, species and location of trees to be removed and
            proposals for replacing trees; a vegetation management plan and revegetation
            plans.     [2020 GENERAL PLAN MITIGATION MEASURE MM-
            SCENIC-01, MM-WATER QUALITY-01, MM-GEOLOGY-01, MM-
            COMMUNITY-01]
            Provisions of a Grading Ordinance should be combined with those of a
            Hillside Management Ordinance to the maximum extent feasible. [2020
            GENERAL PLAN MITIGATION MEASURE MM-SCENIC-01, MM-
            WATER QUALITY-01, MM-GEOLOGY-01, MM-COMMUNITY-01]
            Equivalent Programs: 1Cf (Land Use), 4Cf (Conservation & Open Space), 4Ga
            (Conservation & Open Space), 11Ac (Community Identity)
Angels Camp 2020 General Plan                                    Public Safety Element      VI-23
                                                                               February 3, 2009
  6.A.m     Establish Standards for Erosion and Dust Control
            Establish and adopt standards for erosion and dust control to be included as
            conditions of approval, conditions of site development or to be otherwise
            attached as requirements of entitlements issued by the city, as necessary to
            reduce dust and erosion during construction activities. Methods to be
            addressed include, but are not limited to:
                     •   Revegetating cut and fill slopes
                     •   Hydroseeding
                     •   Re-vegetation using native grasses
                     •   Use of on-site water trucks or similar devices during non-
                         precipitation periods to control dust emissions and maintain water
                         quality during demolitions, construction, or other dust-generating
                         activities
                     •   Installation of erosion control devices (e.g., silt fences, hay bales)
                         prior to the rainy season
                     •   Measures for protecting soil stability (See 2020 General Plan
                         Program 6Ak)
                     •   Tire-washing stations for trucks leaving construction sites
            Equivalent Programs: 1Ee (Land Use), 9Ad (Air Quality), 11Ad (Community Identity)
            Related Program: 6Ak (Public Safety)
  6.A.n     Keep Appraised of New Seismic Information
            Continue to monitor the Department of Conservation, California Geological
            Survey website for release of ground shaking maps for Angels Camp and
            Calaveras County. Update emergency plans and the Safety Element, as
            necessary, in response to the release of new data.
  6.A.o     Provide Emergency Response/Preparation Guidelines for Citizens on The
            Angels Camp City Website
            Provide a link from the city’s website to the Federal Emergency Management
            Agency (FEMA) website regarding emergency response procedures for
            citizens. Provide handouts to the public for citizen emergency response
            procedures available from FEMA. 2020 General Plan Appendix 6A provides
            a list of some sources of emergency response preparedness information.
            Equivalent Programs: 6Bl (Public Safety), 6Cg (Public Safety), 6De (Public Safety), 6Ec
            (Public Safety), 6Fc (Public Safety)
Angels Camp 2020 General Plan                                   Public Safety Element            VI-24

                                                                          February 3, 2009
6B. Flood Hazard & Dam Failure
Goal 6.B    Protect persons and property from flooding and inundation from dam failures.
Policies
   6.B.1    Make emergency preparedness a city priority.
   6.B.2    Keep the city’s emergency response plan updated to reflect the most current
            information available regarding the potential risks to persons and property
            from flooding and inundation from dam failures within the city.
   6.B.3    Provide guidance to citizens for preparing for and responding to floods and
            inundation from dam failures affecting the city.
   6.B.4    Evaluate and minimize potential impacts of new development on drainage
            facilities and downstream property.
Implementation Programs
   6.B.a    Prepare an Emergency Operations Plan and Local Hazard Mitigation
            Plan For the City
            Using the guidelines provided by the State Office of Emergency Services and
            the Federal Emergency Management Agency, prepare an emergency
            operations plan and local hazard mitigation plan for Angels Camp. A draft
            plan should be completed by December 31, 2008. Anticipated contents of the
            Emergency Operations Plan may include, but are not limited to:
            Administration: including responsibilities of government during disaster,
            emergency plan authorities and references, comprehensive emergency
            management planning, the incident command system, continuity of
            Government, and preservation of records.
            Management Functions and Responsibilities: including activation of the
            Emergency Service Plan, resource management, assignment of
            responsibilities, mutual aid, incident command system, emergency operations
            center, emergency alerting and broadcast system, emergency broadcast system
            procedures, emergency public information, evacuation, emergency shelter and
            feeding, donation management, medical care, public health, mass casualties,
            mass fatalities, and recovery.
            Hazard Specific Operations:          including aircraft accidents, agricultural
Angels Camp 2020 General Plan                                Public Safety Element       VI-25

                                                                               February 3, 2009
            disasters, civil disturbance, earthquake, flood/dam failure, hazardous
            materials, major fire, radiological incidents, severe weather, utility failure,
            volcanic activities, water supply and impacts related to population influxes
            resulting from regional disasters.
            The Local Hazard Mitigation Plan should consider, but not be limited to
            consideration of, the following threats: provision of adequate water supply
            during emergency situations, identifying evacuation routes (including
            identification of evacuation routes in response to destruction of highway
            bridges), earthquakes, volcanic eruptions, flooding, inundation from dam
            failures (in particular local dams and reservoirs that are not regulated by the
            Federal Energy Regulatory Commission), transportation accidents (air and
            highway), civil disturbance, acts of terrorism, agricultural disaster, major fires,
            radiological incidents, severe weather, utility failures, contamination of water
            supply (biological or chemical), hazardous materials (including, in particular,
            hazardous materials associated with drug labs, roadside abandonments and the
            release of chlorine in association with water and wastewater treatment
            facilities) and other threats as may be identified. The plan should integrate
            with regional and state emergency plans.
            Equivalent Programs: 6Aa (Public Safety), 6Ca (Public Safety), 6Da (Public Safety), 6Ea
            (Public Safety), 6Fa (Public Safety)
            Related program: 6Cc (Public Safety)
  6.B.b     Continue to Participate in the Preparation and Implementation of the
            County/City Hazard Management Plan
            Continue to participate in the preparation and implementation of the
            county/city Hazard Management Plan.
            Equivalent Programs: 6Ab (Public Safety), 6Cb (Public Safety), 6Db (Public Safety), 6Eb
            (Public Safety), 6Fb (Public Safety)
  6.B.c     Facilitate Assessment of Hazards Associated with Dam Failures Affecting
            Angels Camp
            Pursue information from Union Public Utility District (UPUD) addressing
            potential effects of the failure of UPUD’s water treatment facility dam on
            Angels Camp.
            Acquire and maintain copies of the flood inundation maps prepared for the
            Union, Spicer, and Utica reservoirs and Lake Alpine as part of the city’s
            emergency response plan.
            Investigate the potential impacts of a failure of the Ross Reservoir dam on
            Angels Camp.
Angels Camp 2020 General Plan                                   Public Safety Element            VI-26

                                                                                    February 3, 2009
  6.B.d     Consider Preparation of a Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance
            Consider preparation of a flood damage prevention ordinance to guide
            development within flood zones identified by the Federal Emergency
            Management Agency (FEMA).
            Related Programs: 1Be (Land Use), 1Bf (Land Use), 4Dd (Conservation & Open Space),
            4Gc (Conservation & Open Space), 4Ha (Conservation & Open Space), 6Bg (Public Safety),
            11Bb (Community Identity)
  6.B.e     Continue to Maintain and Upgrade Storm Drainage Facilities
            Continue to address maintenance and upgrades of the city’s drainage facilities.
            Consider preparation of a Storm Drainage Facilities Management Plan to
            forecast when systems may require replacement and the potential costs and
            funding sources necessary to maintain the city’s drainage facilities. Continue
            to pursue sources of funding to ensure ongoing maintenance of the city’s
            storm drains.
            Equivalent Program: 7Hb (Public Facilities & Services)
            Related Programs: 4Hb (Conservation & Open Space), 6Bf (Public Safety), 6Bh (Public
            Safety), 6Bj (Public Safety), 6Bk (Public Safety), 7Hb (Public Facilities & Services), 7Hd
            (Public Facilities & Services), 7He (Public Facilities & Services)
  6.B.f     Mitigate Impacts on Downstream Drainage Facilities and Property
            In conjunction with              2020 General Plan Program 6.A.k, address
            requirements for preparation of drainage plans addressing potential impacts on
            downstream drainage facilities and properties and requiring implementation of
            measures identified to reduce or eliminate those impacts. Continue to require
            drainage plans for private development to prevent inundation of the city’s
            Storm Drainage Facilities.
            Equivalent Program: 7Hc (Public Facilities & Services)
            Related Programs: 4Hb (Conservation & Open Space), 6Be (Public Safety), 6Bh (Public
            Safety), 6Bj (Public Safety), 6Bk (Public Safety), 7Hb (Public Facilities & Services), 7Hd
            (Public Facilities & Services), 7He (Public Facilities & Services)
  6.B.g     Designate Resource Management & Open Space Setbacks Along Creeks
            Establish an open space setback encompassing designated flood hazard areas
            along Angels Creek and Six Mile Creek. Designate these areas as Resource
            Management (RM) on the city’s general plan maps and as Open Space (OS)
            on the city’s zoning maps. Establish similar setbacks along other drainages
            within the city (e.g., China Gulch) or along drainages in areas that may be
            annexed into the city in the future.
            Equivalent Programs: 1Bf (Land Use), 4Dd (Conservation & Open Space), 4Gc
            (Conservation & Open Space), 11Bb (Community Identity)
Angels Camp 2020 General Plan                                          Public Safety Element        VI-27

                                                                                     February 3, 2009
            Related Programs: 1Be (Land Use), 4Dc (Conservation & Open Space), 4Ha (Conservation
            & Open Space)
  6.B.h     Coordinate With the County to Address the Impacts of Development
            Within the Watersheds of Drainages Flowing Through the City
            Request that the county forward all development proposals located within
            watersheds of drainages flowing through Angels Camp to the city for
            comment (e.g., Six Mile Creek, Indian Creek, Angels Creek, Greenhorn
            Creek, Cherokee Creek, Utica Ditch, Jupiter Ditch, Lone Gulch, San Domingo
            Creek). The city’s area of interest, for the purposes of assessing impacts
            within watersheds of interest, is illustrated in 2020 General Plan Map 6A.
            Continue to comment on projects within the county with the potential to
            increase runoff, increase flood hazards and tax drainage systems within the
            city. Meet with the county to establish a strategy for acquiring funding for
            preparation of a retention basin master plan and/or standardized mitigation
            requirements to offset cumulative impacts of individual projects occurring
            upstream of Angels Camp and resulting in increased runoff, increased flood
            hazards and overtaxing of drainage systems within the city.
            Equivalent Program: 7Hd (Public Facilities & Services)
            Related Programs: 1Ia (Land Use), 2Aa (Housing), 2Dg (Housing), 3Bk (Circulation), 4Hb
            (Conservation & Open Space), 5Ak (Noise), 6Be (Public Safety), 6Bf (Public Safety), 6Bh
            (Public Safety), 6Bi (Public Safety), 6Bj (Public Safety), 6Bk (Public Safety), 7Cj (Public
            Facilities & Services), 7Hb (Public Facilities & Services), 7Hc (Public Facilities & Services),
            7Hd (Public Facilities & Services), 7He (Public Facilities & Services), 7Id (Public Facilities
            & Services), 7Ig (Public Facilities & Services), 10Ab (Economic Development), 12Am (Parks
            & Recreation)
  6.B.i     Pursue Funding for Preparation of a Hydrological Study
            Pursue a Community Development Block Grant (CDBG) Technical
            Assistance Grant, or similar funding, to prepare a drainage study. The study
            should include, but not be limited to, addressing existing hydrological
            conditions and projected conditions considering proposed developments
            within the county upstream of the city and within the city’s watershed. The
            study should further address potential threats to city bridges and roadways
            from increased runoff and flooding and identify high priority locations for the
            establishment of drainage basins upstream of the city.
            Related Program: 6Bh (Public Safety), 7Hd (Public Facilities & Services)
Angels Camp 2020 General Plan                                         Public Safety Element             VI-28

                                                                                      February 3, 2009
  6.B.j     Coordinate with Appropriate Agencies and Private Landowners to
            Ensure Debris Removal in Streams to Reduce the Potential for Damage
            of Downstream Facilities (e.g., Bridges)
            Coordinate with appropriate local, state and/or federal agencies to ensure the
            removal of debris adjacent to bridges within the city limits that may result in
            damage and/or destruction of bridges, or damming at bridges, during flood
            events, thereby limiting emergency access into and out of the city. Update the
            city’s emergency response plan to address the emergency response priority
            associated with maintenance of the State Route 49 Bridge over Angels Creek.
            Consider preparation of standardized mitigation requirements on new
            development requiring management of stream debris in conjunction with
            monitoring vegetation clearances for fire safety. Consider facilitating
            acquisition of a master streambed alteration permit from the California
            Department of Fish and Game and/or a Federal Clean Water Act Section 404
            Permit to facilitate the removal of debris within drainage facilities adjacent to
            already developed private property to reduce the potential for damage to
            downstream facilities resulting from inadequate debris removal.
            Equivalent Programs: 4Hb (Conservation & Open Space), 7He (Public Facilities &
            Services)
            Related Programs: 6Bf (Public Safety), 6Be (Public Safety), 6Bh (Public Safety), 6Bj
            (Public Safety), 6Bk (Public Safety), 7Hb (Public Facilities & Services), 7Hc (Public
            Facilities & Services), 7Hd (Public Facilities & Services)
  6.B.k     Design New Bridges (Pedestrian and Automobile) to Minimize Damage
            From Major Flood Events
            Require new pedestrian and vehicle bridges to incorporate design features that
            reduce or avoid damage during major flood events, to the extent feasible (e.g.,
            pedestrian bridges designed to pivot at an upstream corner and break away to
            reduce debris collection).
            Related Programs: 4Hb (Conservation & Open Space), 6Be (Public Facilities & Services),
            6Bf (Public Safety), 6Bh (Public Safety), 6Bj (Public Safety), 7Hb (Public Facilities &
            Services), 7Hc (Public Facilities & Services), 7Hd (Public Facilities & Services), 7He (Public
            Facilities & Services)
Angels Camp 2020 General Plan                                          Public Safety Element           VI-29

                                                                                  February 3, 2009
  6.B.l     Provide Emergency Response/Preparation Guidelines for Citizens on The
            Angels Camp City Website
            Provide a link from the city’s website to the Federal Emergency Management
            Agency (FEMA) website regarding emergency response procedures for
            citizens. Provide handouts to the public for citizen emergency response
            procedures available from FEMA. 2020 General Plan Appendix 6A provides
            a list of some sources of emergency response preparedness information.
            Equivalent Programs: 6Ao (Public Safety), 6Cg (Public Safety), 6De (Public Safety), 6Ec
            (Public Safety), 6Fc (Public Safety)
  6.B.m     Pursue Preparation of Detailed Flood Zone Maps
            Identify funding sources and qualified agencies to prepare detailed flood zone
            maps establishing flood elevations throughout the city. Consider approaching
            the Resource Conservation & Development District to assist in preparing the
            maps.
            Equivalent Program: 4.H.g (Conservation & Open Space)
            Related Programs: 6Bd (Public Safety), 6Bg (Public Safety), 6Bi (Public Safety)
  6.B.n     Protect New Development from Flood Hazards
            [2020 GENERAL PLAN MITIGATION MEASURE, MM-FLOOD-01]
            For streams without mapped flood zones and flood elevations:
            Prior to approval of new development occurring within 75 feet of both sides
            of Indian Creek, Greenhorn Creek, Cherokee Creek, San Domingo Creek and
            Lone Gulch (measured from the top of the bank of the drainage or the edge of
            the riparian zone); the applicant shall identify flood elevations and provide
            documentation that new development will be located outside of the 100-year
            flood elevation, prior to approval of new development. The City may waive
            this requirement if ample evidence is available on-site (e.g., site topography)
            to clearly establish that new development will occur outside of the 100-year
            flood elevation.
Angels Camp 2020 General Plan                                     Public Safety Element          VI-30

                                                                         February 3, 2009
6C. Emergency Services Plan & Emergency Services
Goal 6.C    Undertake adequate preparation for and ensure an adequate response to
            emergency and disaster situations affecting the city.
Policies
   6.C.1    Prepare city staff, to the maximum extent feasible given available funding
            levels, to respond quickly and adequately to emergency and disaster situations
            affecting the city.
   6.C.2    Provide guidance to citizens regarding preparing for and responding to
            emergencies to supplement and ensure the smooth implementation of the
            city’s emergency operations plan.
   6.C.3    Support the formation of self-help/citizen response teams to aid city agencies
            in providing emergency response services to a large segment of the city’s
            population.
   6.C.4    Make emergency preparedness a city priority and keep the city’s emergency
            response plan updated.
Implementation Programs
   6.C.a    Prepare an Emergency Operations Plan and Local Hazard Mitigation
            Plan for the City
            Using the guidelines provided by the State Office of Emergency Services and
            the Federal Emergency Management Agency, prepare an emergency
            operations plan and local hazard mitigation plan for Angels Camp. A draft
            plan should be completed by December 31, 2008. Anticipated contents of the
            Emergency Operations Plan may include, but are not limited to:
            Administration: including responsibilities of government during disaster,
            emergency plan authorities and references, comprehensive emergency
            management planning, the incident command system, continuity of
            Government, and preservation of records.
            Management Functions and Responsibilities: including activation of the
            Emergency Service Plan, resource management, assignment of
            responsibilities, mutual aid, incident command system, emergency operations
            center, emergency alerting and broadcast system, emergency broadcast system
            procedures, emergency public information, evacuation, emergency shelter and
Angels Camp 2020 General Plan                                Public Safety Element      VI-31

                                                                                  February 3, 2009
            feeding, donation management, medical care, public health, mass casualties,
            mass fatalities, and recovery.
            Hazard Specific Operations: including aircraft accidents, agricultural
            disasters, civil disturbance, earthquake, flood/dam failure, hazardous
            materials, major fire, radiological incidents, severe weather, utility failure,
            volcanic activities, water supply and impacts related to population influxes
            resulting from regional disasters.
            The Local Hazard Mitigation Plan should consider, but not be limited to
            consideration of, the following threats: provision of adequate water supply
            during emergency situations, identifying evacuation routes (including
            identification of evacuation routes in response to destruction of highway
            bridges), earthquakes, volcanic eruptions, flooding, inundation from dam
            failures (in particular local dams and reservoirs that are not regulated by the
            Federal Energy Regulatory Commission), transportation accidents (air and
            highway), civil disturbance, acts of terrorism, agricultural disaster, major fires,
            radiological incidents, severe weather, utility failures, contamination of water
            supply (biological or chemical), hazardous materials (including, in particular,
            hazardous materials associated with drug labs, roadside abandonments and the
            release of chlorine in association with water and wastewater treatment
            facilities) and other threats as may be identified. The plan should integrate
            with regional and state emergency plans.
            Equivalent Programs: 6Aa (Public Safety), 6Ba (Public Safety), 6Da (Public Safety), 6Ea
            (Public Safety), 6Fa (Public Safety)
            Related program: 6Cc (Public Safety)
  6.C.b     Continue to Participate in the Preparation and Implementation of the
            County/City Hazard Management Plan
            Continue to participate in the preparation and implementation of the
            county/city Hazard Management Plan.
            Equivalent Programs: 6Ab (Public Safety), 6Bb (Public Safety), 6Db (Public Safety), 6Eb
            (Public Safety), 6Fb (Public Safety)
  6.C.c     Adopt an Emergency Operations Plan Enabling Ordinance
            Adopt an enabling ordinance in conjunction with an Emergency Operations
            Plan.
            Related Programs: 6Aa (Public Safety), 6Ba (Public Safety), 6Ca (Public Safety), 6Da
            (Public Safety), 6Ea (Public Safety), 6Fa (Public Safety)
Angels Camp 2020 General Plan                                         Public Safety Element      VI-32
                                                                               February 3, 2009
  6.C.d     Sponsor Emergency Training for City Personnel
            Enlist the aid of the American Red Cross to conduct a training day to teach (or
            provide a refresher course for) all city employees CPR, basic first aid, the
            operation of an automatic external defibrillator and blood borne pathogen
            training. Coordinate with Calaveras County emergency services personnel to
            conduct a joint training event.
  6.C.e     Conduct Emergency Training Exercises
            Conduct emergency response training exercises. Exercises involving both city
            and county emergency response agencies are recommended.
  6.C.f     Continue to Maintain a City Safety Committee
            Continue to maintain and hold regular meetings of the City Safety Committee
            to reinforce emergency preparedness.
  6.C.g     Provide Emergency Response/Preparation Guidelines for Citizens on The
            Angels Camp City Website
            Provide a link from the city’s website to the Federal Emergency Management
            Agency (FEMA) website regarding emergency response procedures for
            citizens. Provide handouts to the public for citizen emergency response
            procedures available from FEMA. 2020 General Plan Appendix 6A provides
            a list of some sources of emergency response preparedness information.
            Equivalent Programs: 6Ao (Public Safety), 6Bl (Public Safety), 6De (Public Safety), 6Ec
            (Public Safety), 6Fc (Public Safety)
  6.C.h     Pursue the Provision of Paramedic Services for the City
            Investigate the costs of hiring and maintaining a paramedic within the Angels
            Camp Fire Department.
  6.C.i     Encourage City Residents to Receive Training as Part of Citizen
            Emergency Response Teams
            Consider sending city staff who are residents of Angels Camp through
            American Red Cross training to become members of Citizen Emergency
            Response Teams (CERT) to assist locally in emergency situations. Provide
            announcements on the city’s website of upcoming CERT training events to
            encourage local residents to become trained.
Angels Camp 2020 General Plan                                   Public Safety Element            VI-33

                                                                        February 3, 2009
6D. Hazardous Materials
Goal 6.D    Protect people and property from risks associated with the use, transport,
            treatment and disposal of hazardous materials and wastes.
Policies
   6.D.1    Encourage citizen opportunities for recycling and disposal of household
            hazardous materials and wastes.
   6.D.2    Continue to work cooperatively with other jurisdictions to manage the use,
            transport, treatment and disposal of hazardous materials.
   6.D.3    Make emergency preparedness a city priority and keep the city’s emergency
            response plan updated.
Implementation Programs
   6.D.a    Prepare an Emergency Operations Plan and Local Hazard Mitigation
            Plan for the City
            Using the guidelines provided by the State Office of Emergency Services and
            the Federal Emergency Management Agency, prepare an emergency
            operations plan and local hazard mitigation plan for Angels Camp. A draft
            plan should be completed by December 31, 2008. Anticipated contents of the
            Emergency Operations Plan may include, but are not limited to:
            Administration: including responsibilities of government during disaster,
            emergency plan authorities and references, comprehensive emergency
            management planning, the incident command system, continuity of
            Government, and preservation of records.
            Management Functions and Responsibilities: including activation of the
            Emergency Service Plan, resource management, assignment of
            responsibilities, mutual aid, incident command system, emergency operations
            center, emergency alerting and broadcast system, emergency broadcast system
            procedures, emergency public information, evacuation, emergency shelter and
            feeding, donation management, medical care, public health, mass casualties,
            mass fatalities, and recovery.
            Hazard Specific Operations: including aircraft accidents, agricultural
            disasters, civil disturbance, earthquake, flood/dam failure, hazardous
            materials, major fire, radiological incidents, severe weather, utility failure,
Angels Camp 2020 General Plan                               Public Safety Element        VI-34

                                                                               February 3, 2009
            volcanic activities, water supply and impacts related to population influxes
            resulting from regional disasters.
            The Local Hazard Mitigation Plan should consider, but not be limited to
            consideration of, the following threats: provision of adequate water supply
            during emergency situations, identifying evacuation routes (including
            identification of evacuation routes in response to destruction of highway
            bridges), earthquakes, volcanic eruptions, flooding, inundation from dam
            failures (in particular local dams and reservoirs that are not regulated by the
            Federal Energy Regulatory Commission), transportation accidents (air and
            highway), civil disturbance, acts of terrorism, agricultural disaster, major fires,
            radiological incidents, severe weather, utility failures, contamination of water
            supply (biological or chemical), hazardous materials (including, in particular,
            hazardous materials associated with drug labs, roadside abandonments and the
            release of chlorine in association with water and wastewater treatment
            facilities) and other threats as may be identified. The plan should integrate
            with regional and state emergency plans.
            Equivalent Programs: 6Aa (Public Safety), 6Ba (Public Safety), 6Ca (Public Safety), 6Ea
            (Public Safety), 6Fa (Public Safety)
            Related program: 6Cc (Public Safety)
  6.D.b     Continue to Participate in the Preparation and Implementation of the
            County/City Hazard Management Plan
            Continue to participate in the preparation and implementation of the
            county/city Hazard Management Plan.
            Equivalent Programs: 6Ab (Public Safety), 6Bb (Public Safety), 6Cb (Public Safety), 6Eb
            (Public Safety), 6Fb (Public Safety)
  6.D.c     Continue to Implement the County/City Multi-Jurisdictional Household
            Hazardous Waste Element
            Continue to implement the programs adopted in the Multi-Jurisdictional
            Household Hazardous Waste Element designed to reduce the amount of
            household hazardous waste (HHW) generated within Calaveras County,
            including periodic drop-off days for all household hazardous wastes, on-going
            drop-off program for recyclable household hazardous waste, public education
            regarding household hazardous waste reduction, and monitoring the success of
            these selected programs.
            Related Program: 4Hf (Conservation & Open Space)
Angels Camp 2020 General Plan                                   Public Safety Element            VI-35
                                                                               February 3, 2009
  6.D.d     Maintain an Inventory of Sites Storing or Using Hazardous Materials
            The Angels Fire Department should regularly update, and consider mapping,
            sites included on its list of sites with Hazardous Materials Business Plans (as
            provided by the Calaveras County Environmental Health Department and
            supplemented by the Angels Camp Fire Department) with accompanying
            hazardous material information to facilitate access to hazardous materials
            information during spills or releases.
            Angels Camp will continue to monitor and abide by the deed restrictions and
            covenants pertaining to no soil disturbances, notifications prior to subsurface
            work, no disturbances of asphalt and no residential uses pertaining to 260 S.
            Main St. This information will be entered into the county’s GIS database and
            permit tracking databases. [2020 GENERAL PLAN MITIGATION
            MEASURE, MM-HAZARD-01]
            Related Programs: 4Hf (Conservation & Open Space), 6Dc (Public Safety)
  6.D.e     Provide Emergency Response/Preparation Guidelines for Citizens on the
            Angels Camp City Website
            Provide a link from the city’s website to the Federal Emergency Management
            Agency (FEMA) website regarding emergency response procedures for
            citizens. Provide handouts to the public for citizen emergency response
            procedures available from FEMA. 2020 General Plan Appendix 6A provides
            a list of some sources of emergency response preparedness information.
            Equivalent Programs: 6Ao (Public Safety), 6Bl (Public Safety), 6Cg (Public Safety), 6Ec
            (Public Safety), 6Fc (Public Safety)
  6.D.f     Expand Opportunities for Recycling in the City Including E-Cycling
            Support the establishment of new or expansion of existing recycling facilities
            in or near the city limits that encourage recycling of a wide variety of
            resources, including recycling of electronic wastes (e-cycling).
            Equivalent Program: 4Bf (Conservation & Open Space)
            Related Program: 4Bg (Conservation & Open Space)
Angels Camp 2020 General Plan                                   Public Safety Element            VI-36

                                                                         February 3, 2009
6E. Water Supply, Utilities & Communications
Goal 6.E    Facilitate the provision of an adequate supply of water, and essential utilities
            and communications for city residents during emergency situations.
Policies
   6.E.1    Provide the necessary tools to reduce the impacts of disruptions in water and
            other essential utilities and communications during emergency situations.
   6.E.2    Proactively plan for emergency response during situations affecting the city
            water supply and essential services and communications.
   6.E.3    Coordinate with public utility agencies in the preparation of emergency
            operations plans.
   6.E.4    Make emergency preparedness a city priority and keep the city’s emergency
            response plan updated.
Implementation Programs
   6.E.a    Prepare an Emergency Operations Plan and Local Hazard Mitigation
            Plan for the City
            Using the guidelines provided by the State Office of Emergency Services and
            the Federal Emergency Management Agency, prepare an emergency
            operations plan and local hazard mitigation plan for Angels Camp. A draft
            plan should be completed by December 31, 2008. Anticipated contents of the
            Emergency Operations Plan may include, but are not limited to:
            Administration: including responsibilities of government during disaster,
            emergency plan authorities and references, comprehensive emergency
            management planning, the incident command system, continuity of
            Government, and preservation of records.
            Management Functions and Responsibilities: including activation of the
            Emergency Service Plan, resource management, assignment of
            responsibilities, mutual aid, incident command system, emergency operations
            center, emergency alerting and broadcast system, emergency broadcast system
            procedures, emergency public information, evacuation, emergency shelter and
            feeding, donation management, medical care, public health, mass casualties,
            mass fatalities, and recovery.
Angels Camp 2020 General Plan                                Public Safety Element        VI-37

                                                                               February 3, 2009
            Hazard Specific Operations: including aircraft accidents, agricultural
            disasters, civil disturbance, earthquake, flood/dam failure, hazardous
            materials, major fire, radiological incidents, severe weather, utility failure,
            volcanic activities, water supply and impacts related to population influxes
            resulting from regional disasters.
            The Local Hazard Mitigation Plan should consider, but not be limited to
            consideration of, the following threats: provision of adequate water supply
            during emergency situations, identifying evacuation routes (including
            identification of evacuation routes in response to destruction of highway
            bridges), earthquakes, volcanic eruptions, flooding, inundation from dam
            failures (in particular local dams and reservoirs that are not regulated by the
            Federal Energy Regulatory Commission), transportation accidents (air and
            highway), civil disturbance, acts of terrorism, agricultural disaster, major fires,
            radiological incidents, severe weather, utility failures, contamination of water
            supply (biological or chemical), hazardous materials (including, in particular,
            hazardous materials associated with drug labs, roadside abandonments and the
            release of chlorine in association with water and wastewater treatment
            facilities) and other threats as may be identified. The plan should integrate
            with regional and state emergency plans.
            Equivalent Programs: 6Aa (Public Safety), 6Ba (Public Safety), 6Ca (Public Safety), 6Da
            (Public Safety), 6Fa (Public Safety)
            Related program: 6Cc (Public Safety)
  6.E.b     Continue to Participate in the Preparation and Implementation of the
            County/City Hazard Management Plan
            Continue to participate in the preparation and implementation of the
            county/city Hazard Management Plan.
            Equivalent Programs: 6Ab (Public Safety), 6Bb (Public Safety), 6Cb (Public Safety), 6Db
            (Public Safety), 6Fb (Public Safety)
  6.E.c     Provide Emergency Response/Preparation Guidelines for Citizens on the
            Angels Camp City Website
            Provide a link from the city’s website to the Federal Emergency Management
            Agency (FEMA) website regarding emergency response procedures for
            citizens. Provide handouts to the public for citizen emergency response
            procedures available from FEMA. 2020 General Plan Appendix 6A provides
            a list of some sources of emergency response preparedness information.
            Equivalent Programs: 6Ao (Public Safety), 6Bl (Public Safety), 6Cg (Public Safety), 6De
            (Public Safety), 6Fc (Public Safety)
Angels Camp 2020 General Plan                                   Public Safety Element            VI-38

                                                                                 February 3, 2009
  6.E.d     Support the Efforts of the Local HAM Radio Club /Radio Amateur Civil
            Emergency Services (RACES)
            Support the efforts of the local HAM Radio Club [e.g., Radio Amateur Civil
            Emergency Services (RACES)] to facilitate communications during
            emergency situations.
             Related Programs: 1Fc (Land Use), 6Ee (Public Safety), 7Gc (Public Facilities & Services),
            10Ag (Economic Development)
  6.E.e     Support the Efforts of KVML and Local Access Television to Provide
            Emergency Updates to Citizens
            Support the efforts of KVML Radio and local access television to provide
            emergency updates and information to citizens.
             Related Programs: 1Fc (Land Use), 6Ed (Public Safety), 7Gc (Public Facilities & Services),
            10Ag (Economic Development)
  6.E.f     Increase Water Storage Capacity
            In future updates of the water master plan, identify additional locations for
            new water storage facilities (or expansion of existing facilities), estimate the
            costs of establishing and acquiring these new facilities and estimate the
            capacity needed within new water storage facilities sufficient to meet the
            demands of the city during emergency situations. The city anticipates that a
            minimum of three day supply of water should be available for emergency
            situations, with a goal of providing five to seven days’ water storage.
            Facilities to be considered include, but are not limited to, the addition of new
            storage tank(s) and/or a new reservoir(s). Funding sources for new facilities
            should address the impacts of new development on city water demand and
            allocate a proportionate share of the cost of new water storage facilities to new
            development.
            Equivalent Program: 7Bk (Public Facilities & Services)
            Related Programs: 1Ag (Land Use), 2Bf (Housing), 2Bh (Housing), 4Gh (Conservation &
            Open Space), 7Ba (Public Facilities & Services), 7Bh (Public Facilities & Services), 7Bj
            (Public Facilities & Services), 10Ae (Economic Development)
  6.E.g     Maintain Information Pertaining to Water Resources in Mines,
            Underground Rivers and High-Production Wells
            Maintain the information contained in 2020 General Plan Appendix 4A
            relative to mine locations and information in 2020 General Plan Appendix
            6B relative to underground rivers. Map the locations of high-production wells
            throughout the city. This information should be used to identify potential
            water sources during emergencies.
            Equivalent Program: 4Gj (Conservation & Open Space)
Angels Camp 2020 General Plan                                      Public Safety Element            VI-39

                                                                       February 3, 2009
  6.E.h     Maintain Information Pertaining to the Use of Untreated or Semi-
            Treated Water During Emergency Situations
            Include in the city’s Emergency Operations Plan information pertaining to the
            use of untreated or semi-treated (i.e., Title 22) water during emergency
            situations.
            Related Program:      4Ge (Conservation & Open Space), 6Eg (Public Safety)
Angels Camp 2020 General Plan                              Public Safety Element       VI-40

                                                                         February 3, 2009
6F. Transportation, Severe Weather, Radiological Incidents
Goal 6.F    Prepare city staff, agencies and citizens to respond in a coordinated and
            cooperative manner to emergency situations.
Policies
   6.F.1    Provide city staff, agencies and citizens with adequate information necessary
            to respond in a coordinated and cooperative manner during emergency
            situations.
   6.F.2    Facilitate and encourage citizen self-help during emergency situations.
   6.F.3    Make emergency preparedness a city priority and keep the city’s emergency
            response plan updated.
Implementation Programs
   6.F.a    Prepare an Emergency Operations Plan and Local Hazard Mitigation
            Plan for the City
            Using the guidelines provided by the State Office of Emergency Services and
            the Federal Emergency Management Agency, prepare an emergency
            operations plan and local hazard mitigation plan for Angels Camp. A draft
            plan should be completed by December 31, 2008. Anticipated contents of the
            Emergency Operations Plan may include, but are not limited to:
            Administration: including responsibilities of government during disaster,
            emergency plan authorities and references, comprehensive emergency
            management planning, the incident command system, continuity of
            Government, and preservation of records.
            Management Functions and Responsibilities: including activation of the
            Emergency Service Plan, resource management, assignment of
            responsibilities, mutual aid, incident command system, emergency operations
            center, emergency alerting and broadcast system, emergency broadcast system
            procedures, emergency public information, evacuation, emergency shelter and
            feeding, donation management, medical care, public health, mass casualties,
            mass fatalities, and recovery.
            Hazard Specific Operations: including aircraft accidents, agricultural
            disasters, civil disturbance, earthquake, flood/dam failure, hazardous
Angels Camp 2020 General Plan                                Public Safety Element      VI-41

                                                                                  February 3, 2009
            materials, major fire, radiological incidents, severe weather, utility failure,
            volcanic activities, water supply and impacts related to population influxes
            resulting from regional disasters.
            The Local Hazard Mitigation Plan should consider, but not be limited to
            consideration of, the following threats: provision of adequate water supply
            during emergency situations, identifying evacuation routes (including
            identification of evacuation routes in response to destruction of highway
            bridges), earthquakes, volcanic eruptions, flooding, inundation from dam
            failures (in particular local dams and reservoirs that are not regulated by the
            Federal Energy Regulatory Commission), transportation accidents (air and
            highway), civil disturbance, acts of terrorism, agricultural disaster, major fires,
            radiological incidents, severe weather, utility failures, contamination of water
            supply (biological or chemical), hazardous materials (including, in particular,
            hazardous materials associated with drug labs, roadside abandonments and the
            release of chlorine in association with water and wastewater treatment
            facilities) and other threats as may be identified. The plan should integrate
            with regional and state emergency plans.
            Equivalent Programs: 6Aa (Public Safety), 6Ba (Public Safety), 6Ca (Public Safety), 6Da
            (Public Safety), 6Ea (Public Safety)
            Related program: 6Cc (Public Safety)
  6.F.b     Continue to Participate in the Preparation and Implementation of the
            County/City Hazard Management Plan
            Continue to participate in the preparation and implementation of the
            county/city Hazard Management Plan.
            Equivalent Programs: 6Ab (Public Safety), 6Bb (Public Safety), 6Cb (Public Safety), 6Db
            (Public Safety), 6Eb (Public Safety), 6Fb (Public Safety)
  6.F.c     Provide Emergency Response/Preparation Guidelines for Citizens on the
            Angels Camp City Website
            Provide a link from the city’s website to the Federal Emergency Management
            Agency (FEMA) website regarding emergency response procedures for
            citizens. Provide handouts to the public for citizen emergency response
            procedures available from FEMA. 2020 General Plan Appendix 6A provides
            a list of some sources of emergency response preparedness information.
            Equivalent Programs: 6Ao (Public Safety), 6Bl (Public Safety), 6Cg (Public Safety), 6De
            (Public Safety), 6Ec (Public Safety)
Angels Camp 2020 General Plan                                         Public Safety Element      VI-42

                                                                                   September 3, 2009
7. Public Facilities & Services
          As a kid growing up in Angels Camp, Joe (Carley) would hear the fire bell, drop
          anything he was doing and make a dash for Main Street to see if he could find the
          fire. Enroute, of course, he would encounter half the kids in town doing the same
          thing, for there is something powerfully attractive about the clanging bell and the
          excited rush of volunteers responding to a situation that holds drama and danger for
          all involved.
                                                Las Calaveras, Quarterly Bulletin of the Calaveras
                                                County Historical Society, Angels Camp 75th Anniversary
                                                Edition, January, 1987, Volume 35, #2; In Angels Camp
                                                Joe Carley was Mr. Fire Department, by Mary Matzek
                                                (Joe Carley, Angels Camp Fire Chief from 1958 to 1981)
Requirements
A Public Facilities and Services Element is an optional general plan element. However, this
optional element includes general plan-required topics relocated from other elements as follows:
     Pursuant to California Government Code Section 65302, the Circulation Element of the
     general plan must include the general location and extent of existing and proposed public
     utilities and facilities - all correlated with the Land Use Element of the general plan.
     Consistent with past practice, this Public Facilities and Services portion of the general plan
     fulfills that requirement.
In addition to the preceding, the Public Facilities and Services Element assists local jurisdictions
in identifying the existing and potential future needs of public, quasi-public and privately-owned
community service facilities within its jurisdiction for planning purposes. The element is useful
in planning for future facility needs, anticipating reuse of buildings after relocation of public
facilities, and in assessing present and future maintenance and upgrades that may be needed for
public facilities. This element also describes the existing water and sewer capacity of the city
and projects future need.
Angels Camp 2020 General Plan                    Public Facilities & Services Element              VII-1
                                                                             September 3, 2009
Organization
This element addresses the following public facilities and services and is organized as follows:
7A.     City Facilities & Services: General
7B.     City Facilities & Services: Water Supply and Water Quality & Wastewater
7C.     City Facilities & Services: Fire Protection
7D.     City Facilities & Services: Police Protection
7E.     City Facilities & Services: Parks
7F.     City Facilities & Services: Parking
7G.     City Facilities & Services: Administration
7H.     City Facilities & Services: Public Works (See Chapter 3, Circulation Element, for
        roadways)
7I.     County, State, Federal and Other Facilities & Services
        County Facilities
        Solid Waste
        Library
        Administrative
        Social Services
        State Facilities
        Caltrans
        Highway 4
        Highway 49
        Federal Facilities
        Post Offices
        Other Facilities
        Schools
        Cemeteries
        Utilities – Public Utility Commission or Federal Communications Commission -
            regulated (Electric, Telecommunications, Internet, Cable and others)
        Ambulance
Angels Camp 2020 General Plan                 Public Facilities & Services Element        VII-2

                                                                              September 3, 2009
        The following inventory of the various facilities located within the city is intended to
        recognize the physical needs of the various service providers located within the city, to
        better analyze potential future needs, and to reflect those needs in land use planning
        documents.
7A. City Facilities: General
Angels Camp adopted a City Services Impact Mitigation Fee in August, 2003. The fee is
collected on building permits issued within the city and is used to support capital
improvements for the following:
       Police facilities
       Fire facilities
       Park facilities
A listing of City Services Impact Mitigation Fees is found in 2020 General Plan Appendix
7A.
City facilities located within the city limits are listed in 2020 General Plan Appendix 7B.
Figure 7-1 identifies the location of public and quasi-public facilities within the city limits.
Angels Camp 2020 General Plan                     Public Facilities & Services Element      VII-3

                                                              September 3, 2009
                              Figure 7-1
Angels Camp 2020 General Plan     Public Facilities & Services Element    VII-4
                                                                                   September 3, 2009
7B. City Facilities & Services: Water Supply, Water Quality &
         Wastewater
         Since Angels Camp was ‘born’ to be a mining camp, it would become necessary to
         have water available, and lots of it.
                                         A History of Angels Camp, H. Stuart Manners, 2001
Water Supply & Water Quality
The water supply for Angels Camp originates from the North Fork of the Stanislaus River
watershed. During the winter months, water is stored in four reservoirs in the High Sierra near
Ebbetts Pass Highway. These reservoirs are: Alpine, Utica, Union, and Spicer, which have a
combined storage of 13,643 acre feet. Water from these reservoirs is released down the North
Fork of the Stanislaus River and its tributaries, where it is diverted into the Collierville Tunnel at
McKay’s Point Reservoir. Some of the water from the Collierville Tunnel is delivered into the
Utica Ditch which enters Hunter Reservoir. Angels Camp and Murphys receive water from
Hunter Reservoir in amounts limited annually per agreement with the Northern California Power
Authority (NCPA). From Hunter Reservoir, water continues back into the Utica Ditch, a 21-22
mile ditch system that terminates at the Murphys Forebay. The water in the forebay then enters
the Murphys Penstock and is used for generating electric power at the Murphys Powerhouse,
which is located on the eastern edge of the town of Murphys.
After the water passes through the Murphys Powerhouse, it enters Angels Creek (aka Murphys
Creek) and is diverted into the Angels Ditch just below Murphys. This 5.5± mile ditch delivers
water through Ross Reservoir to the Angels Forebay, which is the raw water take out point for
the Angels Water Treatment Plan. Water not used by the Angels Water Treatment Plant is used
for power generation through the Angels Powerhouse.
The city provides public water to its residents. The city maintains a water treatment and storage
facility north of the city limits off of Murphys Grade Road. With the completion of planned
improvements, the City’s existing water treatment and storage facility is expected to provide
approximately 4 million gallons of water per day. The 2001-2015 Water Master Plan (WMP),
identifies improvements as necessary to supply new water connections to supply the city through
2027 assuming a growth rate of 2%.
The passage of time is necessary to accommodate the acquisition of sufficient funds for
improvements to the water system as necessary to accommodate projected growth through 2027.
  This means that two key improvements are required to support projected growth:
               Addition of a 4th filter at the treatment plan between 2012-2013
Angels Camp 2020 General Plan                      Public Facilities & Services Element        VII-5

                                                                                September 3, 2009
                  Addition of a sludge removal system at the treatment plan between 2006-2010
                (related to operations and maintenance and not to plant capacity)
Failure to complete either of the preceding could jeopardize the city’s ability to provide water
necessary to accommodate projected growth through 2027.
Current water treatment plant capacity [with 3 filters and 2.5 million gallons per day (MGD)
storage] is at approximately 1,440 gpm or 2.07 MGD. This translates into a facility that can
support approximately 2,359 residential equivalent connections (WMP, 2002). The addition of a
4th filter is needed to increase capacity to approximately 2,160 gpm or 3.1 MGD (approximately
3,046 residential equivalent connections—sufficient to serve the city through 2027).
The WMP projects that the water treatment plant will reach a capacity of 2.07 MGD in 2009—
approximately equal to plant capacity with three filters and sufficient to serve the city’s needs
through 2009. However, due to the storage capacity at the city’s water treatment facility,
additional capacity is recognized for the city’s system allowing the city to grow to a capacity of at
least 2.268 MGD—or sufficient to provide new water connections in the city through 2013
(when infrastructure improvements will increase the system capacity to 3.1 MGD).
These conclusions are based on a growth rate of 2%. If new development exceeds a 2% rate of
growth without an offsetting decline in growth, the city may find it necessary to add a 4th filter to
increase capacity at the water treatment plant before 2013.
If the city’s growth rate continues to exceed 2%, the city may find it necessary to pursue
supplemental funding or to otherwise accelerate funding to supply new water connections
sufficient to meet its affordable housing objectives. Alternatively, the city could consider
rearranging facility improvement priorities placing improvements resulting in increased plant
capacity above other facility improvement projects if the city’s growth exceeds 2%.
In addition to the preceding, the WMP includes provisions to construct a new 2 million gallon
storage facility at a new location approximately 800’ north of the intersection of Highway 4 and
Angel Oaks Drive. Together, the city’s existing and planned water treatment and storage
facilities would provide the city with up to four million gallons of treated water per day plus 4.5
million gallons of water storage capacity.
In addition to water availability and water storage, sufficient water delivery and conveyance
infrastructure is necessary to adequately supply water in the city. As with the city’s wastewater
delivery system, the water distribution system is failing in some portions of the city due to age.
Increasing service connections in those locations would exceed water service capacity due to an
inadequate water distribution system—a potentially significant adverse impact. However, the
city has obtained funding and is currently working to acquire easements necessary upgrade that
portion of the water delivery system necessary to maintain an adequate water supply for the city.
Angels Camp 2020 General Plan                     Public Facilities & Services Element        VII-6

                                                                                   September 3, 2009
Based on a review of the Angels Camp 2020 General Plan 2020 Land Use Map, projected water
needs for the city will reach 3,695,422 gallons per day with 100% buildout. In comparison, the
demand under the 1995 General Plan at 100% buildout would have been slightly larger at
3,876,400 gallons per day.
Waterways
The following streams are recognized by the United States Geological Survey (USGS) within the
Angels Camp Sphere of Influence:
                                               Table 7-1
                              Streams, Tributaries Within the
              Angels Camp Sphere of Influence and Area of Interest
                                  USGS
   Stream Name              Classification/a/              Headwaters                Destination
Six Mile Creek          Perennial                   T3N, R14E, Sec 8            Melones Reservoir,
                                                    (just above Six-mile        Stanislaus River
                                                    Ranch)
Indian Creek            Intermittent                T3N, R13E, Sec. 25          Melones Reservoir,
                                                                                Stanislaus River
Angels Creek            Perennial (portions)        T4N, R14E, Sec. 26          Melones Reservoir,
                        Intermittent (portions)                                 Stanislaus River
Greenhorn Creek         Intermittent                T3N, R13E, Sec 28, 32, 33   Melones Reservoir,
                                                                                Stanislaus River
Cherokee Creek          Perennial                   T3N, R13E, Sec. 20          Hogan Reservoir,
                                                                                Calaveras River
Utica Ditch             Perennial                   North Fork of the           Murphys Forebay,
                                                    Stanislaus 21 miles above   Angels Forebay
                                                    Murphys Forebay
Jupiter Ditch           Perennial                   T3N, R13E, Sec. 20          Utica Ditch
                                                    Reservoir
Lone Gulch              Intermittent                T3N, R13E, Secs. 20, 30     T3N, R12E, Sec. 24
                                                                                Reservoir to San
                                                                                Domingo Creek and
                                                                                Calaveras River
San Domingo Creek       Perennial (portions)        Stanislaus National Forest  South Fork of the
                        Intermittent (portions)     near Hathaway Pines.        Calaveras River to
                                                    T4N, R15E, Sec. 19          New Hogan Reservoir
                                                    A tributary originates west
                                                    of Avery in T4N, R15E,
                                                    Sec. 12
New Melones             --                          Headwaters of the           --
Reservoir                                           Stanislaus River and the
                                                    headwaters of multiple
                                                    creeks
Angels Camp 2020 General Plan                     Public Facilities & Services Element           VII-7
                                                                                         September 3, 2009
/a/ Definitions
Perennial:              Normally flows almost year-round (usually at least into early summer)
Intermittent:           Normally flows in the spring, fall and winter during the rainy season
Ephemeral:              Flows primarily in association with a storm event
Other water bodies within the city’s planning area include:
             The Angels Camp Water Treatment Plant (off Murphys Grade Road)
             The Angels Camp Wastewater Treatment Plant (off Centennial Road)
             Union Public Utility District Water Treatment Plant
             Ross Reservoir
             Holman Reservoir
Water Quality
Angels Camp is located in the Upper Stanislaus and Upper Calaveras River Watersheds (United
States Geological Survey Unit Numbers 18040010 and 18040011, respectively). Water quality
within Angels Camp is regulated by the State Regional Water Quality Control Board’s Central
Valley Region 5b. There are currently no waters designated as impaired pursuant to Section
303(d) of the Federal Clean Water Act within either the upper Stanislaus or upper Calaveras
River watersheds either above or immediately below Angels Camp or its Sphere of Influence
Non-point source pollution includes contaminants that enter surface or ground water through
runoff and/or filtration. Sources of these discharges are normally multiple and/or widely spread.
 In comparison, point source pollution includes contaminants that enter surface or ground water
from a specific known (usually single) source (e.g., an accidental discharge from a wastewater
treatment facility).
Sources and types of non-point source discharges common in urban runoff that could be present
in city’s waterways as runoff are detailed in 2020 General Plan Appendix 4J. They include:
fecal coliform bacteria, phosphorous, insecticides (e.g, DDT), herbicides, pesticides, chlordane,
dieldrin, volatile organic compounds, traces of cadmium, traces of lead, traces of zinc, and traces
of mercury, polycyclic aromatic compounds (PAHs), organochlorine compounds and PCBs.
Water quality sampling within the city limits is limited and primarily limited to monitoring the
city’s water treatment and wastewater treatment facilities. Water quality information from these
sources provides information regarding drinking water quality and the condition of water quality
in a small segment of Angels Creek (above and below the wastewater treatment plant). These
studies do not, however, provide information relative to pollutants entering surface waterways as
urban runoff. Currently, such information is not gathered.
Angels Camp 2020 General Plan                       Public Facilities & Services Element             VII-8

                                                                                        September 3, 2009
Wastewater
Private septic systems are regulated through the Calaveras County Environmental Health
Department and are of limited distribution within the city limits. Age is the primary reason for
septic system failure within the city. Most of these older failing systems have been replaced with
public sewer service.
Angels Camp provides public sewer service to the majority of the city. The city operates a
wastewater treatment plant in the southern portion of the city limits. The city’s wastewater
treatment plant capacity is 0.6 million gallons per day (MGD), or 600,000 gallons per day (GPD)
with a peak flow of 1.9 mgd. The peak influent wet weather flow expected is 3.1 mgd.
Disposal of the treated wastewater is accomplished via spray irrigation. The disposal of chlorine
disinfected tertiary effluent is accomplished via spray irrigation of 110 acres on the Greenhorn Creek Golf
Course. Currently, the disposal of secondary effluent is accomplished by irrigation of 61 out of 235 acres
available within the boundaries of the wastewater treatment facility due to various physical and regulatory
constraints. At present, during winter months, input at the facility may exceed the facility’s
capacity to clarify and digest the input. This “overflow” has resulted in a limited number of
spills into Angels and Six Mile Creeks. In addition to planned facility capacity expansion, the
city pursued and was issued a discharge permit from the Regional Water Quality Control Board
in May, 2007 (NPDES NO. CA0085201) and extending through May, 2012, allowing the
discharge of up to 1.9 mgd tertiary treated effluent into Angels Creek between November 15 and
May 15 of each year with completion of the following:
        Construct an outfall and diffuser to Angels Creek
        Install an ultraviolet light (UV) disinfection system.
Issuance of the 2007 discharge permit and completion of the two improvements above will allow
for the facility to provide for an additional 1,299± residential equivalent service connections—
sufficient to serve already-approved development and future development projected through
2028 and assuming a growth rate of 2% pursuant to the City’s Waste Water Master Plan
(WWMP, 2002).
However, the wastewater distribution system feeding the treatment plant is failing in some
portions of the city. The bulk of city lands located north of SR 4 have reached the maximum
capacity of the wastewater distribution system. Increasing service connections in those locations
would exceed wastewater service capacity due to an inadequate wastewater distribution system—
a potentially significant adverse impact identified in the Draft EIR for 2020 General Plan and
addressed by the incorporation of Implementation Program 7.B.m.
In response, the city is proposing construction of a new sewer line to serve the North End of
Angels Camp (north of SR 4) including all sewer lines currently served by the Altaville Lift
Station. The project would include rerouting the discharge from the Altaville Lift Station to the
Angels Camp 2020 General Plan                        Public Facilities & Services Element            VII-9

                                                                              September 3, 2009
new line thereby freeing up capacity in the Altaville Sewer Line which has been identified as "at
capacity" by the City. The route of the new sewer line will be established by the study which is
currently commencing. The City would cover the cost of construction thru bonds or some other
means of financing and create a Benefit Basin to recapture the costs over time. All parcels which
would connect into the new line or in areas served by the current Altaville Lift Station would be
included in the Benefit Basin.
Based on a review of the Angels Camp 2020 General Plan 2020 Land Use Map, the city would
require waste water capacity accommodating 657,261 gpd to meet demands at 100% buildout
under 2020 General Plan. In comparison, the 1995 General Plan Land Use Map demand was
slightly higher, at 670,579 gpd.
Angels Camp 2020 General Plan                   Public Facilities & Services Element VII-10
                                                                                             September 3, 2009
7C. City Facilities & Services: Fire Protection
         In 1912, Angels Camp incorporated, and an ordinance, No. 26, defined the fire limits
         of the city. On August 26 of that year, a mass meeting was held in the city hall
         calling for a volunteer fire department, and Joe Zwinge was selected as fire chief for
         the new company. An ordinance, No. 68 was adopted regulating the use of water at
         fires. It was not until May, 1916 that a fire engine, a Ford equipped with two twenty-
         five gallon tanks, was purchased from the La France Engine Company for $1250.00.
         ...In 1934, the Board of Fire Underwriters requested that Angels Camp organize a
         fire department under state regulations.
         …In September, 1935, it was proposed to build a new fire house, and in May of 1937,
         a GMC fire truck was purchased. Fire hydrants were installed in the next few years
         both by the city and the Utica Mining Company. After the defeat of a bond issue to
         build a new fire house, service clubs in the city took up the work of raising money for
         the building with card parties, chicken dinners, etc., but the new fire house was not
         obtained until 1959.
                                                        A Brief History of Angels Camp “Home of the Jumping
                                                        Frog,” by Edward C. Leonard, 1998
The Angels Camp Fire Department, the Altaville Melones Fire District, and the CalFire maintain
facilities within the city limits.
The city maintains two fire stations:
                                                   Table 7-2
                                   Angels Camp Fire Stations
                    Station                            Location                  Size             Date
                                                                                               Constructed
   Fire Station No. 1                             1404 East Hwy. 4         3,980 sq. ft.          1967
                                                                           on 0.57 acres
   Fire Station No. 2                             200 Monte Verda          3,000 sq. ft. on       2000
   & Police Station                                                        3.0 acres/a/
         /a/ Approximately 1,000 sq. ft. of the facility is used for fire prevention service
The Angels Camp Fire Department consists of one part-time chief, one full-time fire marshal,
two full-time engineers, three part-time firefighters and sixteen paid on-call firefighters providing
24-hr. staffing.
Angels Camp 2020 General Plan                            Public Facilities & Services Element VII-11

                                                                              September 3, 2009
The Department responds not only to calls within the City limits, but maintains an automatic aid
agreement with Altaville Melones, Murphys and San Andreas Fire Districts. CalFire provides
mutual aid for wildland fires during the summer months with air attack provided from the
Columbia air attack base. Response time by the Angels Camp Fire Department within the city
averages 2-3± minutes.
The incident volume and nature of calls for the Angels Camp Fire Department since 2000 are
found in 2020 General Plan Appendix 7H.
The Angels Camp Fire Department also provides fire safety programs including:
       Stop, Drop & Roll - Teaching children the basics if their clothes catch on fire and a
        related program, “Darth Vadar,” which helps dispel the fear often faced by children
        confronted with a fully suited fire fighter with breathing apparatus.
       E.D.I.T.H. - Exit Drills in the Home
       Fire Evacuation Planning - Helping businesses prepare for emergency evacuation plans
       Fire Extinguisher Training - Providing lecture/practical fire extinguisher training for
        employees and businesses
       Business Fire Safety Inspections - Provide fire safety inspections to help and correct
        fire hazards
The department also provides fire engine visits, station tours and similar community-based
services. The department provides information at the local Home & Garden show and at the
Baby Fair and Health Fair. The Angels Camp Fire Department also works with the Fire Safe
Council to provide educational programs and materials.
Emergency Response Equipment
Fire Department emergency response equipment is listed in 2020 General Plan Appendix 7F,
Table 7F-1.
The Angels Camp Fire Department’s anticipated future assets are listed in 2020 General Plan
Appendix 7F, Table 7F-2.
Medical Equipment
All first responders must have a minimum Basic Life Support (BLS) training. All paid fire
personnel must have Emergency Medical Technician I (EMT I) training. There are no
paramedics on staff.
In addition to Basic Life Support (BLS) medical equipment, the Angels Camp Fire Department
has an auto external defibrillator (AEDs), Oxygen, C-spine kit (Cervical spine kit), and burn kits
supplementing the BLS medical equipment.
Angels Camp 2020 General Plan                   Public Facilities & Services Element VII-12

                                                                                September 3, 2009
Arson Investigation
The Angels Camp Police Department and Fire Department conduct arson investigations jointly
within the city.
Standard of Response Coverage
The standard used by the city in establishing its City Services Impact Mitigation Fee requires one
fire station with a full-service engine company located within 1.5 miles of all developed property
in the city.
Level of service standards vary throughout the state. In addition to levels of service based on
locations of fire stations and response time, many jurisdictions rely on the ISO Public Protection
Classification (PPCTM) Program. However, because the population of Angels Camp fluctuates
widely due to special events, visitor populations, shoppers and workers within the city limits,
Angels Camp plans to undertake a standard of response coverage assessment to establish a level
of service for the city.
Funding
Mitigation fees collected in support of capital improvements for the Angels Camp Fire
Department are detailed in 2020 General Plan Appendix 7A. Fees range between $137± and
$411± for single-family residences.
Angels Camp 2020 General Plan                    Public Facilities & Services Element VII-13

                                                                                  September 3, 2009
7D. City Facilities & Services: Police Protection
        Little police presence was apparent during the early days of Angels Camp... There
        was plenty of crime, mostly theft, but during the first years of the town this crime was
        usually dealt with, swiftly and summarily.
        …Yes, stages were held up in those days, but not in the Angels Camp city area. One
        of the county’s most notorious stage robbers, Black Bart, was active just outside the
        area, as was Joaquin Murietta.
        But the main activity of the Chief was to walk the streets, checking businesses and
        making sure doors were locked, and providing an aire (sic) of security among the
        townspeople. He had to haul the drunks to jail. The city jail was a simple stone
        building on Birds Way. Some considered a stay there worse than being hanged.
                                                 A History of Angels Camp, H. Stuart Manners, 2001
Angels Camp maintains a police department consisting of 14 sworn officers, including nine full-
time, two part-time and five volunteer reserve officers. Sworn officers include the Chief of
Police, two patrol sergeants, four patrol officers, one juvenile officer, one detective, two
volunteer and three part-time officers. One civilian employee serves as administrative staff and
day shift dispatcher and there are two part-time dispatchers, as needed.
The police department is located at 200 Monte Verda Street and totals 3,000 square feet (the fire
department uses approximately 1,000 square feet of the joint police/fire facility). Police
Department assets are listed in 2020 General Plan Appendix 7G, Table 7G-1.
The police department service area includes all of the area within the city limits. In addition, the
police department maintains a mutual aid agreement with Calaveras County and responds to
incidents located within the county, near Angels Camp.
The police department maintains one police officer on duty 24-hours per day. Two sergeants
increase this coverage between 3 p.m. and 1:30 a.m. seven days per week. The police chief
further increases this coverage between 7:30 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. five days per week. In short, out
of a 168-hour work week (24 hours X 7 days per week), there is only one officer on duty 58
hours per week.
The department operates a day-shift dispatch center and the Calaveras County Sheriff’s
Department provides night-shift dispatch services. Animal control services are provided by the
county pursuant to a contract. Jail facilities are located in San Andreas.
Angels Camp 2020 General Plan                    Public Facilities & Services Element VII-14

                                                                                             September 3, 2009
The arrest volumes and nature of reports taken for the Angels Camp Police Department are found
in 2020 General Plan Appendix 7I.
Level of Service
The level of service used to establish the City Services Impact Mitigation Fee indicated in 2020
General Plan Appendix 7A is equal to the existing level of service in 2003 in terms of the ratio
of existing asset costs to existing calls for service per year by development type (Table 7-3).
                                                  Table 7-3
                       Existing Development and Calls for Service
           Development Type                     Development           Existing         Calls per     Existing
                                                   Units/a/           Units/b/          Unit/c/      Calls/d/
Residential, Single-family                            DU                1,045.00          1.14            1,191
Residential, Multi-family                             DU                  284.00          1.71              485
Residential, Mobile Home                              DU                  224.00          1.71              383
Commercial                                           Acres                280.71         11.41            3,202
Industrial                                           Acres                  16.03         2.24               35
Public Facilities                                    Acres                191.13          7.61            1,454
Recreation                                           Acres                   6.43         0.93                5
Open Space                                           Acres                  47.94         0.00                0
                                                                                             Total        6,755
        /a/ Units of development. DU = dwelling unit
        /b/ Estimated existing units of development. Dwelling units based on California Department of
             Finance 200 data adjusted to 2002. Acres estimated by the Angels Camp Community
             Development Department, Planning Division.
        /c/ Average police calls for service per year per unit of development estimated by the Angels Camp
             Police Department
        /d/ Estimated existing calls for service per year = existing units X calls per unit.
Various alternative methods are used throughout the state for establishing level of service for
police protection. These are based, primarily, on numbers of sworn officers per 1,000 population
or as related to response time. Because the Angels Camp Police Department is responsible for
protecting a highly fluctuating population in addition to its resident population due to the influx
of visitors, county residents shopping within the city limits, and workers at major employers
within the city (e.g., government, schools, commercial centers), Angels Camp has opted not to
adopt a level of service based on sworn officers per 1,000 population.
As indicated in the preceding discussion, the level of service established for the Angels Camp
Police Department for the purposes of establishing the City Services Impact Mitigation Fee was
based on the 2003 level of service provided to residents based on calls for service as reflected by
various land uses.
Angels Camp 2020 General Plan                          Public Facilities & Services Element VII-15
                                                                               September 3, 2009
In evaluating other options for establishing level of service for police protection, the city has
opted to adopt a level of service based on response time because this method addresses officer
availability as well as fluctuating population levels. The city’s service goal is a 5-minute
response time for emergency police responses and a 10-minute response time for non-emergency
responses within the city. Due to varying activity levels, increases for both emergency and non-
emergency responses may occur.
Funding
City Services Impact Mitigation Fees provide partial funding in support of capital improvements
for the police department are detailed in 2020 General Plan Appendix 7A and range between
$293± and $440± for single-family residences.
Angels Camp 2020 General Plan                  Public Facilities & Services Element VII-16

                                                                                 September 3, 2009
7E. City Facilities & Services: Parks
        In 1914, the Angels Camp Women’s Improvement Club offered plans for a park in the
        little city, but the war interrupted and it was not until 1933 that the Utica Park idea
        was again revived by Sylvia Murray and Millie Smith, and soon the Utica Park
        Association was formed with Ed C. Leonard elected president…
        On January 2, 1954, the Association asked the city to finance the park, and a
        volunteer program was developed. The ground was leveled and the old north Utica
        shaft was filled above the sixty-foot level. Volunteer organizations took on the work
        of planting the area. The Angels Booster Club built a frog pond and stocked it with
        large frogs. However, this project proved unsuccessful, as seeping water caved in the
        openings to the mine and water and frogs disappeared.
        The round band pavilion from the Hubler Brewery was donated to the park and a
        children’s playground and other features were added over the years to make the park
        a popular meeting place for all citizens of the city and the tourists. In 1945, a statue
        of Mark Twain was dedicated in the park. It was donated by a motion picture
        company making a film on the life of Mark Twain, and was sculptured by P.C.
        Manella of Los Angeles.
                                                A Brief History of Angels Camp “Home of the Jumping
                                                Frog,” by Edward C. Leonard, 1998
Existing park facilities within the city are:
                                             Table 7-4
                             City Park and Recreation Facilities
                              Within Angels Camp City Limits
       Park                               Location/Description                          Acreage
 Gateway Park           Angel Oaks Drive                                                      1.52
                        APN: 58-034-17
 Utica Park             1192 South Main Street                                                2.63
                        APN: 60-006-08
 Tryon Park             Booster Way                                                           0.34
                        APN: 62-003-43
                                                                                Total         4.49
Angels Camp 2020 General Plan                    Public Facilities & Services Element VII-17

                                                                                              September 3, 2009
Level of Service
The current level of service for park improvements within Angels Camp, as established by the
City of Angels Impact Fee Study Report; July 31, 2003, is 1.37 acres per 1,000 population.
Park land acquisition pursuant to the Quimby Act (Government Code 66477) governs the
acquisition of land for parks as a condition of residential subdivision approval. The statute
specifies the ratios of acreage to population that may be used to establish dedication requirements
or calculate fees in lieu of dedication. The Quimby Act provides for a standard based on a ratio
of 3.0 acres and 5.0 acres per 1,000 residents. Because the ratio of park improvements-to-
population in Angels Camp in 2003 (in conjunction with adoption of the City’ City Services
Impact Mitigation Fee) was below 3.0 acres per 1,000; the minimum 3.0 acre standard was
adopted in conjunction with the City Services Impact Mitigation Fee.
 2003 Level of Service Park Improvements: 1.37 Acres per 1,000 population
 2003 Quimby Act - Park Land Acquisition:                                  3 acres per 1,000 population
Alternative levels of service occur throughout the United States. Nearly all jurisdictions adopt a
level of service for parks based on acres of parks per 1,000 population.
Several organizations (e.g., the National Recreation and Park Association, U.S. Department of
the Interior Bureau of Outdoor Recreation) publish standards for specific recreational facilities
that assist in establishing a community’s need for specific facilities, and in guiding design of
these facilities (e.g., baseball diamonds, tennis courts, basketball courts, tot lots). However,
relatively few guidelines are available for estimating overall community park and recreation
facility needs based on the most widely-used recreation planning parameter: acres of facilities
needed per 1,000 individuals. One of the most intensive surveys undertaken to establish
guidelines for calculating a community’s overall recreational facility needs was completed in
1976 by the Canadian Ministry of Culture and Recreation1. Because this study was in-depth,
relatively recent, and surveyed communities on a large scale, the resulting standards established
by that study have been used as a guide in updating facility needs for Angels Camp. The results
of that study endorsed a standard of 20 acres of recreational facilities per 1,000 population, while
recognizing that, in actual application, standards could vary from 11.75 to 20.0 acres per 1,000.
         1
                 “Guidelines for Developing Public Recreation Facility Standards”, Ministry of Culture and Recreation
                 Sports and Fitness Division, 1976.
Angels Camp 2020 General Plan                           Public Facilities & Services Element VII-18

                                                                                  September 3, 2009
In actual practice in California, the level of service for parkland in small jurisdictions is typically
five acres per 1,000 population based on the provisions of the Quimby Act. Angels Camp
follows this precedent by establishing a standard of a minimum of five acres of parkland per
1,000 population.
The city’s projected resident population for 2020 is approximately 4,622-5,138 residents. With
a city park standard of 5 acres per 1,000 population, Angels Camp should strive to construct and
maintain a minimum of 23.11± to 25.69± acres of parkland (5,130± to 5,300± population/1,000
X 5 acres per 1,000 population). Given the city’s existing 4.49± acres of park facilities, the city
has a projected shortfall of 18.62± to 21.2± acres of park and recreation facilities by the year
2020.
Funding
City Services Impact Mitigation Fees assist in funding capital improvements for parks are
detailed in 2020 General Plan Appendix 7A and range between $523± and $1,242± for a single-
family residence.
Angels Camp 2020 General Plan                      Public Facilities & Services Element VII-19

                                                                                 September 3, 2009
7F. City Facilities & Services: Parking
        Another big hotel in downtown, the 54-room Calaveras Hotel, burned beyond repair
        in 1938. Walter Valente described the nature of the fire. “It was in the middle of the
        night, the smoke and flames went straight up into the sky, no wind, no buffing, just
        straight up high into the air.” …The new Visitors Bureau and Center, with its
        parking facility, is now located on the site.
                                               A History of Angels Camp, H. Stuart Manners, 2001
Pursuant to the Angels Camp Parking Inventory, the city has five public parking lots plus
curbside parking providing 203 individual spaces, 2 RV spaces and 4 bus spaces - all located
within the downtown historic district.
                                           Figure 7-2
           Public Parking Facilities in Angels Camp Downtown Historic District
Angels Camp 2020 General Plan                   Public Facilities & Services Element VII-20

                                                                                   September 3, 2009
                                               Table 7-5
          Public Parking – Angels Camp Downtown Historic District
                                                                        Approximate     Number of
                                                     Assessor’s
                 Parking                                                   Size          Standard
                                                  Parcel Number
                                                                          (Acres)         Spaces
Curbside                                         --                                 --            58
Parking Lot Number 1                             062-004-082, -081,            1.2 ac.            49
                                                 -016, -017
Parking Lot Number 2                             060-012-012                  0.35 ac             28
Parking Lot Number 3/c/                          060-012-009, -026            0.20 ac             21
                                                 p/o 060-012-023
Parking Lot Number 4/a/                          060-010-034, -059                  --            32
Parking Lot Number 5/b/                          062-004-043,-044,            0.32 ac             15
                                                 -045
                                                    Total /a/, /b/, /c/                          203
               /a/ Plus 2 RV spaces
               /b/ Plus 4 Bus spaces
               /c/ Some spaces are reserved for non-public parking
Angels Camp 2020 General Plan                       Public Facilities & Services Element VII-21

                                                                                  September 3, 2009
7G. City Facilities & Services: Administration
       Angels Camp (officially incorporated as the City of Angels on January 24, 1912)
       remains unique among California municipalities in that it has had only nine mayors
       during its 75 years. In fact, only six of those nine heads of Angels City Government
       actually have been bearers of the title of ‘Mayor.’ The first three selected as heads of
       the city’s governing body were called Presidents of the City Board of Trustees.
                                               Las Calaveras, Quarterly Bulletin of the Calaveras
                                               County Historical Society, Angels Camp 75th Anniversary
                                               Edition, January, 1987, Volume 35, #2; A Change of
                                               Mayors is Rare Happening in City of Angels
                                               `
                                           Table 7-6
                             The Mayors of Angels Camp
                   Name                     Occupation                       Tenure
          August May               Carpenter                            1912-1914
          Carlton H. Wood          Wells Fargo agent                    1914-1916
          George W. Patterson      Manager, telephone company           1916-1917
          Carlton H. Wood          Wells Fargo agent                    1917-1932
          Alfred D. Menz           Soda and bottle works                1932-1940
          John Lemue               Owner, Angels Hotel                  1940-1968
          James Valente            Banker                               1968-1974
          Oliver Garcia            PG&E                                 1972-1984
          Elizabeth P. Alford      Teacher                              1984-1990
          Paul Raggio              Caltrans, Rancher                    1990-1992
          George Middleton         Truck driver                         1992-1994
          Tad Folendorf            Employment Development               1994-1998
                                   Department
          Jack Johnson             Caltrans                             1998-2000
          Debbie Ponte             Assisted living facility             2000-2004
                                   administrator
          William Hutchinson       Teacher                              2004 to present
The city maintains administration facilities at 584 South Main Street. The Angels Camp City
Hall was built in 1970 and provides 1,558 square feet. City council meetings are currently held
at Angels Camp Fire Station #1.
Angels Camp 2020 General Plan                    Public Facilities & Services Element VII-22

                                                                               September 3, 2009
The Angels Camp Community Development Department (Building Department, Planning
Department and Fire Prevention) is located at 571 Stanislaus Avenue, Suite C. The 983± square-
foot facility is leased by the city.
The city has been investigating a consolidation and/or relocation of all the city administrative
facilities.
7H. City Facilities & Services: Public Works
Roadways
The city encompasses19± miles of collector local roadways (excluding Highways 4 and 49).
2020 General Plan Appendix 3A lists these roadways.
Water
The city provides water service to its residents. The system is detailed in Section 7B with a
detailed list of facilities found in 2020 General Plan Appendix 7B.
Wastewater & Drainage Facilities
The city provides wastewater service to its residents. The system is detailed in Section 7B with a
detailed list of facilities found in 2020 General Plan Appendix 7B.
Other
The location of the city’s public works facilities is detailed in 2020 General Plan Appendix 7B.
Angels Camp 2020 General Plan                    Public Facilities & Services Element VII-23

                                                                                 September 3, 2009
7I. County, State, Federal and Other Facilities & Services
         The first post office serving Angels Camp was established on Carson Creek on
         November 6, 1851. It was moved to Angels Camp on May 27, 1853
                                               A Brief History of Angels Camp “Home of the Jumping
                                               Frog,” by Edward C. Leonard, 1998
         In 1946 the hydroelectric system, including its water rights, flumes, reservoirs and
         ditches still owned by the Hobart Estate, was sold and came under the ownership of
         the Pacific Gas and Electric Company. Subsequently, some of the water rights were
         reserved by the Union Public Utilities District. …In 1984 the domestic water system
         was sold by PG&E to several entities, one of which was the City of Angels Camp.
                                               A History of Angels Camp, H. Stuart Manners, 2001
County Facilities & Services
County facilities and services located within the city are detailed in 2020 General Plan
Appendix 7D and include the Calaveras County Coroner (South Main Street), Calaveras County
Angels Branch Library, and the Calaveras County Superintendent of Schools (185 S. Main
Street).
Library
The Angels branch of the Calaveras County Library system is located in the Middleton Shopping
Center on North Main Street.
Solid Waste Facilities in and near the Angels Camp Sphere of Influence
Red Hill Transfer Station
This facility, located at 5198 Red Hill Road, is operated by Calaveras County. The station
provides recycling and biomass disposal opportunities for county residents accepting both yard
waste and general solid waste. Recycling opportunities are limited to some plastics, aluminum
cans, bottles, newspapers, magazines and similar products. Cardboard recycling bins are a recent
addition at the facility.
The facility does not currently accept widely-used household hazardous waste materials such as
latex paint. The county is investigating expanding the site to accept universal waste, which
would include acceptance of some classes of Household Hazardous Wastes.
20/20 Buy-Back
20/20 Buy-back facilities are located behind Save Mart at the Save Mart Shopping Center. This
facility accepts recyclable containers and both accepts and provides compensation for beverage
containers with a cash refund value (CRV).
Angels Camp 2020 General Plan                   Public Facilities & Services Element VII-24

                                                                               September 3, 2009
SEI Solid Waste, Inc
SEI, Solid Waste, Inc. (formerly Struck Enterprises, Inc.) contracts with Angels Camp for solid
waste pick-up. SEI provides curbside pickup of household garbage for residents of Angels
Camp. Free curbside recycling also is offered, by arrangement, and includes curbside pickup of
newspapers, magazines, aluminum, tin, glass and some plastics. SEI also provides recycling
services for businesses, including pick-up of recyclables on site.
Some limited drop-off opportunities are available from SEI at their facility located at 1149
Dunbar Road, in Arnold.
Rock Creek Facility
This transfer station and county landfill is located off Hunt Road in Milton. The facility provides
disposal services for most types of solid waste materials.
Household Hazardous Waste
Calaveras County offers an annual household hazardous waste drop-off day at the county
fairgrounds located just south of Angels Camp. This provides the only opportunity for Angels
Camp residents to dispose of household hazardous wastes without traveling a long distance to the
Rock Creek transfer station in Milton.
The county is investigating an expansion of the Red Hill facility to allow disposal of Universal
Waste, which would permit the site to accept some classes of household hazardous wastes for
city residents.
Used Motor Oil, Oil Filters, Automobile Batteries, Antifreeze
Calaveras County sponsors nine Used Oil Collection Centers (UOCCs). In Angels Camp,
Kragen Automotive accepts used motor oil, oil filters, automobile batteries and antifreeze
Monday thru Friday, 8 a.m. - 5 p.m.
Potential New Facilities
The county also is considering expansion of available solid waste disposal facilities in the
county, and is currently focused on providing a site in the high country, as no facilities currently
exist above Arnold.
Court System
Pursuant to a 1998 California Constitutional amendment, Calaveras County consolidated its
Municipal and Superior Courts into a single Superior Court system, as did all 58 of California’s
counties. Oversight of Superior trial courts is provided by the Administrative Office of the
Courts, a part of the Judicial Council of California, the policy and rule-making body of the state
court system.
Calaveras County’s Superior Court system includes two judges and support staff located in a
Angels Camp 2020 General Plan                     Public Facilities & Services Element VII-25

                                                                                September 3, 2009
single court location in San Andreas at 891 Mountain Ranch Road.
State Facilities & Services
State facilities located within the city are detailed in 2020 General Plan Appendix 7D and
include Highway 49 and Highway 4. Caltrans maintains a facility in the city.
Federal Facilities & Services
Federal facilities located within the city are detailed in 2020 General Plan Appendix 7D and
include the Altaville and Angels Camp Post Offices. The city owns the building occupied by the
Angels Camp Post Office, which is leased through 2016. The United States Bureau of
Reclamation oversees management of Melones Reservoir and its surrounding lands. A portion
of these lands, including trails associated with the reservoir, are within the Angels Camp Sphere
of Influence.
Other Facilities & Services
Schools
Public and private schools located within the city limits are detailed in 2020 General Plan
Appendix 7D and include a public high school and public elementary school.
Cemeteries
Cemeteries located within the city limits are detailed in 2020 General Plan Appendix 7D. There
are four cemeteries (excluding private burial sites and undiscovered historic or prehistoric sites)
located within the city limits.
Public & Quasi-Public Utility Facilities
Public and quasi-public utilities regulated by the Public Utilities Commission and/or the Federal
Communications Commission and located or partially located within the city limits are detailed
in 2020 General Plan Appendix 7D and include telephone, propane, electrical, and
communication facilities and services.
Medical Facilities & Services
Angels Camp Family Medical Clinic (Angels Towne Center)
Ambulance
Recreational Facilities
The Park and Recreation Element (2020 General Plan Chapter 12, Tables 12-1, 12-2 and 12-3)
lists all recreational facilities within the Angels Camp Area of Interest.
Angels Camp 2020 General Plan                     Public Facilities & Services Element VII-26
                                                                                   September 3, 2009
GOALS, POLICIES AND IMPLEMENTATION PROGRAMS
7A. City Facilities & Services: General
Goal 7A      Maintain and, where feasible, increase levels of city-provided water service,
             wastewater service, fire, police, parks, parking, public works, administrative and
             other services and infrastructure.
Policies
   7.A.1     Spread the costs of providing public facilities and services to all beneficiaries.
   7.A.2     Pursue innovative approaches to financing public facilities and services.
   7.A.3     Maintain or improve the existing condition of city-owned facilities.
   7.A.4     Continue to recognize the need to accommodate county residents, workers, and
             visitors as well as city residents in planning for infrastructure improvements and
             levels of service.
   7.A.5     Monitor the condition of and plan for future public facility needs.
   7.A.6     New development shall be approved when adequate water and wastewater
             infrastructure (i.e., sufficient storage, treatment and distribution capacity) exists
             to serve the new project’s projected demand in addition to existing commitments
             for service for approved projects that have a reasonable likelihood of completion.
              [2020 GENERAL PLAN MITIGATION MEASURE, MM-UTILITY-03]
Implementation Programs
   7.A.a     Consider Alternative Funding Sources for Public Facilities and Services
             Consider funding for public facilities and city services that spreads the cost of
             providing such facilities and services to all beneficiaries (i.e., residents, visitors,
             employees, new development and other beneficiaries). Alternative funding
             sources that may be investigated also include revisions to sales taxes and
             transient occupancy taxes.
             Related Programs: 7Cl (Public Facilities & Services), 7Df (Public Facilities & Services), 7Ee
             (Public Facilities & Services)
Angels Camp 2020 General Plan                   Public Facilities & Services Element VII-27

                                                                                  September 3, 2009
  7.A.b     Consider Establishing a Redevelopment Agency to Assist in the Provision of
            Affordable Housing, to Fund Infrastructure Improvements, and to Achieve
            Other City Goals Identified in the General Plan
            Consider establishing a redevelopment agency and plan, or similar mechanism, to
            assist in:
                 a. The provision of affordable housing
                 b. Funding infrastructure improvements that may be necessary for the
                      provision of affordable housing or economic development
                 c. Funding water and wastewater infrastructure improvements
                 d. Funding fire and medical protection infrastructure improvements
                      (e.g., upgrading fire hydrants, increasing fire flow)
                 e. Funding park infrastructure and related improvements (e.g.,
                      sidewalk construction, facilities for low-impact modes of
                      transportation)
                 f. The provision of infrastructure improvements supporting public
                      works facilities (e.g., sidewalks, drainage facilities)
                 g. The rehabilitation of historic properties
                 h. Promoting economic development (e.g., undertaking commercial area
                      enhancements, improving and/or expanding parking facilities,
                      establishing a commercial/retail facade loan program, undertaking
                      gateway beautification projects, undertaking curb, gutter and
                      sidewalk replacement and repair, providing and/or improving
                      restroom facilities, conducting an historic inventory)
            The preceding activities are subject to redevelopment law restrictions and
            requirements. The city should hold at least one public forum to discuss the
            establishment of a redevelopment agency prior to 2009.
            Equivalent Programs: 1Af (Land Use), 2Cf (Housing), 7Bc (Public Facilities & Services), 7Cb
            (Public Facilities & Services), 7Eb (Public Facilities & Services), 7Fa (Public Facilities &
            Services), 7Ha (Public Facilities & Services), 8Bp (Cultural Resources), 10Al (Economic
            Development), 12Ea (Parks & Recreation)
Angels Camp 2020 General Plan                   Public Facilities & Services Element VII-28
                                                                            September 3, 2009
7.A.c       Incorporate Facilities for Special Needs Populations in the Design of Public-
            Use Centers
            Consider the needs of special needs populations when designing public-use
            facilities, such as community centers. For example, as feasible, include facilities
            for a senior center or meeting room, youth center, community dining room,
            computer centers, or similar facilities.
            Equivalent Program: 2Dh (Housing)
7.A.d       Prepare and Maintain a Capital Improvement Plan (CIP)
            Prepare and maintain a capital improvement plan for the city addressing time
            schedules and potential funding sources for maintenance and expansion of
            existing facilities and construction of new facilities (e.g., city hall, community
            development department, museum), which are not already addressed in other
            facilities management plans for the city (e.g., water and wastewater management
            plans, roads). The CIP should be updated annually.
7.A.e       Establish a Growth Management /Infrastructure Allocation Program
            [2020 GENERAL PLAN MITIGATION MEASURE – MM-LAND-03,
            MM-UTILITY-04, MM-CIRCULATION-01, MM-UTILITY-04]
            Establish a growth management program, including adoption of a growth
            management ordinance, to:
                a. Encourage a cohesive pattern of urbanization that balances competing
                     interests, including the need for additional housing and related
                     development, and the community desire to maintain community
                     character, ensure adequate public facilities, and provide public open
                     spaces for recreation, economic development and maintenance of scenic
                     resources
                a. Ensure all new development provides the necessary infrastructure and
                     public facilities required to support the development
                b. Provide the framework to phase and pace growth so as to minimize its
                     fiscal and environmental impacts, and ensure concurrency between
                     growth, infrastructure and services
                c. Provide for the accommodation of the city's fair-share housing allocations
                     to meet the needs of all segments of the community
                d. Establish a growth management program that is consistent with the
                     general plan
Angels Camp 2020 General Plan                 Public Facilities & Services Element VII-29

                                                                               September 3, 2009
                e. Assure that the rate of population growth will not exceed the average
                    annual growth rates established in the general plan, so that new
                    development occurs concurrently with necessary infrastructure and public
                    service improvements
                f. Ensure that adequate wastewater facilities and services are available to
                    meet the needs of existing and new development
                g. Provide sufficient quantities of water for residents and businesses
                h. Establish limits for new water and wastewater connections consistent
                    with the anticipated timing of capital improvements necessary to provide
                    sufficient capacity as identified in the adopted Water and Wastewater
                    Management Plans, as that plan may be amended.
                i. Revise water and wastewater master plans based on a range of population
                    growth (e.g., 1.8% - 2.52%)
                j. Identify Benefit Basins for new local roadways included in the 2020
                    General Plan and commence formation of the Benefit Basins in
                    anticipation of new development within the Basins
            In conjunction with this program, prepare a growth allocation study, jobs/housing
            balance study to determine a healthy balance between job growth, labor force,
            affordable housing, wages and the appropriate allocation of water and sewer
            connections necessary to achieve this balance. In addition, include an economic
            implementation program to assure that all aspects of the program are
            accomplished.
            The program should be completed in coordination with the collaborative UPLAN
            (Partnership in Integrated Planning) modeling efforts being undertaken by the
            Calaveras Council of Governments to assist in anticipating future growth and
            development and the demand on city and county infrastructure and resources.
            Within 30 months of adopting General Plan 2020, draft a growth management
            plan addressing projected population growth (ranging from a low of 1.8% to at
            least 2.52%) and available infrastructure (water and wastewater services, at a
            minimum)
            Equivalent Programs: 1Ag (Land Use), 7Bl (Public Facilities & Services), 10Ae (Economic
Angels Camp 2020 General Plan               Public Facilities & Services Element VII-30
                                                                                    September 3, 2009
             Development)
7B. City Facilities & Services: Water and Wastewater
Goal 7B      Continue to improve Angels Camp’s capacity to store, treat and deliver water and
             to collect and treat wastewater as necessary to achieve the stated goals of the city.
Policies
   7.B.1     Continue to recognize the need to accommodate county residents, workers, and
             visitors as well as city residents in planning for infrastructure improvements and
             levels of service.
   7.B.2     Spread the costs of providing water and wastewater services to all beneficiaries.
   7.B.3     Pursue innovative approaches to financing water and wastewater facility
             maintenance and improvements.
   7.B.4     Monitor the condition of and plan for future water and wastewater facility needs.
   7.B.5     Maintain water and wastewater facilities adequate to serve the city’s housing
             needs for all income levels.
   7.B.6     Protect public facilities from encroachment by incompatible land uses.
   7.B.7     Establish and pursue water storage capacity levels compatible with community
             health and safety needs.
Implementation Programs
   7.B.a     Continue to Coordinate Land Use Data and Water and Wastewater Master
             Planning Efforts
             Continue to update land use data and provide that data to the city engineer for use
             in updates of the City of Angels Water and Wastewater Master Plans.
             Related Programs: 1Ag (Land Use), 2Bf (Housing), 2Bh (Housing), 4Gh (Conservation &
             Open Space), 6Ef (Public Safety), 7Bh (Public Facilities & Services), 7Bk (Public Facilities &
             Services), 7Bj (Public Facilities & Services), 10Ae (Economic Development)
Angels Camp 2020 General Plan                      Public Facilities & Services Element VII-31

                                                                            September 3, 2009
  7.B.b     Continue to Update the City Water and Wastewater Master Plans
            Continue to update and implement the city’s water master plan in compliance
            with state law including regular updates to the facility financing plan. Continue
            to update and implement the city’s wastewater master plan in compliance with
            state law including regular updates to the facility financing plan.
            Related Programs: 4Gf (Conservation & Open Space), 4Gg (Conservation & Open Space)
  7.B.c     Consider Establishing a Redevelopment Agency to Assist in the Provision of
            Affordable Housing, to Fund Infrastructure Improvements, and to Achieve
            Other City Goals Identified in the General Plan
            Consider establishing a redevelopment agency and plan, or similar mechanism, to
            assist in:
                 a. The provision of affordable housing
                 b. Funding infrastructure improvements that may be necessary for the
                     provision of affordable housing or economic development
                 c. Funding water and wastewater infrastructure improvements
                 d. Funding fire and medical protection infrastructure improvements
                     (e.g., upgrading fire hydrants, increasing fire flow)
                 e. Funding park infrastructure and related improvements (e.g.,
                     sidewalk construction, facilities for low-impact modes of
                     transportation)
                 f. The provision of infrastructure improvements supporting public
                     works facilities (e.g., sidewalks, drainage facilities)
                 g. The rehabilitation of historic properties
                 h. Promoting economic development (e.g., undertaking commercial area
                     enhancements, improving and/or expanding parking facilities,
                     establishing a commercial/retail facade loan program, undertaking
                     gateway beautification projects, undertaking curb, gutter and sidewalk
                     replacement and repair, providing and/or improving restroom facilities,
                     conducting an historic inventory)
            The preceding activities are subject to redevelopment law restrictions and
            requirements. The city should hold at least one public forum to discuss the
Angels Camp 2020 General Plan                Public Facilities & Services Element VII-32

                                                                                  September 3, 2009
            establishment of a redevelopment agency prior to 2009.
            Equivalent Programs: 1Af (Land Use), 2Cf (Housing), 7Ab (Public Facilities & Services), 7Cb
            (Public Facilities & Services), 7Eb (Public Facilities & Services), 7Fa (Public Facilities &
            Services), 7Ha (Public Facilities & Services), 8Bp (Cultural Resources), 10Al (Economic
            Development), 12Ea (Parks & Recreation)
   7.B.d    Adopt Public Water Requirements
            Amend Section 14.75.010 of the municipal code to state that all new
            development on parcels within the city limits shall be served with public water.
            Exceptions may be granted for hardships by the City Council pursuant to review
            on a case-by-case basis.
            Equivalent Program: 1Ga (Land Use)
  7.B.e     Adopt Public Sewer Requirements
            Amend Section 13.12.025 of the municipal code to state that all new
            development on parcels within the city limits shall be served with public sewer.
            Exceptions may be granted for hardships by the City Council pursuant to review
            on a case-by-case basis.
            Equivalent Program: 1Gb (Land Use)
   7.B.f    Protect the City’s Wastewater Treatment Facility From Conflicts With
            Incompatible Land Uses
            Designate and maintain compatible land uses surrounding the city’s wastewater
            treatment facilities, including spray fields. Coordinate with Calaveras County to
            initiate necessary changes to the county general plan to accomplish this purpose.
            Compatible county land use designations are those consistent with zoning
            districts requiring minimum parcel sizes of five acres or larger. Establish a
            boundary map surrounding the wastewater treatment plant indicating those areas
            that could affect or be affected by the treatment plant. Identify properties within
            this zone of potential effect and record notices to property owners recognizing the
            treatment plant’s right to exist and detailing the potential for objectionable odors
            (or other effects) that may be present as a result of living in close proximity to the
            treatment plant.
            Equivalent Programs: 1Bh (Land Use), 4He (Conservation and Open Space)
            Related Programs: 1Hc (Land Use)
            See also: Map 1B: Angels Camp 2020 General Plan Primary and Secondary Sphere of
            Influence; Map 1C: Angels Camp 2020 General Plan Area of Interest / Comment
Angels Camp 2020 General Plan                   Public Facilities & Services Element VII-33

                                                                                  September 3, 2009
  7.B.g     Forward a Draft Ordinance to the City Council to Waive, Reduce and/or
            Defer Application, Connection and Impact Fee Payments For Low-to-
            Moderate Income Housing Projects
            Draft an enabling ordinance to waive, reduce and/or defer all or portions of the
            city’s application, connection and/or impact mitigation fees for low or very low
            income housing projects. The ordinance should, at a minimum, address deferral
            for the payment of connection fees and/or impact fees (that are not waived) until
            after issuance of building permit (e.g., prior to final inspection) to reduce
            developer construction financing costs and overall development costs for low-to-
            moderate income housing projects.
            Equivalent Program: 2Bc (Housing)
            Related Programs: 1Db (Land Use), 2Bg (Housing), 3Ai (Circulation), 3Ak (Circulation), 3Bf
            (Circulation), 4Cg (Conservation and Open Space), 7Bi (Public Facilities & Services), 7Cc
            (Public Facilities & Services), 7Da (Public Facilities & Services), 7Ea (Public Facilities &
            Services), 7Ed (Public Facilities & Services), 12Bf (Parks & Recreation), 12Ef (Parks &
            Recreation)
  7.B.h     Continue to Monitor the City’s Water Treatment Plant Capacity to Ensure
            Sufficient Capacity for New Development and to Meet the City’s Land Use
            Goals
            If the city’s growth rate continues to exceed 2%, the city will undertake one or
            more of the following programs (or equivalent programs) to ensure adequate (i.e.,
            sufficient storage, treatment and distribution) capacity to meet the city’s
            affordable housing objectives and other new projected development [2020
            GENERAL PLAN MITIGATION MEASURE, MM-UTILITY-05]:
                 a. Rearrange facility improvement priorities in the City of Angels Water
                     Master Plan to give priority to improvements resulting in increased water
                     treatment plant capacity
                 b. Aggressively seek funding to accelerate construction of key
                     improvements to the city’s water facilities to allow for the approval of
                     new affordable housing projects in the short-term. Funding sources to be
                     pursued should include state and federal funding supporting the provision
                     of affordable housing. The city intends to apply for at least one new grant
                     prior to June 30, 2009, to assist in accelerating construction of
                     improvements to increase the capacity of the city’s water treatment
                     facilities if necessary to accommodate accelerated growth (i.e., addition
                     of a 4th filter). Target funding sources include, but are not limited to:
                           U.S. Department of Agriculture Small Communities Grant
                               Program
Angels Camp 2020 General Plan                   Public Facilities & Services Element VII-34

                                                                                    September 3, 2009
                                   SB 308 (Financing assessment, bond financing, state
                                    program)
                                   Redevelopment Funds (See 2020 General Plan Programs
                                    2Cf, 7Bc)
            The financing plan and timeline for constructing these facility improvements are
            described in the City of Angels Water Master Plan, 2002, hereby incorporated by
            reference.
            If insufficient water treatment capacity exists to serve existing commitments and
            new development within 24 months of adopting 2020 General Plan, then the city
            will implement a policy of no net increase in water connections until sufficient
            water treatment facilities are established to service existing commitments and
            new development. [2020 GENERAL PLAN MITIGATION MEASURE,
            MM-UTILITY-05]
            Equivalent Program: 2Bf (Housing)
            Related Programs: 1Ag (Land Use), 2Bh (Housing), 4Gh (Conservation & Open Space), 6Ef
            (Public Safety), 7Ba (Public Facilities & Services), 7Bk (Public Facilities & Services), 7Bj
            (Public Facilities & Services), 10Ae (Economic Development)
7.B.i       Reduce Connection Fees for Low and Very Low Income Households
            Commensurate With the Acquisition of Funding from State and Federal
            Sources Supporting Affordable Housing
            The city shall investigate the feasibility of providing a reduction in water and/or
            wastewater connection fees to low and very low income households when the city
            acquires state or federal funding to improve the city’s water and wastewater
            systems from sources intended to assist low and very low income families. As
            feasible, the city should strive to reduce connection fees in an amount
            commensurate with the level of funding received.
            Equivalent Program: 2Bg (Housing)
            Related Programs: 2Bc (Housing), 3Ai (Circulation), 3Ak (Circulation), 3Bf (Circulation), 4Cf
            (Conservation and Open Space), 7Bg (Public Facilities & Services), 7Cc (Public Facilities &
            Services), 7Da (Public Facilities & Services), 7Ea (Public Facilities & Services), 7Ed (Public
            Facilities & Services), 12Bf (Parks & Recreation), 12Ef (Parks & Recreation)
Angels Camp 2020 General Plan                    Public Facilities & Services Element VII-35

                                                                                     September 3, 2009
7.B.j       Maintain Sufficient Water and Wastewater Capacity
            [2020 GENERAL PLAN MITIGATION MEASURE, MM-UTILITY-01]
            If insufficient wastewater storage, treatment, or delivery capacity exists to serve
            existing commitments and new development, then the city will implement a
            policy of no net increase in wastewater connections until sufficient wastewater
            capacity has been established to service existing commitments and new
            development.
            If insufficient water storage, treatment or delivery capacity exists to serve
            existing commitments and new development, then the city will implement a
            policy of no net increase in water connections until sufficient water treatment
            facilities are established to service existing commitments and new development
            Equivalent Program: 2Bh (Housing)
            Related Programs: 1Ag (Land Use), 2Bf (Housing), 4Gh (Conservation & Open Space), 6Ef
            (Public Safety), 7Ba (Public Facilities & Services), 7Bh (Public Facilities & Services), 7Bk
            (Public Facilities & Services), 10Ae (Economic Development)
7.B.k       Increase Water Storage Capacity
            In future updates of the water master plan, identify additional locations for new
            water storage facilities (or expansion of existing facilities), estimate the costs of
            establishing and acquiring these new facilities and estimate the capacity needed
            within new water storage facilities sufficient to meet the demands of the city
            during emergency situations. The city anticipates that a minimum of three day
            supply of water should be available for emergency situations, with a goal of
            providing five to seven days’ water storage. Facilities to be considered include,
            but are not limited to, the addition of new storage tank(s) and/or a new
            reservoir(s). Funding sources for new facilities should address the impacts of
            new development on city water demand and allocate a proportionate share of the
            cost of new water storage facilities to new development.
            Equivalent Program: 6Ef (Public Safety)
            Related Programs: 1Ag (Land Use), 2Bf (Housing), 2Bh (Housing), 4Gh (Conservation &
            Open Space), 7Ba (Public Facilities & Services), 7Bh (Public Facilities & Services), 7Bj (Public
            Facilities & Services), 10Ae (Economic Development)
Angels Camp 2020 General Plan                    Public Facilities & Services Element VII-36

                                                                           September 3, 2009
7.B.l       Establish a Growth Management /Infrastructure Allocation Program
            [2020 GENERAL PLAN MITIGATION MEASURE MM-LAND-03, MM-
            UTILITY-04, MM-CIRCULATION-01, MM-UTILITY-04]
            Establish a growth management program, including adoption of a growth
            management ordinance, to:
            a.      Encourage a cohesive pattern of urbanization that balances competing
                    interests, including the need for additional housing and related
                    development, and the community desire to maintain community
                    character, ensure adequate public facilities, and provide public open
                    spaces for recreation, economic development and maintenance of scenic
                    resources
            b.      Ensure all new development provides the necessary infrastructure and
                    public facilities required to support the development
            c.      Provide the framework to phase and pace growth so as to minimize its
                    fiscal and environmental impacts, and ensure concurrency between
                    growth, infrastructure and services
            d.      Provide for the accommodation of the city's fair-share housing allocations
                    to meet the needs of all segments of the community
            e.      Establish a growth management program that is consistent with the
                    general plan
            f.      Assure that the rate of population growth will not exceed the average
                    annual growth rates established in the general plan, so that new
                    development occurs concurrently with necessary infrastructure and public
                    service improvements
            g.      Ensure that adequate wastewater facilities and services are available to
                    meet the needs of existing and new development
            h.      Provide sufficient quantities of water for residents and businesses
            i.      Establish limits for new water and wastewater connections consistent
                    with the anticipated timing of capital improvements necessary to provide
                    sufficient capacity as identified in the adopted Water and Wastewater
                    Management Plans, as that plan may be amended.
            j.      Revise water and wastewater master plans based on a range of population
                    growth (e.g., 1.8 – 2.52%)
Angels Camp 2020 General Plan                Public Facilities & Services Element VII-37

                                                                              September 3, 2009
            k.      Identify Benefit Basins for new local roadways included in the 2020
                    General Plan and commence formation of the Benefit Basins in
                    anticipation of new development within the Basins
            In conjunction with this program, prepare a growth allocation study, jobs/housing
            balance study to determine a healthy balance between job growth, labor force,
            affordable housing, wages and the appropriate allocation of water and sewer
            connections necessary to achieve this balance. In addition, include an economic
            implementation program to assure that all aspects of the program are
            accomplished.
            The program should be completed in coordination with the collaborative UPLAN
            (Partnership in Integrated Planning) modeling efforts being undertaken by the
            Calaveras Council of Governments to assist in anticipating future growth and
            development and the demand on city and county infrastructure and resources.
            Within 30 months of adopting General Plan 2020, draft a growth management
            plan addressing projected population growth (ranging from a low of 1.8% to at
            least 2.52%) and available infrastructure (water and wastewater services, at a
            minimum)
            Equivalent Programs: 1Ag (Land Use), 7Ae (Public Facilities & Services), 10Ae (Economic
            Development)
7.B.m       At Capacity Wastewater Systems
            [2020 GENERAL PLAN MITIGATION MEASURE, MM-UTILITY-02]
            The city shall implement a process requiring no net increase in wastewater
            connections in conjunction with adoption of the 2020 General Plan in the areas
            connecting to the system identified as “at capacity” in 2020 General Plan
            Appendix 7J) The program will remain effect until the following is completed:
            A new sewer line is constructed to serve the North End of Angels Camp (north of
            SR 4) including all sewer lines currently served by the Altaville Lift Station and
            discharge has been rerouted from the Altaville Lift Station to the new line freeing
            up capacity in the Altaville Sewer Line (which also has been identified as "at
            capacity" by the City). The route of the new sewer line shall be evaluated
            pursuant to a separate environmental evaluation once a route has been
            determined. The City anticipates securing funding through bonds or alternative
            financing with creation of a Benefit Basin to recapture costs over time. All
            parcels connecting to the new line and in areas served by the current Altaville Lift
            Station shall be included in the Benefit Basin.
Angels Camp 2020 General Plan               Public Facilities & Services Element VII-38

                                                                             September 3, 2009
7C. City Facilities & Services: Fire Protection
Goal 7C     Maintain or increase the standards of coverage currently available within Angels
            Camp for fire protection and medical response facilities and infrastructure.
Policies
   7.C.1    Continue to recognize the need to accommodate county residents, workers, and
            visitors as well as city residents in planning for infrastructure improvements and
            standards of coverage.
   7.C.2    Spread the costs of providing adequate fire protection and medical response
            facilities and services to all beneficiaries.
   7.C.3    Pursue innovative approaches to financing fire protection and medical response
            facilities and services.
   7.C.4    Monitor the condition of and plan for future fire protection and medical response
            facility needs.
   7.C.5    Continue to recognize the need for and support fire prevention and education
            activities to promote community health and safety.
   7.C.6    Continue to support and encourage coordination between organizations and
            agencies to optimize limited resources assisting in the provision of adequate fire
            protection and medical response services.
   7.C.7    Recognize the need to coordinate planning for infrastructure improvements (e.g.,
            circulation improvements) to achieve the city’s health and safety goals.
   7.C.8    Assist in protecting residents from the effects of global warming by reducing fire
            hazard associated with existing development in the wildland/urban interface.
            [2020 GENERAL PLAN MITIGATION MEASURE, MM-AIR-03]
Angels Camp 2020 General Plan                 Public Facilities & Services Element VII-39

                                                                            September 3, 2009
Implementation Programs
   7.C.a     Undertake a “Standard of Coverage” Process Study/Assessment
             Secure a technical assistance grant, or similar funding, and undertake a “Standard
             of Coverage” process study/assessment (aka Standard of Response Coverage
             Assessment). The “Standard of Coverage” assessment is a community-driven,
             self-assessment study evaluating fire response, emergency medical response and
             establishing standards for fire protection and medical response. Guidelines and
             examples of assessments and the study process are provided in 2020 General
             Plan Appendix 7E. The assessment should identify areas within the existing city
             limits and within the city’s sphere of influence where new development in the
             wildland/urban interface has the potential to significantly hinder the city’s ability
             to achieve its adopted standard of coverage. [2020 GENERAL PLAN
             MITIGATION MEASURE, MM-FIRE-04]
             Equivalent Program: 1.B.m (Land Use)
             Related Programs: 7.C.n (Public Facilities & Services)
   7.C.b     Consider Establishing a Redevelopment Agency to Assist in the Provision of
             Affordable Housing, to Fund Infrastructure Improvements, and to Achieve
             Other City Goals Identified in the General Plan
             Consider establishing a redevelopment agency and plan, or similar mechanism, to
             assist in:
                 a. The provision of affordable housing
                 b. Funding infrastructure improvements that may be necessary for the
                      provision of affordable housing or economic development
                 c. Funding water and wastewater infrastructure improvements
                 d. Funding fire and medical protection infrastructure improvements
                      (e.g., upgrading fire hydrants, increasing fire flow)
                 e. Funding park infrastructure and related improvements (e.g., sidewalk
                      construction, facilities for low-impact modes of transportation)
                 f. The provision of infrastructure improvements supporting public works
                      facilities (e.g., sidewalks, drainage facilities)
                 g. The rehabilitation of historic properties
Angels Camp 2020 General Plan                   Public Facilities & Services Element VII-40

                                                                                  September 3, 2009
                 h. Promoting economic development (e.g., undertaking commercial area
                      enhancements, improving and/or expanding parking facilities,
                      establishing a commercial/retail facade loan program, undertaking
                      gateway beautification projects, undertaking curb, gutter and sidewalk
                      replacement and repair, providing and/or improving restroom facilities,
                      conducting an historic inventory)
            The preceding activities are subject to redevelopment law restrictions and
            requirements. The city should hold at least one public forum to discuss the
            establishment of a redevelopment agency prior to 2009.
            Equivalent Programs: 1Af (Land Use), 2Cf (Housing), 7Ab (Public Facilities & Services), 7Bc
            (Public Facilities & Services), 7Eb (Public Facilities & Services), 7Fa (Public Facilities &
            Services), 7Ha (Public Facilities & Services), 8Bp (Cultural Resources), 10Al (Economic
            Development), 12Ea (Parks & Recreation)
  7.C.c     Continue to Implement a City Services Impact Mitigation Fee Program
            Continue to implement a City Services Impact Mitigation Fee Program, or
            equivalent, to support the continued provision of city services that benefit city
            residents and visitors. Continue to maintain a community services impact
            mitigation fee for new development to assist in the provision of adequate
            recreational, fire, medical, police and other community services, as applicable.
            Update fees as necessary to ensure adequate funding.
            Equivalent Programs: 1Db (Land Use), 7Da (Public Facilities), 7Ea (Public Facilities)
            Related Programs: 2Bc (Housing), 4Cg (Conservation and Open Space), 7Bg (Public
            Facilities), 7Ed (Public Facilities), 12Ef (Recreation)
  7.C.d     Continue to Mitigate Impacts to City Fire and Medical Protection Resources
            Continue to mitigate impacts of new development on the city’s ability to achieve
            its goal of achieving standards of coverage compatible with those established
            pursuant to 2020 General Plan Program 7.C.a. For example, require built-in
            fire suppression equipment in new development that may directly or cumulatively
            impact the Angels Camp Fire Department’s ability to achieve established
            standards of coverage.
Angels Camp 2020 General Plan                       Public Facilities & Services Element VII-41

                                                                              September 3, 2009
  7.C.e     Make Available Fire Protection Standards
            Publish the city’s adopted development standards in booklet form or on-line to
            allow for easy access to this information by the public. Alternatively, amend the
            municipal code to include a separate title for the city’s adopted Fire Protection
            Standards including, but not limited to:
                a. The city’s adopted standards for the urban/wildland interface including
                    provisions for defensible space, secondary access and other fire-
                    protection related standards
                b. Adopted standards for fire flow for commercial, residential, industrial and
                    other land use categories
                c. Standards for installing fire sprinklers
                d. Standards for fire protection systems
                e. Standards for placement of propane tanks and facilities
                f. Standards of coverage for fire and emergency medical response as may be
                    established pursuant to 2020 General Plan Program 7.C.a
            Equivalent Program: 1Bj (Land Use), 1Gc (Land Use)
            Related Programs: 1Ge (Land Use), 3Ab (Circulation), 7Cn (Public Facilities & Services)
  7.C.f     Continue to Maintain and Expand Fire Prevention Inspection Activities
            Continue to maintain and expand fire prevention inspection activities as
            necessary to reduce the risk of loss of life and property to fire.
  7.C.g     Continue to Maintain State-of-the-Art First Responder Equipment and
            Trained Personnel for Emergency Medical Response and Fire Suppression
            Continue to maintain state-of-the-art first responder equipment and trained
            personnel for emergency medical response and fire suppression consistent with
            the standards of coverage as may be established in 2020 General Plan Program
            7.C.a.
  7.C.h     Continue to Provide Fire Prevention and Safety Education
            Continue to provide fire prevention and safety education to schools, public
            interest groups and other interested parties.
  7.C.i     Continue to Implement the Citywide Weed Abatement Program
            Continue to implement the citywide weed abatement program in order to reduce
            fuel loads and fire hazards.
Angels Camp 2020 General Plan                Public Facilities & Services Element VII-42

                                                                                  September 3, 2009
  7.C.j     Continue to Work Cooperatively with CalFire, Calaveras County Fire
            District (CCFD), and the United States Forest Services (USFS), U.S. Bureau
            of Land Management (BLM) and U.S. Bureau of Reclamation (BOR)
            [2020 GENERAL PLAN MITIGATION MEASURE, MM-FIRE-02]
            Continue to work cooperatively with CalFire, Calaveras County Fire District, the
            United States Forest Service, U.S. Bureau of Land Management and U.S. Bureau
            of Reclamation in matters of mutual aid, automatic aid and related fire protection
            and emergency response endeavors. Meet with BLM and BOR land managers to
            formulate and implement a plan for reducing fire hazards on BLM wildlands
            adjacent to the city consistent with the agency’s resources management goals
            Related Programs: 1Ia (Land Use), 2Aa (Housing), 2Dg (Housing), 3Bk (Circulation), 7Id
            (Public Facilities & Services)
  7.C.k     Pursue Reimbursement for Fire Protection and Emergency Response
            Services, Police Protection and Criminal Justice Services, and Other City
            Services in Future Annexations
            Request reimbursement for the provision of expanded fire protection and
            emergency response services, police protection and criminal justice services, and
            other services provided by the city in conjunction with LAFCo actions involving
            annexation agreements between Angels Camp and the county. Agreements
            should provide for county reimbursement to the city for the expansion of city
            services required in conjunction with the annexation.
            Equivalent Programs: 7Dc (Public Facilities & Services, 7Ge (Public Facilities & Services), 7If
            (Public Facilities & Services)
            Related Programs: 1Ha (Land Use), 10Ai (Economic Development), 11Af (Community
            Identity)
  7.C.l     Consider Fixed Funding Sources for Fire and Emergency Medical Response
            Personnel
            Consider and adopt, as appropriate, fixed methods of funding fire and emergency
            medical response personnel. Funding mechanisms to be considered included, but
            are not limited to, the formation of special districts, increases in the transient
            occupancy tax, benefit assessment districts, and sales taxes.
            Related Programs: 7Aa (Public Facilities & Services), 7Df (Public Facilities & Services), 7Ee
            (Public Facilities & Services)
  7.C.m     Support Circulation Improvements
            Continue to support local and regional traffic circulation improvements which
            facilitate the response of emergency resources during emergencies.
            Equivalent Programs: 7Dd (Public Facilities & Services), 7Hg (Public Facilities & Services)
Angels Camp 2020 General Plan                Public Facilities & Services Element VII-43

                                                                                 September 3, 2009
  7.C.n     Prepare a Community Wildfire Protection Plan
            Prepare a Community Wildfire Protection Plan (CWPP) in accordance with the
            California Fire Alliance’s guidelines for Community Wildfire Protection Plans
            and in cooperation with the local Fire Safe Council. CWPPs enable communities
            to plan how to reduce the risk of wildfire including identifying strategic sites and
            methods for fuel reduction across jurisdictional boundaries. The plan should be
            prepared in coordination with the Standard of Coverage Assessment (2020
            General Plan Program 7.C.a). Guidance for preparation of a CWPP is available
            at www.cafirealliance.org/cwpp/ and through the California Fire Alliance’s
            manual: Preparing a Community for Wildfire Protection Plan: A Handbook for
            Wildland-Urban Interface Communities.
            Related Programs: 7C.a (Public Facilities & Services), 7Ce (Public Facilities & Services)
  7.C.o     Update Chapter 15.24 of the Angels Camp Municipal Code (Fire
            Prevention), Including Very High Fire Hazard Severity Zone Map
            (VHFHSZ) Vegetation Management Plans, Guidelines for New Development
            in Urban/Wildland Interface Areas, Public Resources Code 4291
            [2020 GENERAL PLAN MITIGATION MEASURE, MM-FIRE-01]
            Update Chapter 15.24 of the Angels Camp Municipal Code to reference those
            codes currently enforced by the Angels Camp Fire Department (e.g., Current
            versions of the California Fire Code and/or national fire codes) as adopted by the
            State of California to guide fire safe development standards and to eliminate
            outdated references to fire hazard areas within the city and including, but not
            limited to:
               Identifying (i.e., map) areas of moderate, high and very high fire hazard
                within the city limits [Very High Fire Hazard Severity Zone (VHFHSZ) Map]
                as authorized pursuant to Section 15.24.025.
               Adopting guidelines for new development in urban/wildland interface areas
                for each of the fire hazard zones identified on the city’s VHFHSZ map
                including consideration for adopting the International Fire Code Council
                Urban Interface Code (or equivalent provisions of the California Fire Code)
                for new development in Urban/Wildlife interface areas and designated as a
                very high fire hazard severity zone.
               Including provisions for when to prepare and guidelines addressing content of
                Vegetation Management Plans including, but not limited to: clearing
                hazardous vegetation surrounding existing residential structures—especially
                in conjunction with changes or expansions of existing use and addressing
Angels Camp 2020 General Plan                Public Facilities & Services Element VII-44

                                                                         September 3, 2009
                management of diseased vegetation and non-native invasive species as they
                relate to wildland fire hazard.
               Consider adopting Public Resources Code 4291 to address evacuation and
                emergency vehicle access, water supplies and fire flow, fuel modification for
                defensible space and home signing.
  7.C.p     Maintain Vegetation Clearances along Emergency Access Routes
            [2020 GENERAL PLAN MITIGATION MEASURE, MM-FIRE-03]
            Continue to maintain vegetation clearances along emergency access
            transportation routes encompassing, at a minimum, the existing width of the
            roadway.
Angels Camp 2020 General Plan               Public Facilities & Services Element VII-45

                                                                                 September 3, 2009
7D. City Facilities & Services: Police Protection
Goal 7D      Maintain or increase the levels of service currently available within Angels Camp
             for police protection facilities and infrastructure.
Policies
   7.D.1     Continue to recognize the need to accommodate county residents, workers, and
             visitors as well as city residents in planning for infrastructure improvements and
             levels of service.
   7.D.2     Spread the costs of providing adequate police protection facilities and services to
             all beneficiaries.
   7.D.3     Pursue innovative approaches to financing police protection facilities and
             services.
   7.D.4     Pursue and adopt, as feasible, innovative approaches to reduce crime.
   7.D.5     Monitor the condition of and plan for future police protection facility needs.
   7.D.6     Continue to support and encourage coordination between organizations and
             agencies to optimize limited resources and assist in the provision of adequate
             police protection services.
   7.D.7     Recognize the need to coordinate planning for infrastructure improvements (e.g.,
             circulation improvements) to achieve the city’s health and safety goals.
Implementation Programs
   7.D.a     Continue to Implement a City Services Impact Mitigation Fee Program
             Continue to implement a City Services Impact Mitigation Fee Program, or
             equivalent, to support the continued provision of city services that benefit city
             residents and visitors. Continue to maintain a community services impact
             mitigation fee for new development to assist in the provision of adequate
             recreational, fire, medical, police and other community services, as applicable.
             Update fees as necessary to ensure adequate funding.
             Equivalent Programs: 1Db (Land Use), 7Cc (Public Facilities), 7Ea (Public Facilities)
             Related Programs: 2Bc (Housing), 4Cg (Conservation and Open Space), 7Bg (Public
             Facilities), 7Ed (Public Facilities), 12Ef (Recreation)
Angels Camp 2020 General Plan                        Public Facilities & Services Element VII-46

                                                                                    September 3, 2009
  7.D.b        Identify and Implement Land Use Planning Techniques to Reduce Crime
               Incorporate land use planning techniques to identify potential high-crime land
               uses and to integrate design methods to deter crime (e.g., hours of operation,
               lighting consistent with community character; use of private patrols and security
               personnel in large residential and commercial development).2
               Equivalent Program: 1Gd (Land Use)
  7.D.c        Pursue Reimbursement for Fire Protection and Emergency Response
               Services, Police Protection and Criminal Justice Services, and Other City
               Services in Future Annexations
               Request reimbursement for the provision of expanded fire protection and
               emergency response services, police protection and criminal justice services, and
               other services provided by the city in conjunction with LAFCo actions involving
               annexation agreements between Angels Camp and the county. Agreements
               should provide for county reimbursement to the city for the expansion of city
               services required in conjunction with the annexation.
               Equivalent Programs: 7Ck (Public Facilities & Services), 7Ge (Public Facilities & Services),
               7If (Public Facilities & Services)
               Related Programs: 1Ha (Land Use), 10Ai (Economic Development), 11Af (Community
               Identity)
  7.D.d        Support Traffic Circulation Improvements
               Continue to support local and regional traffic circulation improvements that
               facilitate the response of emergency resources during emergencies.
               Equivalent Programs: 7Cm (Public Facilities & Services), 7Hg (Public Facilities & Services)
  7.D.e        Strive to Maintain a Level of Service Standard for Police Services
               Strive to maintain a 5-minute response time level of service standard for
               emergency police responses and a 10-minute response time level of service
               standards for non-emergency responses within the city. Due to varying activity
               levels, increases for both emergency and non-emergency responses may occur.
  7.D.f        Consider Fixed Funding Sources for Police Personnel
               Consider and adopt, as appropriate, fixed methods of funding police personnel.
               Funding mechanisms to be considered included, but are not limited to, the
               formation of special districts, increases in the transient occupancy tax, benefit
               assessment districts, and sales taxes.
               Related Programs: 7Aa (Public Facilities & Services), 7Cm (Public Facilities & Services), 7Ee
               (Public Facilities & Services)
2
      Recommended: SafeScape, Al Zelinka and Dean Brennan. Available through the Planners Book
      Service, American Planning Association, APA Planners Press, 2000
Angels Camp 2020 General Plan                     Public Facilities & Services Element VII-47
                                                                                    September 3, 2009
7E. City Facilities & Services: Parks
Goal 7E      Maintain or increase the levels of service currently available within Angels Camp
             for park facilities and infrastructure.
Policies
   7.E.1     Continue to recognize the need to accommodate county residents, workers, and
             visitors as well as city residents in planning for infrastructure improvements and
             levels of service.
   7.E.2     Spread the costs of providing adequate recreation facilities and services to all
             beneficiaries.
   7.E.3     Pursue innovative approaches to financing recreation facilities and services.
   7.E.4     Monitor the condition of and plan for future recreation facility needs.
   7.E.5     Continue to support and encourage coordination between organizations and
             agencies to optimize limited resources and assist in the provision of adequate
             recreational facilities and services.
   7.E.6     Assist in counteracting the effects of global warming by expanding vegetative
             cover through the provision of park and recreation facilities. [2020 GENERAL
             PLAN MITIGATIO MEASURE, MM-AIR-03]
Implementation Programs
   7.E.a     Continue to Implement a City Services Impact Mitigation Fee Program
             Continue to implement a City Services Impact Mitigation Fee Program, or
             equivalent, to support the continued provision of city services that benefit city
             residents and visitors. Continue to maintain a community services impact
             mitigation fee for new development to assist in the provision of adequate
             recreational, fire, medical, police and other community services, as applicable.
             Update fees as necessary to ensure adequate funding.
             Equivalent Programs: 1Db (Land Use), 7Cc (Public Facilities & Services), 7Da (Public
             Facilities & Services)
             Related Programs: 2Bc (Housing), 4Cg (Conservation & Open Space), 7Bg (Public Facilities &
             Services), 7Ed (Public Facilities & Services), 12Ef (Parks & Recreation)
Angels Camp 2020 General Plan                     Public Facilities & Services Element VII-48
                                                                                  September 3, 2009
  7.E.b     Consider Establishing a Redevelopment Agency to Assist in the Provision of
            Affordable Housing, to Fund Infrastructure Improvements, and to Achieve
            Other City Goals Identified in the General Plan
            Consider establishing a redevelopment agency and plan, or similar mechanism, to
            assist in:
                a. The provision of affordable housing
                b. Funding infrastructure improvements that may be necessary for the
                     provision of affordable housing or economic development
                c. Funding water and wastewater infrastructure improvements
                d. Funding fire and medical protection infrastructure improvements (e.g.,
                     upgrading fire hydrants, increasing fire flow)
                e. Funding park infrastructure and related improvements (e.g.,
                     sidewalk construction, facilities for low-impact modes of
                     transportation)
                f. The provision of infrastructure improvements supporting public works
                     facilities (e.g., sidewalks, drainage facilities)
                g. The rehabilitation of historic properties
                h. Promoting economic development (e.g., undertaking commercial area
                     enhancements, improving and/or expanding parking facilities,
                     establishing a commercial/retail facade loan program, undertaking
                     gateway beautification projects, undertaking curb, gutter and sidewalk
                     replacement and repair, providing and/or improving restroom facilities,
                     conducting an historic inventory)
            The preceding activities are subject to redevelopment law restrictions and
            requirements. The city should hold at least one public forum to discuss the
            establishment of a redevelopment agency prior to 2009.
            Equivalent Programs: 1Af (Land Use), 2Cf (Housing), 7Ab (Public Facilities & Services), 7Bc
            (Public Facilities & Services), 7Cb (Public Facilities & Services), 7Fa (Public Facilities &
            Services), 7Ha (Public Facilities & Services), 8Bp (Cultural Resources), 10Al (Economic
            Development), 12Ea (Parks & Recreation)
Angels Camp 2020 General Plan                   Public Facilities & Services Element VII-49
                                                                                      September 3, 2009
  7.E.c     Strive to Achieve an Increased Recreational Facilities Level of Service of 5
            Acres per 1,000 Population
            The city will strive to achieve a minimum of 5 acres of recreational facilities for
            every 1,000 city residents through implementation of the programs provided in
            the Recreation Element of the Angels Camp 2020 General Plan.
            Related Programs: 1Gg (Land Use), 12Aa (Parks & Recreation)
  7.E.d     Update the City Services Impact Mitigation Fees to Recognize the Increased
            Recreational Level of Service
            Update the City Services Impact Mitigation Fees to recognize the city’s adopted
            level of service of 5 acres of park facilities per 1,000 resident population.
            Related Programs: 1Db (Land Use), 2Bc (Housing), 4Cg (Conservation & Open Space), 7Bg
            (Public Facilities & Services), 7Cc (Public Facilities & Services), 7Da (Public Facilities &
            Services), 7Ea (Public Facilities & Services), 7Ed (Public Facilities & Services), 12Ef (Parks &
            Recreation)
  7.E.e     Consider Fixed Funding Sources for Recreational Services Personnel
            Consider and adopt, as appropriate, fixed methods of funding recreational
            services personnel. Funding mechanisms to be considered included, but are not
            limited to, the formation of special districts, increases in the transient occupancy
            tax, benefit assessment districts, and sales taxes.
            Related Programs: 7Aa (Public Facilities & Services), 7Df (Public Facilities & Services), 7Cl
            (Public Facilities & Services)
  7.E.f     Select Park and Facility Sites and Designs that Conserve Water Resources
            Design parks and facilities to reduce the need for irrigation and conserve water,
            where feasible (e.g., limiting areas of turf where appropriate, choosing plants that
            require minimal water, installing smart irrigation systems).
            Equivalent Programs: 4Gm (Conservation & Open Space), 12Dg (Parks & Recreation)
  7.E.g     Encourage City Use of Treated Water to Irrigate Landscaping at City
            Facilities
            Install infrastructure to facilitate the use of treated water for landscape irrigation
            when renovating or establishing new city facilities (including new city parks),
            where feasible.
            Equivalent Programs: 4.G.l (Conservation & Open Space), 12Df (Parks & Recreation)
Angels Camp 2020 General Plan                     Public Facilities & Services Element VII-50

                                                                              September 3, 2009
7F. City Facilities & Services: Parking
Goal 7F      Maintain or increase the levels of service currently available within Angels Camp
             for parking facilities and infrastructure.
Policies
   7.F.1     Continue to recognize the need to accommodate county residents, workers, and
             visitors as well as city residents in planning for infrastructure improvements and
             levels of service.
   7.F.2     Maintain both on and off-street parking sufficient to accommodate residents,
             workers and visitors.
   7.F.3     Spread the costs of providing adequate parking facilities to all beneficiaries.
   7.F.4     Pursue innovative approaches to financing parking facilities.
   7.F.5     Monitor the condition of and plan for future parking facility needs.
Implementation Programs
   7.F.a     Consider Establishing a Redevelopment Agency to Assist in the Provision of
             Affordable Housing, to Fund Infrastructure Improvements, and to Achieve
             Other City Goals Identified in the General Plan
             Consider establishing a redevelopment agency and plan, or similar mechanism, to
             assist in:
                 a. The provision of affordable housing
                 b. Funding infrastructure improvements that may be necessary for the
                      provision of affordable housing or economic development
                 c. Funding water and wastewater infrastructure improvements
                 d. Funding fire and medical protection infrastructure improvements (e.g.,
                      upgrading fire hydrants, increasing fire flow)
                 e. Funding park infrastructure and related improvements (e.g., sidewalk
                      construction, facilities for low-impact modes of transportation)
Angels Camp 2020 General Plan                   Public Facilities & Services Element VII-51
                                                                                    September 3, 2009
                f. The provision of infrastructure improvements supporting public works
                     facilities (e.g., sidewalks, drainage facilities)
                g. The rehabilitation of historic properties
                h. Promoting economic development (e.g., undertaking commercial area
                     enhancements, improving and/or expanding parking facilities,
                     establishing a commercial/retail facade loan program, undertaking
                     gateway beautification projects, undertaking curb, gutter and sidewalk
                     replacement and repair, providing and/or improving restroom facilities,
                     conducting an historic inventory)
            The preceding activities are subject to redevelopment law restrictions and
            requirements. The city should hold at least one public forum to discuss the
            establishment of a redevelopment agency prior to 2009.
            Equivalent Programs: 1Af (Land Use), 2Cf (Housing), 7Ab (Public Facilities & Services), 7Bc
            (Public Facilities & Services), 7Cb (Public Facilities & Services), 7Eb (Public Facilities &
            Services), 7Ha (Public Facilities & Services), 8Bp (Cultural Resources), 10Al (Economic
            Development), 12Ea (Parks & Recreation)
  7.F.b     Update the City’s Parking Standards
            Update the city’s parking standards to provide specific requirements for a wide
            variety of land uses and to include illustrations for parking design and
            landscaping techniques. Incorporate standards for the location and provision of
            bicycle spaces, motorcycle spaces, low-speed vehicle spaces, compact vehicle
            spaces, landscaping and lighting, pedestrian-friendly design, and bus loading
            zones.
            Equivalent Programs: 1Ec (Land Use), 3Da (Circulation), 11Cc (Community Identity)
            Related Programs: 3Dc (Circulation), 3Db (Circulation), 7Fc (Public Facilities & Services),
            7Fd (Public Facilities & Services)
  7.F.c     Investigate Re-Establishment of a Parking Fund
            Present the City of Angels City Council with an outline of the pros and cons of
            reestablishing a parking fund to allow for the collection of parking fees for
            developments which cannot provide on-site parking (e.g., downtown historic
            district) to be used for the construction of future parking facilities. In response to
            the presentation, the City of Angels City Council should provide staff direction to
            proceed, further investigate or abandon pursuit of a parking fund.
            Equivalent Program: 3Dd (Circulation)
            Related Programs: 1Ec (Land Use), 3Da (Circulation), 3Db (Circulation), 3Dc (Circulation),
            7Fb (Public Facilities), 7Fd (Public Facilities), 11Cc (Community Identity)
Angels Camp 2020 General Plan                     Public Facilities & Services Element VII-52

                                                                                       September 3, 2009
  7.F.d     Increase Use of Existing Parking Facilities
            Increase use of existing parking facilities including, but not limited to, the
            following (see following figure for locations):
            Parking Lot #1: Improve signs, landscaping, security and pedestrian access to
                this facility.
            Parking Lot #2: Re-evaluate the design of the existing parking structure and
                consider converting the facility into a two-level parking structure.
            Parking Lot #5: Investigate the feasibility of constructing a footbridge across the
                creek to Birds Way or other pedestrian access improvements.
            Should all of the following fail to fail to improve parking in the historic district,
            the city will investigate the possibility of increased parking enforcement in the
            district.
            Equivalent Program: 3Dc (Circulation)
            Related Programs: 1Ec (Land Use), 3Da (Circulation), 3Db (Circulation), 3Dc (Circulation),
            7Fb (Public Facilities & Services), 7Fc (Public Facilities & Services), 11Cc (Community Identity)
Angels Camp 2020 General Plan                     Public Facilities & Services Element VII-53
                                                                      September 3, 2009
      Public Parking Facilities in the Angels Camp Downtown Historic District
Angels Camp 2020 General Plan             Public Facilities & Services Element VII-54
                                                                                 September 3, 2009
7G. City Facilities & Services: Administration
Goal 7G      Maintain or increase the levels of service currently available within Angels Camp
             for administrative services facilities and infrastructure.
Policies
   7.G.1     Continue to recognize the need to accommodate county residents, workers, and
             visitors as well as city residents in planning for infrastructure improvements and
             levels of service.
   7.G.2     Pursue innovative approaches for financing administrative facilities and services.
   7.G.3     Monitor the condition of and plan for future administrative facility needs.
Implementation Programs
   7.G.a     Establish a Centralized Civic Center
             As funding allows, strive to establish a centralized civic center to provide one-
             stop service for planning, building, fire prevention, administrative services and
             other community services. Planning for a community park should be integrated
             with design plans for the center. Planning for the facilities should be done in
             coordination with the post office (see 2020 General Plan Program 7.G.h),
             schools, the library, museum and other agencies providing public services and/or
             desiring public meeting facilities. Design should incorporate, to the maximum
             extent feasible, facilities available to the community promoting healthy arts
             programs.
             Related Programs: 3Cc (Circulation), 7Gb (Public Facilities & Services), 12Ci (Parks &
             Recreation)
   7.G.b     Adopt a Location and Timeline for Establishing a Centralized Civic Center
             Evaluate alternatives for land acquisition necessary to meet public demands for
             administrative facilities as outlined in 2020 General Plan Program 7.G.a.
             Adopt a location and establish a timeline for establishing a centralized civic
             center.
             Related Programs: 3Cc (Circulation), 7Ga (Public Facilities & Services)
Angels Camp 2020 General Plan                  Public Facilities & Services Element VII-55
                                                                                  September 3, 2009
   7.G.c    Encourage Communications Infrastructure
            In evaluating applications for new communications infrastructure, the city will
            consider the following:
                     How the proposed infrastructure will enhance the city’s ability to reach
                      its business attraction and expansion goals (as established in the studies
                      contained in 2020 General Plan Programs 1.F.b and 10.A.c)
                     Consistency of the proposal with                     the     city’s      Wireless
                      Telecommunications Facilities Ordinance
            Equivalent Programs: 1Fc (Land Use), 10Ag (Economic Development)
            Related Programs: 1Fb (Land Use), 6Ed (Public Safety), 6Ee (Public Safety), 10Ac (Economic
            Development)
  7.G.d     Identify Solid Waste Facilities
            Continue to identify existing and planned solid waste facilities in the county
            within or adjacent to the city’s Sphere of Influence on the general plan land use
            diagrams and designate land around these facilities for compatible land uses
            recognizing that some potentially incompatible land uses may already exist.
            Equivalent Program: 1Bg (Land Use)
  7.G.e     Pursue Reimbursement for Fire Protection and Emergency Response
            Services, Police Protection and Criminal Justice Services, and Other City
            Services in Future Annexations
            Request reimbursement for the provision of expanded fire protection and
            emergency response services, police protection and criminal justice services, and
            other services provided by the city in conjunction with LAFCo actions involving
            annexation agreements between Angels Camp and the county. Agreements
            should provide for county reimbursement to the city for the expansion of city
            services required in conjunction with the annexation.
            Equivalent Programs: 7Ck (Public Facilities & Services), 7Dc (Public Facilities & Services, 7If
            (Public Facilities & Services)
            Related Programs: 1Ha (Land Use), 10Ai (Economic Development), 11Af (Community
            Identity)
Angels Camp 2020 General Plan                  Public Facilities & Services Element VII-56

                                                                             September 3, 2009
  7.G.f     Formulate a Plan for Re-Use of the City-Owned Post Office
            Formulate a plan for re-use of the city-owned post office building (the post office
            lease is due to expire in 2016). Planning for re-use of the building should
            commence prior to December 31, 2009.
            Related Program: 7Ih (Public Facilities & Services)
  7.G.g     Increase Museum Visibility and Use
            Seek grant funding to establish a strategy for increasing the visibility and use,
            including the addition of signage, of the Angels Camp Museum.
  7.G.h     Facilitate Establishment of a Community-Based Organization to Accept
            Donations and Spearhead Community Projects
            Organize community leaders to establish a community-based organization
            authorized to accept land and facility donations for public uses or related
            community benefits from landowners, while encouraging continued use of the
            property by the landowner before donation (e.g., similar to estate planning
            assistance). The organization should work in coordination with the city to ensure
            coordinated planning efforts for public uses and community facilities.
            Equivalent Programs: 12 Ai (Parks & Recreation), 12Eh (Parks & Recreation)
Angels Camp 2020 General Plan                 Public Facilities & Services Element VII-57
                                                                               September 3, 2009
7H. City Facilities & Services: Public Works
See Also Circulation Element for Roadways
Goal 7H       Maintain or increase the levels of service currently available within Angels Camp
              for public works facilities and infrastructure including roads, sidewalks, drainage
              facilities, public buildings, and other public facilities.
Policies
   7.H.1      Continue to recognize the need to accommodate county residents, workers, and
              visitors as well as city residents in planning for infrastructure improvements and
              levels of service.
   7.H.2      Spread the costs of providing adequate public works facilities and services to all
              beneficiaries.
   7.H.3      Pursue innovative approaches to financing public works facilities and services.
   7.H.4      Monitor the condition of and plan for future public works facility needs.
   7.H.5      Continue to support and encourage coordination between organizations and
              agencies to optimize limited resources assisting in the provision of adequate
              public works facilities and services.
Angels Camp 2020 General Plan                   Public Facilities & Services Element VII-58
                                                                                   September 3, 2009
Implementation Programs
   7.H.a     Consider Establishing a Redevelopment Agency to Assist in the Provision of
             Affordable Housing, to Fund Infrastructure Improvements, and to Achieve
             Other City Goals Identified in the General Plan
             Consider establishing a redevelopment agency and plan, or similar mechanism, to
             assist in:
                 a. The provision of affordable housing
                 b. Funding infrastructure improvements that may be necessary for the
                      provision of affordable housing or economic development
                 c. Funding water and wastewater infrastructure improvements
                 d. Funding fire and medical protection infrastructure improvements (e.g.,
                      upgrading fire hydrants, increasing fire flow)
                 e. Funding park infrastructure and related improvements (e.g.,
                      sidewalk construction, facilities for low-impact modes of
                      transportation)
                 f. The provision of infrastructure improvements supporting public
                      works facilities (e.g., sidewalks, drainage facilities)
                 g. The rehabilitation of historic properties
                 h. Promoting economic development (e.g., undertaking commercial area
                      enhancements, improving and/or expanding parking facilities,
                      establishing a commercial/retail facade loan program, undertaking
                      gateway beautification projects, undertaking curb, gutter and
                      sidewalk replacement and repair, providing and/or improving
                      restroom facilities, conducting an historic inventory)
             The preceding activities are subject to redevelopment law restrictions and
             requirements. The city should hold at least one public forum to discuss the
             establishment of a redevelopment agency prior to 2009.
             Equivalent Programs: 1Af (Land Use), 2Cf (Housing), 7Ab (Public Facilities & Services), 7Bc
             (Public Facilities & Services), 7Cb (Public Facilities & Services), 7Eb (Public Facilities &
             Services), 7Fa (Public Facilities & Services), 8Bp (Cultural Resources), 10Al (Economic
             Development), 12Ea (Parks & Recreation)
Angels Camp 2020 General Plan                    Public Facilities & Services Element VII-59
                                                                                       September 3, 2009
  7.H.b     Continue to Maintain and Upgrade Storm Drainage Facilities
            Continue to address maintenance and upgrades of the city’s drainage facilities.
            Consider preparation of a Drainage Facilities Management Plan to forecast when
            systems may require replacement and the potential costs and funding sources
            necessary to maintain the city’s drainage facilities. Continue to pursue sources of
            funding to ensure ongoing maintenance of the city’s storm drains.
            Equivalent Program: 6Be (Public Safety)
            Related Programs: 4Hb (Conservation & Open Space), 6Bf (Public Safety), 6Bh (Public
            Safety), 6Bj (Public Safety), 6Bk (Public Safety), 7Hd (Public Facilities & Services), 7He (Public
            Facilities & Services)
  7.H.c     Mitigate Impacts on Downstream Drainage Facilities and Property
            In conjunction with 2020 General Plan Program 6.A.k, address requirements for
            preparation of drainage plans addressing potential impacts on downstream
            drainage facilities and properties and requiring implementation of measures
            identified to reduce or eliminate those impacts. Continue to require drainage
            plans for private development to prevent inundation of the city’s Storm Drainage
            Facilities.
            Equivalent Program: 6Bf (Public Safety)
            Related Programs: 4Hb (Conservation & Open Space), 6Be (Public Safety), 6Bh (Public
            Safety), 6Bj (Public Safety), 6Bk (Public Safety), 7Hb (Public Facilities & Services), 7Hd (Public
            Facilities & Services), 7He (Public Facilities & Services)
  7.H.d     Coordinate with the County to Address the Impacts of Development
            Increasing Runoff, Flood Hazards or Affecting the City’s Storm Drain
            System within the Watersheds of Drainages Flowing through the City
            Request that the county forward all development proposals located within
            watersheds of drainages flowing through Angels Camp to the city for comment
            (e.g., Six Mile Creek, Indian Creek, Angels Creek, Greenhorn Creek, Cherokee
            Creek, Utica Ditch, Jupiter Ditch, Lone Gulch, San Domingo Creek). The city’s
            area of interest, for the purposes of assessing impacts within watersheds of
            interest, is illustrated in 2020 General Plan Map 6A. Continue to comment on
            projects within the county with the potential to increase runoff, increase flood
            hazards and tax drainage systems within the city. Meet with the county to
            establish a strategy for acquiring funding for preparation of a retention basin
            master plan and/or standardized mitigation requirements to offset cumulative
            impacts of individual projects occurring upstream of Angels Camp and resulting
            in increased runoff, increased flood hazards and overtaxing of drainage systems
            within the city.
            Equivalent Program: 6Bh (Public Safety)
            Related Programs: 1Ia (Land Use), 2Aa (Housing), 2Dg (Housing), 3Bk (Circulation), 4Hb
            (Conservation & Open Space), 6Be (Public Safety), 6Bf (Public Safety), 6Bh (Public Safety), 6Bi
Angels Camp 2020 General Plan                    Public Facilities & Services Element VII-60

                                                                                     September 3, 2009
            (Public Safety), 6Bj (Public Safety), 6Bk (Public Safety), 7Hb (Public Facilities & Services),
            7Hc (Public Facilities & Services), 7He (Public Facilities & Services), 7Id (Public Facilities &
            Services)
  7.H.e     Coordinate with Appropriate Agencies and Private Landowners to Ensure
            Debris Removal in Streams to Reduce the Potential for Damage of
            Downstream Facilities (e.g., Bridges)
            Coordinate with appropriate local, state and/or federal agencies to ensure the
            removal of debris adjacent to bridges within the city limits that may result in
            damage and/or destruction of bridges, or damming at bridges, during flood
            events, thereby limiting emergency access into and out of the city. Update the
            city’s emergency response plan to address the emergency response priority
            associated with maintenance of the State Route 49 Bridge over Angels Creek.
            Consider preparation of standardized mitigation requirements on new
            development requiring management of stream debris in conjunction with
            monitoring vegetation clearances for fire safety. Consider facilitating acquisition
            of a master streambed alteration permit from the California Department of Fish
            and Game and/or a federal Clean Water Act Section 404 Permit to facilitate the
            removal of debris within drainage facilities adjacent to already developed private
            property to reduce the potential for damage to downstream facilities resulting
            from inadequate debris removal.
            Equivalent Programs: 4Hb (Conservation & Open Space), 6Bj (Public Safety)
            Related Programs: 6Be (Public Safety), 6Bf (Public Safety), 6Bh (Public Safety), 6Bk (Public
            Safety), 7Hb (Public Facilities & Services), 7Hd(Public Facilities & Services), 7Hd (Public
            Facilities & Services)
  7.H.f     Investigate Potential Underground Hazards Associated with New Public
            Facilities
            New public facilities (e.g., new buildings, new roads) located in the vicinity of
            known or suspected mines and tunnels should assess the risk of potential
            subsidence prior to construction. The city should consider requiring similar
            evaluations for new private facilities.
            Related Programs: 6Ac (Public Safety), 6Ad (Public Safety)
  7.H.g     Support Traffic Circulation Improvements
            Continue to support local and regional traffic circulation improvements that
            facilitate the response of emergency resources during emergencies.
            Equivalent Programs: 7Cm (Public Facilities & Services), 7Dd (Public Facilities & Services)
Angels Camp 2020 General Plan                     Public Facilities & Services Element VII-61

                                                                           September 3, 2009
  7.H.h     Establish a New or Improve the Existing Corporation Yard Facility
            Include, in the city’s capital improvement plan, provisions for establishing a new,
            or improving the existing, city corporation yard facility.
            Related Program: 7Ad (Public Facilities and Services)
  7.H.i     Pursue Fair Share Participation and Contributions to Finance and Maintain
            Adequate Stormwater Runoff Infrastructure and Capacity
            [2020 GENERAL PLAN MITIGATION MEASURE, MM-UTILITY-07]
            The city will identify agencies with jurisdiction over, and pursue contributions to
            offset impacts created by, facilities that contribute significantly to stormwater
            runoff and generation of non-point source pollutants within the city limits (e.g.
            Caltrans).       Participation and contributions to financing and maintaining
            stormwater runoff infrastructure should be formalized in written agreements and
            should address, but not be limited to : participation in a Stormwater Pollution
            Prevention Plan (SWPPP), maintenance of off-site drains impacted by
            contributions to said drainages and participation in studies to identify drainage
            problems and solutions.
Angels Camp 2020 General Plan                 Public Facilities & Services Element VII-62

                                                                            September 3, 2009
7I. County, State, Federal and Other Facilities & Services
Goal 7I      Strive to work cooperatively with county, state, federal, regional, public and
             quasi-public agencies to formulate and achieve common goals while avoiding or
             minimizing actions which conflict with community goals.
Policies
   7.I.1     Recognize the need to coordinate future expansion and relocation plans of
             schools, county, state, federal and other service providers within the city limits.
   7.I.2     Continue to address the needs of county residents, workers, and visitors as well as
             city residents in planning for infrastructure improvements and levels of service.
   7.I.3     Encourage cooperation and communication between the city and other public and
             quasi-public agencies.
Implementation Programs
   7.I.a     Participate in School Expansion/Relocation Planning Efforts
             Participate in planning efforts to expand or relocate school facilities within the
             city limits and encourage the following in those planning efforts:
                 a. Joint use of school and park facilities
                 b. Integration with bike lanes, and pedestrian facilities
                 c. Linkages to nearby residential areas through installation of bike lanes,
                      pedestrian facilities
                 d. Location of schools within residential areas
             Related Program: 7Ib (Public Facilities & Services)
   7.I.b     Keep Appraised of Future Expansion/Relocation Plans of Service Providers
             Continue to keep appraised of the future expansion or relocation plans of schools,
             county, state, federal and other service providers located within the city as
             necessary to accommodate those plans in future updates of the general plan.
             Related Programs: 7Ia (Public Facilities & Services)
Angels Camp 2020 General Plan                   Public Facilities & Services Element VII-63
                                                                                  September 3, 2009
  7.I.c        Recognize Opportunities and Constraints of Public Land Uses
               Continue to recognize the opportunities and constraints created by public lands3
               in and around Angels Camp and integrate these elements in the city’s land use
               planning decisions.
               Planning opportunities associated with public lands include:
                   a. Providing buffers between communities to assist in retaining individual
                        community character
                   b. Providing recreational opportunities for residents and visitors
                   c. Providing open space for conserving natural resources
                   d. Providing defined public lands boundaries that may be integrated into the
                        established boundaries of the city’s sphere of influence
                   e. Providing defined public lands boundaries that may be integrated into
                        established city limit boundaries
               Planning constraints that may be associated with public lands include:
                   f. Increased demands on the city’s police and fire services
                   g. Generating significant noise levels (e.g., concerts at the fairgrounds)
                   h. Increased traffic through the city (e.g., recreational vehicles, boats)
               Equivalent Program: 1Bk (Land Use)
               Related Programs: 3Bk (Circulation), 12Af (Recreation), 12Ag (Parks & Recreation)
3     Examples of public lands in and around Angels Camp include: U.S. Bureau of Reclamation (New
  Melones), fairgrounds, U.S. Bureau of Land Management
Angels Camp 2020 General Plan                     Public Facilities & Services Element VII-64

                                                                                        September 3, 2009
  7.I.d     Facilitate City Cooperation/Coordination with Other Agencies
            The city will seek input from county, state, federal, regional, public and quasi-
            public agencies regarding projects undertaken by the city with the potential to
            influence the interests of these agencies.
            Equivalent Program: 1Ia (Land Use)
            Related Programs: 2Aa (Housing), 2Dg (Housing), 3Bk (Circulation), 5Ak (Noise), 6Bh
            (Public Safety), 7Ck (Public Facilities & Services), 7Hc (Public Facilities & Services), 7Hd
            (Public Facilities & Services), 7Ig (Public Facilities & Services), 10Ab (Economic Development),
            12Am (Parks & Recreation)
  7.I.e     Facilitate Agency Cooperation/Coordination with the City
            The city will contact local representatives of the county, state, federal, regional,
            public and quasi-public agencies within its sphere of influence, requesting that
            each agency notify the city and provide the city with an opportunity to provide
            input for projects with the potential to influence the interests of the city.
            Equivalent Program: 1Ib (Land Use)
  7.I.f     Pursue Reimbursement for Fire Protection and Emergency Response
            Services, Police Protection and Criminal Justice Services, and Other City
            Services in Future Annexations
            Request reimbursement for the provision of expanded fire protection and
            emergency response services, police protection and criminal justice services, and
            other services provided by the city in conjunction with LAFCo actions involving
            annexation agreements between Angels Camp and the county. Agreements
            should provide for county reimbursement to the city for the expansion of city
            services required in conjunction with the annexation.
            Equivalent Programs: 7Ck (Public Facilities & Services), 7Dc (Public Facilities & Services,
            7Ge (Public Facilities & Services)
            Related Programs: 1Ha (Land Use), 10Ai (Economic Development), 11Af (Community
            Identity)
Angels Camp 2020 General Plan                      Public Facilities & Services Element VII-65
                                                                                 September 3, 2009
   7.I.g    Continue to Support and Increase Coordination Between the City and the
            39th Agricultural District (Fairgrounds)
            Increase coordination and communications between the city and the 39th
            Agricultural District (fairgrounds).          Suggested methods for increasing
            coordination and communication may include, but are not limited to:
                      a. Holding a gathering with city department heads and members of the
                          39th Agricultural District Board of Directors
                      b. Executing a memorandum of understanding to establish (in writing)
                          the roles and responsibilities of the parties.
            Areas to be targeted for improved coordination and communication include, but
            are not limited to:
                c. Traffic management during special events
                d. Effects of noise on city residents during special events
                e. Impacts on police staffing
                f. Reimbursement of city expenses incurred during special events (e.g.,
                      overtime for law enforcement)
                g. Providing a connector road between the fairgrounds and the proposed
                      Southeast State Bypass
            Equivalent Program: 12Al (Parks & Recreation)
            Related Programs: 1Ia (Land Use), 2Aa (Housing), 3Aj (Circulation), 5Ak (Noise), 7Id (Public
            Facilities & Services), 10Ab (Economic Development)
  7.I.h     Formulate a Plan for a New Post Office
            Begin working with Postal Services prior to December 31, 2005 to establish a
            plan for designing and locating a new post office. Encourage the postal service to
            reduce traffic impacts on the downtown area by considering home delivery
            throughout the city, as well as rural home delivery.
            Related Program: 3Cb (Circulation), 7Gf (Public Facilities & Services)
Angels Camp 2020 General Plan                  Public Facilities & Services Element VII-66
                                                                           September 3, 2009
  7.I.i     Support the Maintenance/Encourage the Location of a Satellite
            Campus(s)/Learning Center in Association with Columbia College or Other
            Colleges in or Near the City
            Encourage and support the expansion, location, and maintenance of a Columbia
            College campus or satellite learning center (currently at the Glory Hole
            Commercial Center) in or near the city limits in cooperation with the appropriate
            agencies. Encourage the location of new satellite campus sites from other
            learning centers (e.g., San Joaquin Delta College) in or near the city.
            Equivalent Program: 2Dc (Housing), 10Bb (Economic Development)
            Related Program: 2Ae (Housing), 10Ba (Economic Development)
  7.I.j     Coordinate with Cemetery Districts to Ensure Sufficient Land
            Consult with local cemetery districts to keep appraised of the districts’ future
            need for expanding cemeteries. Work with the districts to identify suitable land
            for expansion.
            Equivalent Program: 1.G.h (Land Use)
Angels Camp 2020 General Plan                Public Facilities & Services Element VII-67






















































































































































