                                                       SECTION VI
                                                 HEALTH AND SAFETY
Planning for Placerville’s development must take into account a wide range of environmental hazards.
Some are natural, such as seismic shaking, some are entirely man-made, such as noise, and others are
natural hazards that are exacerbated by man, such as development in a floodplain or a wildland fire
hazard area. Many of the hazards can simply be avoided in the development process through locational
decisions, while others can be tolerated or minimized by including mitigation measures in the planning
and land use process. The overall goal of the policies in this section is to minimize the public health and
safety threats and nuisances to residents and minimize the potential for property damage and loss.
To promote land use development surrounding the Placerville Airport that is compatible with the noise,
safety, airspace protection, overflight and other special characteristic policies and maps of the Placerville
Airport Land Use Compatibility Plan (ALUCP), and to make the General Plan consistent with the ALUCP
as required under Government Code Section 65302.3, the following from the ALUCP are incorporated
into this Section of the General Plan by reference:
     •    “Glossary of Terms,” pages vii to xviii;
     •    Chapter 2: Basic Provisions;
     •    Chapter 3: ALUC Review Process
     •    Chapter 4: Land Use Compatibility Criteria;
     •    Chapter 6: PLA-1: Placerville Airport Policies and Compatibility Maps;
     •    Chapter 9: Background Data: Placerville Airport and Environs
          (Res. 8105, June 25, 2013)
GOALS AND POLICIES
Goal A: To prevent loss of lives, injury and property damage due to geological hazards.
Policies:
     1. Lands with significant, identified geological hazards shall be designated for open-space and low
          intensity uses until it becomes feasible to mitigate the health and safety risks.
     2. The City shall require the following information and plans to be submitted for all projects subject
          to discretionary review by the City in areas of moderate or high slope instability and areas with
          identified soil instability problems.
          •    Engineering geologic report
          •    Soils and foundation engineering report
          •    Grading, erosion, and sediment control plan
          •    Plan review letter evidencing review of all proposed development by a qualified engineering
               geologist
          •    As-built construction report, including building plans, explanation and discussion of any
               deviations from the approved grading plan, the location and results of field tests, results of
               laboratory tests, and a statement that the work was performed under the supervision of and
               in accordance with recommendations of the engineering geologist and/or soils engineer
          •    Signature of an engineering geologist certified by the State of California and/or a soils
               engineer registered in the State of California.
     3. The City shall ensure that both public and private developments in areas with significant identified
          geological hazards are sited to minimize the exposure of structures and improvements to damage
          resulting from geological hazards and to minimize the aggravation of off-site geological hazards.
                                        Part II - Section VI – Health and Safety
                                                            45

     4. Development in areas of lava-caped underground streams shall be property engineered to allow
         for the free flow of water.
     5. The suitability of soil and/or rock formations should be one of the prime considerations for
         determining the type and intensity of development permitted.
     6. The City shall establish an ongoing program to collect and maintain current geological data.
     7. The City shall retain on an ongoing basis a qualified consulting geologist to assist the City in
         updating its geological data and to review geological reports prepared in connection with new
         development projects.
Goal B: To prevent loss of lives, injury, and property damage due to the collapse of buildings and
critical facilities and to minimize disruption of essential services in the event of an earthquake.
     1. The City shall, as required by State law, inventory all potentially hazardous buildings within the
         city and develop a mitigation program, including requirements for strengthening buildings,
         changing the use of the buildings to an acceptable occupancy level, or demolishing the buildings.
     2. The City should ensure that all public facilities, such as buildings, water tanks, and reservoirs, are
         structurally sound and able to withstand seismic shaking and the effect of seismically-induced
         ground failure.
     3. The City shall ensure that privately-owned and maintained above-ground petroleum products
         storage tanks and their retaining walls are structurally sound and able to withstand seismic
         shaking and the effects of seismically-induced ground failure.
Goal C: To prevent loss of lives, injury, and property damage due to flooding.
     1. The City shall continue to participate in the National Flood Insurance Program. To this end, the
         City shall ensure that local regulations are in full compliance with standards adopted by the
         Federal Emergency Management Agency.
     2. New residential development shall be constructed so that the lowest floor is at least one foot
         above the 100-year flood level.
     3. Non-residential development shall be anchored and flood-proofed to prevent damage from 100-
         year flood, or alternatively, elevated to at least one foot above the 100-year flood level.
     4. Existing development shall comply with policies VI.C.2 and VI.C.3 when improvements are
         made costing at least 50 percent of the current market value of the structure before the
         improvements.
     5. The City shall provide for channel improvements to and tree and brush clearance along
         watercourses in Placerville to reduce flooding.
Goal D: To prevent loss of lives, injuries, and property damage due to wildland and urban fires.
     1. Areas of high and extreme fire hazards shall be the subject of special review, and building and
         higher intensity uses shall be limited unless the hazards are mitigated to a point acceptable by
         the Fire Department.
     2. All new development in areas of high and extreme fire hazards as shown in Figure VIII-3 in the
         Background Report shall be constructed with fire retardant roof coverings.
                                     Part II - Section VI – Health and Safety
                                                         46

   3. The City shall require the installation of an approved interior sprinkler system in all new
        combustible woodframe commercial buildings of 5,000 square feet or more.
   4. All new development in areas of high and extreme fire hazards as shown in Figure VIII-3 in the
        Background Report shall provide for clearance around the structures and the use of fire resistant
        groundcover.
   5. The City shall encourage the Placerville Fire Department to maintain a regular program of fire
        inspection for commercial and industrial buildings.
   6. The City will ensure in approving and constructing new roads and streets that they are adequate
        in terms of width, turning radius and grade to facilitate access by firefighting apparatus. All plans
        for new streets for areas within the Urban Service Area and/or sphere of influence of the City
        shall be reviewed by the Placerville Fire Department to ensure that City standards are met since
        there is a high probability that these areas will be annexed to the City at some point in the future.
   7. All new development shall be required to meet the minimum fire flow rates and other standards
        specified by the City’s Fire Code.
   8. Future roadway systems and networks shall be designed with at least one means of egress other
        than the access in all developing areas.
   9. The City shall not approve any medium or high density residential developments unless they are
        served by a street system with at least two streets capable of carrying peak load traffic.
   10. Parcel splits and multi-family developments shall not be allowed in areas served by narrow streets
        until minimum access can be guaranteed to emergency vehicles at all times.
   11. In approving commercial, industrial, and multi-family developments, the City shall ensure all
        structures are located within 150 feet of an access useable by fire trucks.
   12. Existing streets shall be upgraded to meet City Subdivision Ordinance standards wherever
       possible.
   13. Parking shall be restricted on streets less than 28 feet in width curb to curb.
   14. The City shall continue to aggressively enforce its fire code and weed abatement regulations.
   15. The City shall encourage the Placerville Fire District to enact and enforce a weed abatement
       ordinance for the unincorporated area within the Fire District’s service area.
   16. The City shall strive to restrict vehicular access and recreational use of undeveloped foothill areas
       during critical fire hazard periods.
   17. The City shall adopt a uniform system for numbering structures, residences, and businesses.
   18. The City shall remove obstructions obscuring street signs and require that house numbers be
       legible from the street. Commercial structures with rear street access shall be identified with the
       business name and street address in a clear and conspicuous manner on the rear of the building.
Goal E: To minimize crime and promote the personal security of Placerville residents.
   1. The Placerville Police Department shall continue to promote neighborhood security programs and
       provide crime prevention training for neighborhood groups and associations.
                                    Part II - Section VI – Health and Safety
                                                        47

    2. Residential areas shall be designed to ensure the provision of adequate police services and to
        promote self-policing of individual communities.
    3. The City shall promote the design of new development and the installation of security equipment
        aimed at crime prevention. To this end, the Police Department shall review proposed
        subdivisions, medium and high density projects, and commercial and industrial projects to ensure
        that these features are considered in the design of the projects.
Goal F: To protect Placerville residents from the effects of hazardous materials.
    1. City approvals of all new development shall consider the potential for the production, use,
        storage, and transport of hazardous materials and provide for reasonable controls on such
        hazardous materials.
    2. Within its authority, the City shall regulate the production, use, storage, and transport of
        hazardous materials to protect the health of Placerville residents.
    3. The City shall work with the County in implementing the County’s Hazardous Materials Area Plan
        and acknowledges the County as lead agency for hazardous materials management and
        disclosure.
    4. The City shall work with the County in establishing an Annual Citizens’ Hazardous Materials
        Clean-up Day.
Goal G: To ensure that City emergency procedures are adequate in the event of potential natural
or man-made disasters.
    1. The City shall maintain and periodically update the City’s Emergency Plan. As part of the periodic
        update, the City shall review County and State emergency response procedures that must be
        coordinated with City procedures.
    2. The City shall conduct periodic emergency response exercises to test the effectiveness of City
        emergency response procedures.
Goal H: To protect the public from the hazards posed by old mine shafts and openings.
    1. The City shall enforce the Nuisance Abatement Ordinance requiring the identification and capping
        of all abandoned mine shafts and openings.
Goal I: To protect the residents of Placerville from the harmful effects of exposure to excessive
noise.
    1. The City shall attempt, insofar as possible, to protect areas within the city where the present
        noise environment is considered acceptable.
    2. Areas within Placerville exposed to existing or projected exterior noise levels exceeding 60dB Ldn
        shall be designated as noise-impacted areas.
    3. Areas within Placerville shall be designated as noise-impacted if exposed to existing or projected
        exterior noise levels exceeding the performance standards in Table II-1.
    4. New development of residential or other noise-sensitive land uses will not be permitted in noise-
        impacted areas unless effective mitigation measures are incorporated into the project design to
        reduce noise levels to:
                                   Part II - Section VI – Health and Safety
                                                       48

     a. 60 dB Ldn or less in outdoor activity areas, and interior noise levels to 45 dB Ldn or less,
         where the noise source is preempted from local control (i.e. traffic on public roadways,
         railroads and airports). In areas where it is not possible to reduce exterior noise levels to 60
         dB Ldn or less using a practical application of the best available noise-reduction technology,
         an exterior noise level of up to 65 dB Ldn will be allowed. Under no circumstances will
         interior noise levels be permitted to exceed 45 dB Ldn with the windows and doors closed.
     b. Achieve compliance with the standards in Subsection 4.a. and with the performance
         standards set out in Table II-1, where the noise source is subject to local control (i.e., non-
         traffic related).
5. When industrial, commercial, or other land uses, including locally-regulated noise sources, are
    proposed for areas containing noise-sensitive land uses, noise levels generated by the proposed
    use shall not exceed the standards in Subsection 4.a. or the performance standards set out in
    Table II-1.
6. Where the development of residential or other noise-sensitive land use is proposed for a noise-
    impacted area, an acoustical analysis shall be prepared at the applicant’s expense. The
    acoustical analysis shall:
    a. Be prepared by a qualified acoustical consultant experienced in the fields of environmental
        noise assessment and architectural acoustics.
    b. Include representative noise level measurements with sufficient sampling periods and
        locations to adequately describe local conditions.
    c.  Include estimated noise levels in terms of Ldn and/or the standards in Table II-1 for existing
        and projected future noise levels, with a comparison made to the adopted policies of this
        subsection.
    d. Include recommendations for appropriate mitigation to achieve compliance with the adopted
        policies of this subsection. Where the noise source in question consists of intermittent single
        events, the report must address the effects of maximum noise levels in sleeping rooms in
        terms of possible sleep disturbance.
    e. Include estimates of noise exposure after the prescribed mitigation measures have been
        implemented. If compliance with the policies of this subsection will not be achieved, a
        rationale for acceptance of the project must be provided.
7. Noise level criteria applied to land uses other than residential or other noise-sensitive uses shall
    be consistent with recommendations of the California Office of Noise Control (see Table II-2).
8. The City shall enforce the Noise Insulation Standards of Title 24 of the California Administrative
    Code and Chapter 35 of the Uniform Building Code concerning the construction of new multiple
    occupancy dwellings such as hotels, apartments, and condominiums.
9. Noise exposure information developed during the community noise survey descried in the
    Background Report shall be used as a guideline for the development of a community noise
    control ordinance to address noise complaints, and to provide local industry with performance
    standards for future development and equipment modifications. The ordinance should be
    consistent with the “Model Community Noise Control Ordinance” prepared by the California Office
    of Noise Control in 1977 with modifications made to reflect local concerns and conditions.
10. The rerouting of Highway 49 should be investigated for noise impacts on proposed land uses.
                               Part II - Section VI – Health and Safety
                                                   49

    11. New equipment and vehicles purchased by the City shall comply with noise level performance
        standards consistent with the best available noise reduction technology.
    12. The Placerville Police Department shall actively enforce requirements of the California Vehicle
        Code relating to vehicle mufflers and modified exhaust systems.
    13. The City shall monitor noise levels on Highway 50 and encourage the installation of noise barriers
        or noise attenuating vegetation if noise levels reach an unacceptable level.
    14. The use of solid barriers, earth mounds, and vegetation should be utilized as a means of
        screening noise sources from adjacent land uses.
    15. The City shall encourage acoustically compatible land uses and require noise attenuation
        measures, when necessary, in the vicinity of the Placerville Airport. The City shall ensure that
        land use approvals in the City are consistent with the Placerville Airport Land Use Compatibility
        Plan.
Goal J: To promote land use development surrounding the Placerville Airport that is compatible
with the noise, safety, airspace protection, overflight and other special characteristic policies and
maps of the Placerville ALUCP.
Policies:
    1. The City shall amend the General Plan as required under Government Code Section 65302.3 so
        that it is consistent with the ALUCP, incorporating by reference the following from the ALUCP into
        this Section of the General Plan:
        •    “Glossary of Terms,” pages vii to xviii;
        •    Chapter 2: Basic Provisions;
        •    Chapter 3: ALUC Review Process
        •    Chapter 4: Land Use Compatibility Criteria;
        •    Chapter 6: PLA-1: Placerville Airport Policies and Compatibility Maps;
        •    Chapter 9: Background Data: Placerville Airport and Environs
    2. The City shall ensure that land use approvals in the City are consistent with the Placerville Airport
        Land Use Compatibility Plan through the adoption of an airport overlay zone that references the
        policies and maps of the ALUCP.
                                     Part II - Section VI – Health and Safety
                                                         50

                                                   TABLE II-1
                              NOISE LEVEL PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
                              FOR NEW PROJECTS AND DEVELOPMENTS
Noise created by non-preempted noise sources* associated with new projects or developments shall be
controlled so as not to exceed the noise level standards set forth below as measured at any affected
residential land use situated in either the incorporated or unincorporated areas. New residential
development shall not be allowed where the ambient noise level due to non-preempted noise sources will
exceed the noise level standards set forth below.
                                                                  Exterior Noise Level Standards dBA
                             Cumulative Number of
                                                                   Daytime                  Nighttime
        Category            minutes in any one-hour
                                                              7 a.m. to 10 p.m.          10 p.m. to 7 a.m.
                                    time period
             1                           30                          50                        45
             2                           15                          55                        50
             3                            5                          60                        55
             4                            1                          65                        60
             5                            0                          70                        65
Each of the noise level standards specified above shall be reduced by five dBA for simple tone noises,
noises consisting primarily of speech or music, or for recurring impulsive noises.
*A preempted noise source is one that is regulated by the State or Federal Government at the source
such as automobiles, railroads, and airports.
                                    Part II - Section VI – Health and Safety
                                                        51

                                                           TABLE II-2
                       LAND USE COMPATIBILITY FOR COMMUNITY NOISE ENVIRONMENTS
                                           COMMUNITY NOISE EXPOSURE
      LAND USE CATEGORY                              Ldn OR CNEL, dB
                                         55      60      65    70    75    80
Residential – Low Density
Single Family, Duplex,                                                                              Interpretation
Mobile Homes
Residential – Multi-Family
                                                                                    Normally Acceptable
                                                                                    Specified land use is satisfactory, based
                                                                                    upon the assumption that any buildings
Transient Lodging -
                                                                                    involved are of normal conventional
Motels, Hotels                                                                      construction, without any special noise
                                                                                    insulation requirements.
Schools, Libraries, Churches,
Hospitals, Nursing Homes
                                                                                    Conditionally Acceptable
                                                                                    New construction or development should be
                                                                                    undertaken only after a detailed analysis of
Auditoriums, Concert, Halls,
                                                                                    the noise reduction requirements is made
Amphitheatres                                                                       and needed noise insulation features
                                                                                    included in the design. Conventional
                                                                                    construction, but with closed windows and
                                                                                    fresh air supply systems or air conditioning
Sports Arena, Outdoor Spectator
                                                                                    will normally suffice.
Sports
Playgrounds, Neighborhood
                                                                                    Normally Unacceptable
Parks                                                                               New construction or development should
                                                                                    generally be discouraged. If new
                                                                                    construction or development does proceed,
                                                                                    a detailed analysis of the noise reduction
Golf Courses, Riding Stables,
                                                                                    requirements must be made and needed
Water Recreation, Cemeteries                                                        noise insulation features included in the
                                                                                    design.
Office Buildings, Business
Commercial and Professional
                                                                                    Clearly Unacceptable
                                                                                    New construction or development should
                                                                                    generally not be undertaken.
Industrial, Manufacturing,
Utilities, Agriculture
Source: California Office of Noise Control
                                           Part II - Section VI – Health and Safety
                                                               52

IMPLEMENTATION PROGRAMS
   1. The City shall prepare, maintain, and regularly update an Index to Geological Reports which shall
      include reports prepared for both public and private projects.
      Responsibility:
           Development Services Department
      Time Frame:
           Ongoing
   2. The City shall maintain an official Geological Map showing basic geology and the location of
      geological hazards. The Geological Map shall be regularly updated on the bases of geological
      reports prepared and filed in connection with development projects and water well logs and
      subsurface information developed in connection with public projects.
      Responsibility:
               Development Services Department
      Time Frame:
               Ongoing
   3. The City shall inventory all potentially hazardous buildings within the city and adopt a mitigation
      program, including requirements for strengthening buildings, changing the use of the buildings to
      an acceptable occupancy level, or demolishing the buildings.
      Responsibility:
           City Council
           Building Department
      Time Frame:
           FY 90-91
   4. The City shall prepare and adopt a uniform system for numbering structures, residences, and
      businesses.
      Responsibility:
           City Council
           Fire Department
      Time Frame:
           FY 90-91
   5. The City shall prepare and adopt an ordinance requiring that street numbers be legible from the
      street.
      Responsibility:
                                 Part II - Section VI – Health and Safety
                                                     53

       City Council
       Fire District
       Police Department
   Time Frame:
       FY 90-91
6. The City shall amend the Zoning Ordinance to include hillside zoning provisions to relate land use
   intensity and minimum lot size to the degree of slope and to implement other policies of the
   General Plan.
   Responsibility:
       City Council
       Development Services Department
   Time Frame:
       FY 90-91
7. The City shall prepare and adopt a noise ordinance consistent with the policies of this section.
   Among other things, the ordinance shall limit residential construction noise to specified daylight
   hours and regulate such nuisances as barking dogs.
   Responsibility:
       City Council
       Development Services Department
   Time Frame:
       FY 90-91
8. The City shall continue to review and amend, as necessary, fire codes with respect to safety
   considerations.
   Responsibility:
       City Council
        Fire Department
   Time Frame:
       Ongoing
9. The Placerville Police Department shall continue to promote neighborhood security programs and
   provide crime prevention training for neighborhood groups and associations.
   Responsibility:
       Police Department
   Time Frame:
                              Part II - Section VI – Health and Safety
                                                  54

         Ongoing
10. The City shall adopt an ordinance requiring businesses manufacturing, storing, using, or
    transporting significant quantities of hazardous materials to identify annually such materials and
    their quantities. The City shall maintain current inventory of such materials by location for use by
    the Fire Department and the Development Services Department.
    Responsibility:
         City Council
         Fire Department
    Time Frame:
         FY 89-90
11. The City shall adopt an ordinance requiring installation of an approved interior sprinkler system in
    all new combustible wood frame commercial buildings of 5,00 square feet or more.
    Responsibility:
         City Council
         Fire Department
    Time Frame:
         FY 89-90
12. To implement Policies 1 and 2 of Goal J the City shall incorporate by reference the “Glossary of
    Terms,” provisions, review process, noise, safety, airspace protection, overflight and other special
    characteristic compatibility policies and maps contained in the following sections of the Placerville
    Airport Land Use Compatibility Plan, as may be amended from time to time.
         •   “Glossary of Terms,” pages vii to xviii;
         •   Chapter 1: Introduction;
         •   Chapter 2: Basic Provisions;
         •   Chapter 3: ALUC Review Process
         •   Chapter 4: Land Use Compatibility Criteria;
         •   Chapter 6: PLA-1: Placerville Airport Policies and Compatibility Maps;
         •   Chapter 9: Background Data: Placerville Airport and Environs
    The City shall also adopt an airport overlay zone that references the policies and maps of the
    ALUCP.
    Responsibility:
         City Council
         Development Services Department
    Time Frame:
         Spring 2013
                                Part II - Section VI – Health and Safety
                                                    55

                     CITY OF PLACERVILLE
                           GENERAL PLAN
                        POLICY DOCUMENT
                                      Adopted
                         JANUARY 23, 1990 (Res. No. 5133)
                    Amended December 14, 2004 (Res. No. 7008)
             Housing Element amended February 2012 (Res. No. 8013)
Street Classifications and Circulation Diagram amended June 2012 (Res. No. 8014)
               Land Use Element amended June 2013 (Res. No. 8105)
           Transportation Element amended June 2013 (Res. No. 8105)
           Health & Safety Element amended June 2013 (Res. No. 8105)
             Housing Element amended February 2014 (Res. No. 8168)
  Land Use Element & Housing Element amended February 2016 (Res. No. 8390)
  Land Use Element & Housing Element amended October 2016 (Res. No. 8471)



                                            TABLE OF CONTENTS
TABLE OF CONTENTS
LIST OF FIGURES
INTRODUCTION
        REGIONAL AND LOCAL SETTING . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1
        PURPOSE AND NATURE OF THE GENERAL PLAN. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1
        PREPARATION OF THE GENERAL PLAN. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2
        CITIZEN CONCERNS. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
        ORGANIZATION OF THE GENERAL PLAN. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .6
PART I LAND USE/CIRCULATION DIAGRAMS AND STANDARDS
        LAND USE DIAGRAM AND STANDARDS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1
               Residential Designation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1
               Commercial Designation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
               Other Designation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
        CIRCULATION PLAN DIAGRAM AND STANDARDS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
        STREET CLASSIFICATIONS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
        LAND USE DIAGRAM FIGURES
               I-1A CIRCULATION PLAN DIAGRAM . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
               I-1B CIRCULATION PLAN DIAGRAM . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
               I-2 STREET STANDARDS – LOCAL STREETS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . 16
               I-3 STREET STANDARDS – COLLECTOR STREETS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . .17
               I-4 STREET STANDARDS – CUL-DE-SAC STREETS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
               I-5 STREET STANDARDS – HILLSIDE STREETS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
               I-6 STREET STANDARDS – HILLSIDE STREETS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
               I-7 STREET STANDARDS – MINOR ARTERIAL . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .21
PART II GOALS, POLICIES, AND IMPLEMENTATION PROGRAMS
   Section
        I      LAND USE. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1
        II     HOUSING (Amended & Adopted December 14, 2004) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
        III    TRANSPORTATION. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
        IV     PUBLIC FACILITIES AND SERVICES. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
        V      NATURAL, CULTURAL, AND SCENIC RESOURCES . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
        VI     HEALTH AND SAFETY . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45
        VII    COMMUNITY DESIGN . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .56
        VIII   ADMINISTRATION AND IMPLEMENTATION. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 68


INTRODUCTIO
                                               INTRODUCTION
REGIONAL AND LOCAL SETTING
Placerville is located in El Dorado County on the western slope of the Central Sierra Nevada at the
junction of U.S. Highway 50 and State Highway 49. Situated approximately midway between Sacramento
and Lake Tahoe, Placerville lies about 25 miles east of Folsom, which marks the eastern edge of the
intense urban development of the Sacramento Metropolitan area. The rural residential communities of El
Dorado Hills and Shingle Springs lie just to the west of Placerville along Highway 50, and the city of South
Lake Tahoe is approximately 60 miles to the east along Highway 50. Auburn lies approximately 25 miles
north of Placerville on Highway 49 and Jackson is approximately 34 miles to the south on Highway 49.
Placerville occupies approximately five square miles at the bottom and up the slopes of a ravine bisected
by Hangtown Creek and Highway 50.
The historical development of Placerville can be divided into five periods. The first began in 1848 with the
formation of the town and its transition from a tent community to a frontier boom town. The second period
was characterized by gradual economic decline, reflected in a slowdown in gold discovery, lower gold
prices, and population decline. The third period, which began with the discovery of silver ore near Virginia
City, Nevada, was characterized by quick growth lasting through the early 1870’s. The fourth period
began in the early 1870’s and lasted into the second decade of the twentieth century. This period was
characterized by population decline and economic diversification. The fifth and last period began in the
1920’s and continues to the present. This last period has been characterized by steady growth in the
population and major growth in the retail market, in agribusiness, and in the lumber industry.
Placerville is a thriving community with a 1988 population of approximately 8,000 within the city and
another 3,000 outside in the adjacent unincorporated area. The city is the administrative and commercial
center of El Dorado County and a popular destination for Gold Country tourists and recreationists.
PURPOSE AND NATURE OF THE GENERAL PLAN
A general plan is a legal document, required by state law, which serves as a community’s “constitution”
for development and the use of its land. It must be a comprehensive, long-term document, detailing
proposals for the “physical development of the city, and of any land outside its boundaries which in the
planning agency’s judgment bears relation to its planning” (Government Code Sections 65300 et seq.).
Time horizons vary, but the typical general plan looks 10-20 years into the future. Like a single frame in a
motion picture, the general plan represents, and a given point in time, the city’s aspirations for the future.
The law specifically requires that the general plan address seven topics or “elements.” These are land
use, circulation (transportation), housing, conservation, open space, noise, and safety. The plan must
analyze issues of importance to the community, set forth policies in text and diagrams for conservation
and development, and outline specific programs for implementing these policies.
On the most abstract level, preparing the general plan can be viewed as an activity which sharpens and
focuses the many concerns of citizens within the community and provides a structure by which these
often conflicting concerns can be forged into a common vision of the future. By bringing attention to the
issues facing the community and placing them in an expanded time frame, the plan helps citizens see
their community as a complex system—a living entity that grows and responds to problems and
opportunities—and to guide it along an agreed upon course.
On a more concrete level, preparing, adopting, and maintaining a general plan serves to:
     •   Establish within local government the capacity to analyze local and regional conditions and needs
         in order to respond effectively to the problems and opportunities facing the community;
                                                  Introduction
                                                        1

     •    Identify the community’s environmental, social, and economic goals;
     •    Record the local government’s policies and standards for the maintenance and improvement of
          existing development and the location and characteristics of future development;
     •    Provide citizens with information about their community and with opportunities to participate in the
          local planning and decision-making process;
     •    Improve the coordination of community development activities among local, regional, state, and
          federal agencies; and
     •    Establish a basis for subsequent planning efforts, such as preparation of specific plans,
          redevelopment plans, and special studies, to deal with unique problems or areas in the
          community.
While the general plan sets out policies and suggests ways to put these policies into action, the actual
implementation of the plan is a complex and lengthy process in its own right. As with piecing together a
puzzle, local officials must take many separate, but interconnected actions according to the directions set
out in the general plan. These various actions rest on two essential powers of local government:
corporate and police powers. Using their “corporate power,” local governments collect money through
bonds, fees, assessments, and taxes, and spend it to provide services and facilities such as police and
fire protection, streets, water and sewage disposal facilities, and parks. Using their “police power,” local
governments regulate citizens’ use of their property through zoning, subdivision, and building regulations
in order “to promote the health, safety, and welfare of the public.” The general plan provides the
framework for the exercise of these powers by local officials.
PREPARATION OF THE GENERAL PLAN
In May 1985, the City of Placerville initiated a comprehensive revision of its 1974 General Plan, retaining
a consultant team headed by J. Laurence Mintier & Associates.
In June 1985, the Consultants carried out an issue identification process consisting of a town hall
meeting, interviews with public officials, and written community response forms.
Following the issue identification process, the Consultants prepared a detailed background report
describing and assessing existing conditions, constraints, and opportunities in Placerville.
In January 1986, the City appointed a 35-member citizen advisory committee to assist the City and the
Consultants in preparing the revised General Plan. The Citizen Advisory Committee, which was divided
into six subcommittees, met throughout 1986 reviewing background materials and drafting policies for the
new plan.
Working with City staff and the Consultants during early 1987, the Citizen Advisory Committee prepared a
formal draft of the revised General Plan for review and consideration by the Placerville Planning
Commission and City Council. The Consultants subsequently prepared a Draft Environmental Impact
Report on the Draft General Plan.
The Draft General Plan Policy Document, the Draft General Plan Background Report, and the Draft
General Plan EIR were released for public review in February 1988.
The Planning Commission held 2 hearings and 10 meetings on the Draft General Plan and Draft EIR
between April and December 1988. The City Council held 4 hearings and 2 meetings between July 1988
and August 1989. Following the final recommendations of the City Council on the draft plan, City staff
revised the Policy Document and Land Use Map, and the Consultants revised the Draft EIR for
certification as the Final EIR and revised the Housing chapter of the Background Report. The planning
Commission and City Council each held one final meeting on the General Plan and it was adopted in
January 1989.
                                                  Introduction
                                                        2

CITIZEN CONCERNS
During the preparation of the revised General Plan, two separate efforts were undertaken to identify
citizen concerns about Placerville and its future development. In June 1985, the Consultants conducted a
three-pronged effort to identify citizens concerns. The Consultants interviewed City Council members,
Planning Commissioners, City staff, and several other individuals active in community affairs. Second, the
Consultants conducted a town hall meeting. Third, the Consultants solicited comments from residents by
distributing a Community Response Form. The form was made available at City offices and other
locations around town and distributed at the town hall meeting.
The Citizen’s Advisory Committee subsequently developed its own questionnaire, which was mailed to all
City utility customers in the fall of 1986. More than 110 completed questionnaires were returned.
All these efforts generally sought responses to three questions: 1) what are the positive qualities or
assets of Placerville; 2) what are the problems with Placerville; and 3) what should be done through the
General Plan revision and other City efforts to improve Placerville and to protect and perpetuate its
positive qualities and assets?
The responses to these questions reveal a general consensus on the positive and negative qualities of
Placerville and identify a broad range of recommended improvements. Perceptions naturally vary among
residents, and some recommendations were contradictory. The following summarizes the general
findings and opinions gleaned from the efforts of both the Citizen’s Advisory Committee and the
Consultants to identify citizen concerns.
Positive Qualities and Assets
The interviews, opinion surveys, and townhall meeting all included a question about the most important
assets of qualities of Placerville. Three assets were most frequently mentioned: small-town rural quality,
historic qualities, and the physical environment.
Small Town, Rural Quality
By far the most frequently-mentioned asset was Placerville’s small town, rural quality. This quality is
characterized by sense of neighborliness and closeness, a relaxed pace, and a sense of individuality not
found in larger cities. This quality is also characterized by a sense of personal safety and personal service
from local merchants. Placerville is generally seen as a good place to raise children.
Historic Qualities
Many stressed the importance of the historical qualities of Placerville and felt the preservation of these
qualities to be crucial. Examples include the Old Town area, with its mixture of buildings and older homes,
and the general historic significance of the area. Many noted with appreciation the improvements
occurring in the Old Town area.
Physical Environment
The physical environment was also a frequently-mentioned asset. Under this heading, residents
specifically cited varied terrain, temperate climate, clean air and water, open space, proximity of the
wilderness, and trees (both in town and in the surrounding area) as prized assets.
Other Assets
Many other assets were mentioned at least once in the survey responses. They include:
                                                  Introduction
                                                         3

     Progressive City attitudes
     Good schools, hospitals, and public services and facilities
     Old residential neighborhoods
     Downtown character
     Good shopping opportunities
     Mixture of housing types and architecture
     Accessible city government
     Proximity to recreational activities
     Proximity to Sacramento, the Bay Area, and Lake Tahoe
     Lack of congestion
Problems
The problems most often mentioned can be grouped into two principal areas: traffic and circulation and
planning and land use issues.
Traffic and Circulation
Traffic congestion and circulation patterns were the most often identified problems. More specifically,
individuals mentioned limited access in and out of parts of the city, congestion in downtown, the
narrowness and steepness of streets, poor road maintenance, heavy traffic on Placerville Drive, and
Broadway and Pacific Streets. By consensus, Highway 50 is the prime contributor to the traffic problems:
the highway bisects the city at grade, includes numerous signalized intersections, and disrupts cross-
town travel. The intersection of Bedford and Main was frequently cited as the most congested
intersection. Several people noted that the lack of adequate pedestrian and bicycle facilities created a
hazardous situation. Lack of parking in residential areas and in new commercial developments was also
noted.
Land Use and Planning Issues
Problems identified in this area ranged from a concern for the poor quality of recent development to lack
of coordination between the City and County. Several people mentioned that recent projects have been
poorly designed and constructed. High-density residential development in older, low-density
neighborhoods concerned many people. Others complained about the hodge-podge commercial
development on Broadway and the proliferation of fast food businesses in that area. Too much
commercial development in residential areas and the proliferation of shopping centers were also cited as
problems. The amount and pace of growth in Placerville was frequently mentioned.
Inadequate sewer and water capacity are seen by many as major constraints on future development.
Many people expressed concern over the present plans and development approval process. The lack of
an up-to-date general plan and opposition of neighbors to development that is consistent with the 1974
General Plan were both mentioned as problems. Extensive grading of hillsides concerned several people.
Some residents feel that the city limits are too small, and that too much development is occurring in the
unincorporated periphery as a result. There is a general frustration with the County and the Local Agency
Formation Commission because of their resistance to Placerville annexation efforts.
Other Problems
A variety of other concerns were mentioned in the interviews, townhall meetings, and surveys that cannot
be easily categorized. They include:
     High cost of developing land in Placerville
     Unattractiveness of the town
     Rubbish and abandoned cars in streets, yards, driveways, and vacant lots
     Dogs and cats running loose
                                                 Introduction
                                                       4
    Farm animals in residential areas
    Inability to widen streets
    Retirees who do not support the local economy
    Lack of concern for the needs of seniors
    Pent-up demand for close-in housing
    Transport of hazardous materials through town
    Inadequate tax base
    High utility rates
    Excessive government regulation
    Newcomers seeing to change Placerville
    Lack of recreational activities for teens and adults
    Lack of well-designed pedestrian areas
    Lack of sidewalk maintenance in downtown
    Air pollution from wood-burning stoves
    Excessive noise between 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
Issues to be Addressed in the New General Plan
Responses to the questions about Placerville’s assets and problems identified major issues to be
addressed in the General Plan revision. This section summarizes other issues identified that do not fit
easily into either of the two preceding categories or are very specific in nature.
General Issues
    Lack of clear guidelines for development
    Need for progressive, clear direction on aesthetics
    Public input/awareness as consensus for development
    Definition and adoption of the urban service area
    Recognition of neighborhood stability
    Holding capacity of planning area and rate of growth
    Impacts of growth
    Need to maintain flexibility in development standards
    Future of the railroad line
Specific Recommendations
    Set aside areas for commercial and industrial development
    City should expand/annex to keep residential densities low
    Annex the Missouri Flat area
    Growth should be toward Smith Flat
    Move fairgrounds and develop the site for other uses
    Develop where there are adequate roads and services
    Protect single-family neighborhoods; higher density should go to new areas with adequate facilities
    Do not expand low-income housing programs
    Keep commercial development along Highway 50 corridor and off of Cedar Ravine and Highway 49
    Stop major cut-fill development
    No more annexation
    Expand/develop pedestrian facilities
    Use a village concept of future development in the city
    Encourage residential development of existing vacant land
    Increase public transportation opportunities in and out of town
    Focus development efforts on infill
    Infill at compatible densities
    Promote “quality” in new development
    Determine future of Placerville Road
                                                 Introduction
                                                       5

     Enhance Broadway’s looks
     Develop new business and sales tax revenues
     Support auto dealerships for their generation of sales tax revenues and general budget contributions
     Create new area for auto dealerships and related services
     Increase funding for park development and maintenance
     Integrate local services and tourism in downtown area
     Widen Cedar Ravine
     Enhance downtown’s historical qualities
     Move highway 50 out of middle of the City or, if not, elevate it to eliminate dangerous crossings
        (e.g., Bedford, Spring, and Canal Streets)
     Construct more overcrossings along Highway 50
     Add more parking downtown
     Provide alternate transportation access
     Keep the town an enjoyable place to live
     Make traffic on Main Street one-way and add more planters and stop signs
     Close Main Street and turn it into a pedestrian mall
     Route delivery trucks, vans, and buses around Main Street
     Promote balanced blend of old and new
     Limit commercial growth to present downtown area
     Provide for a recreational vehicle park
     Make Main Street safe after dark
     Develop a large park above town with swimming, picnic areas, and landscaping
     Keep Placerville primarily low-density residential; avoid high-density housing
     Add speed bumps to streets
     Expand bike routes and lanes
ORGANIZATION OF THE GENERAL PLAN
The Placerville General Plan consists of two documents: the General Plan Background Report and the
General Plan Policy Document. The General Plan Background Report inventories and analyzes existing
conditions and trends in Placerville. The Background Report, which provides the formal supporting
documentation for general plan policies, addresses nine subject areas: land use, housing, population,
economic conditions and fiscal considerations, transportation, public facilities and services, natural
resources, health and safety, and scenic resources and urban design.
The General Plan Policy Document includes the goals, policies, standards, and implementation programs
that constitute the formal policy of the City of Placerville for land use, development, and environmental
quality. The following definitions describe the nature of the statements of goals, policies, standards, and
implementation programs as they are used in this document.
     Goal – The ultimate purpose of an effort stated in a way that is general in nature and immeasurable.
     Policy – A specific statement in text or diagram guiding action and implying clear commitment.
     Standard – A specific, often quantified, guideline incorporated in a policy or implementation program,
     defining the relationship between two or more variables. Standards can often translate directly into
     regulatory controls.
     Implementation Program – An action, procedure, program, or technique that carries out general plan
     policy. Implementation programs also specify primary responsibility for carrying out the action and a
     time frame for its accomplishments.
The General Plan Policy Document is divided into two main parts. Part I includes the land use diagram
and contains a description of the land use designations, the purposes of the various land use
designations, allowable uses within each designation, and standards of population density and building
                                                  Introduction
                                                        6

intensity for the various land use designations. Part I also contains a diagram describing the proposed
circulation system and a set of street standards.
Part II contains explicit statements of goals, policies, standards, and implementation programs. Part II is
divided into the following seven sections: I. Land Use; II. Housing; III.Transportation; IV. Public Facilities
and Services; V. Natural, Cultural, and Scenic Resources; VI. Health and Safety; and VII. Administration
and Implementation.
In addition to the Background Report and Policy Document, an Environmental Impact Report (EIR)
analyzing the impacts and implication of the Placerville General Plan was prepared and certified prior to
adoption of the plan.
                                                 Introduction
                                                        7
                   PART I
    LAND USE/CIRCULATION
DIAGRAMS AND STANDARDS
                                                       PART I
                         LAND USE/CIRCULATION DIAGRAMS AND STANDARDS
Part I describes the General Plan Land Use Diagram and the Circulation Plan designed to support the
proposed land uses.
LAND USE DIAGRAM AND STANDARDS
The Land Use Diagram depicts proposed land use for the Placerville General Plan Area for the year
2005. The following sections describe the land use designations appearing on the Land Use Diagram, the
purposes of each land use designation, allowable uses within each designation, applicable standards of
population density and/or building intensity, and the zoning districts deemed to be consistent with each
land use designation.
For residential designations, General Plan density standards are stated in dwelling units per gross acre,
while the minimum parcel sizes and minimum lot areas per dwelling unit specified for the corresponding
zoning districts are stated in net square feet of parcel area. After making deductions for streets and rights-
of-way from the gross acreage figures, the density standards for the General Plan designations and the
minimum parcel sizes and minimum lot area per dwelling unit specified by the applicable zoning districts
are roughly determined based on maximum density established by the Zoning Ordinance for each district.
The maximum residential density possible with a density bonus will, therefore, exceed the maximum
density per gross specified for each residential category. Additionally, the maximum density per gross
acre specified for each residential designation does not reflect the possible development of secondary
residential units, which would increase the possible density over what is otherwise specified.
The General Plan assumes that the average household size for the Rural Residential (RR), Low Density
Residential (LD), and the Medium Density (MD) designations is 2.5 persons and the average household
size for the High Density Residential (HD) designation is 2.0 persons.
Development intensity standards for the commercial and industrial designations are stated in terms of
floor-area ratios, that is, the ratio of total square footage of floor area within a building to the net parcel
area.
RESIDENTIAL DESIGNATIONS
Rural Residential (RR)
Purposes
     1. Provide for single-family residential development at very low densities in rural areas with limited
         services and facilities.
     2. Provide for agricultural uses compatible with the residential character of the area.
     3. Create conditions conducive to a desirable rural environment and protect it from encroachment by
         unrelated and incompatible uses.
     4. Protect watershed lands and open space values.
     5. Prevent incompatible development on steep slopes.
     6. Minimize the need for the extension of urban-level utilities and facilities.
                               Part I Land Use/Circulation Diagrams and Standards
                                                          1
     7. Preserve lands suited for eventual development until such time as they are needed and the
         economical provision of utilities, streets, schools, recreation facilities, and other facilities has been
         planned and scheduled.
Allowable Uses
Detached single-family homes, secondary residential units, agricultural uses, such as raising and grazing
livestock, poultry or other animals, and growing and harvesting of trees, fruits, vegetables, flowers, grains
or other crops, public and quasi-public uses, and similar and compatible uses.
Density/Intensity Standards
Density Range: 0.20 to 1.00 dwelling units per gross acre.
Consistent Zoning Districts                                                Minimum Site Area per Dwelling Unit
RE (Estate Residential) .................................................................... .. 5 acres
R1A (Single-Family – Acre)..................................................................... 1 acre
OS (Open Space)
PF (Public Facilities)
Low Density Residential (LD)
Purposes
     1. Provide for single-family residential development in areas with urban-level services and facilities,
         but limited for development by topography and terrain.
     2. Create conditions conducive to a desirable low-density environment and protect it from
         encroachment by unrelated and incompatible uses.
Allowable Uses
Detached single-family homes, secondary residential units, public and quasi-public uses, and similar and
compatible uses.
Density/intensity Standards
Density Range: 1.01 to 4.00 dwelling units per gross acre.
Consistent Zoning Districts                                   Minimum Site Area per Dwelling Unit
R1-10,000 (Single-Family Residential) ............................... 10,000 square feet
R1-20,000 (Single-Family Residential) ............................... 20,000 square feet
OS (Open Space)
PF (Public Facilities)
Medium Density Residential (MD)
Purposes
     1. Provide for single-family residential and mobilehome park development in areas with urban-level
         services and facilities.
                              Part I Land Use/Circulation Diagrams and Standards
                                                                    2

    2. Create conditions conducive to a desirable medium-density residential environment and protect it
        from encroachment of unrelated and incompatible uses.
Allowable Uses
Detached single-family homes, secondary residential units, mobilehomes and mobilehome parks, public
and quasi-public uses, and similar and compatible uses.
Density/Intensity Standards
Density Range: 4.01 to 6.00 dwelling units per gross acre.
Consistent Zoning Districts                                 Minimum Site Area per Dwelling Unit
R1 – 6,000 (Single-Family Residential) .............................. 6,000 square feet
MP (Mobilehome Park) ........................................................ 2,700 square feet
PF (Public Facilities)
High Density Residential (HD)
Purposes
    1. Provide for multi-family residential development in areas with urban-level services and facilities
        and properly located in relation to commercial and other residential areas.
    2. Create conditions conducive to a desirable high-density residential environment and protect it
        from encroachment by unrelated and incompatible uses.
    3. Provide for a range of densities to facilitate transitional densities from lower to higher density
        neighborhoods.
    4. Provide for a range of housing types and densities consistent with the General Plan Housing
        Element.
Density/Intensity Standards
Density Range: 4.01 to 24.00 dwelling units per gross acre.
Allowable Uses
Detached and attached single-family homes, condominiums, apartments, public and quasi-public uses,
and similar and compatible uses.
Consistent Zoning Districts                                 Minimum Site Area per Dwelling Unit
R-2 (Low Density Multi-Family) ............................................. 5,445 square feet
R-3 (Medium Density Multi-Family) ....................................... 3,630 square feet
R-4 (High Density Multi-Family) ............................................ 2,722 square feet
R-5 (Very High Density Multi-Family) .................................... 1,815 square feet
OS (Open Space)
PF (Public Facilities)
                           Part I Land Use/Circulation Diagrams and Standards
                                                                  3

Planned Residential Development/Historic (PRDH)
Purposes
    1. Provide for the development of single-family and multi-family homes in a manner compatible with
        the historic areas of the city or undeveloped areas within or adjacent to historic neighborhoods.
    2. Ensure that new development within historic neighborhoods is designed and constructed in a
        manner that is compatible with existing historic development.
    3. Protect the historic integrity of areas such as Smith Flat.
Allowable Uses
Single-family detached and attached homes, secondary residential units, multi-family residential units,
parks, open space, public and quasi-public uses, and similar and compatible uses.
Density/Intensity Standards
Density Range: 0.20 to 16.00 units per gross acre.
Consistent Zoning Districts                                Minimum Site Area per Dwelling Unit
PRDH (Planned Residential Development/Historic). . . . . . . . . . . . . .10,000 square feet
OS (Open Space)
PF (Public Facilities)
Housing Opportunity Overlay (HO)
Purposes
    1. Provide for the development of attached single-family and multi-family housing to meet the goals
        of the City’s Regional Housing Need Allocation (RHNA).
    2. Provide a means of achieving the residential housing objectives of the Housing Element of the
        General Plan, particularly by encouraging new multi-family residential development that includes
        affordable housing, housing for persons with disabilities, housing for persons with developmental
        disabilities, and housing that supports aging in place.
Allowable Uses
Multi-family residential units, single-family attached homes, home occupations,
Density/Intensity Standards
Density Range: 20.00 to 24.00 units per gross acre.
Consistent Zoning Districts…………………………………..Minimum Site Area Per Dwelling Unit
HO (Housing Opportunity Overlay)…………………………. 1,815 square feet
                             Part I Land Use/Circulation Diagrams and Standards
                                                        4

COMMERCIAL DESIGNATIONS
Agricultural/Commercial (AC)
Purposes
      1. Provide for agricultural uses compatible with the residential character of the area.
      2. Create conditions conducive to a desirable rural environment while allowing for limited
         commercial development.
      3. Protect the watershed lands and open space values.
      4. Allow for agricultural activities with related commercial uses.
Allowable Uses
Detached single-family homes, secondary residential uses, agricultural uses such as raising and grazing
of livestock, poultry, or other animals, growing and harvesting of trees, fruits, vegetables, flowers, grains,
or other crops. Storage, packing, and processing of agricultural products produced on the property. Sales
of agricultural goods and other products, including arts and crafts, antiques, food, Christmas trees, fruits,
and cannery products and similar uses that are incidental to the residential and commercial uses thereon
and that are not a nuisance to contiguous property. This designation also allows for the gift shops, rides
(e.g., hay rides, horseback rides, and small trains), camping/R.V.s, picnicking, farmers’ markets, and
similar uses.
Density / Intensity Standards
Density Range: 0.00 to 0.20 dwelling units per gross acre.
Floor Area Ratio: 0.5
Consistent Zoning Districts                                Minimum Site Area per Dwelling Unit
AC (Agricultural Commercial) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5 acres OS (Open Space)
Commercial (C)
Purposes
      1. Provide for retail sales and services, including entertainment and other commercial activities to
         serve the residents of the community.
      2. Provide for the development of commercial facilities concentrated in well-defined and well-
         designed areas.
     3. Create conditions conducive to a convenient and desirable environment for customers and
         employees.
     4. Protect areas in this designation from encroachment by heavy commercial, residential, or other
         incompatible uses.
                             Part I Land Use/Circulation Diagrams and Standards
                                                                 5

Allowable Uses
Professional or business offices, banks, studios, retail sales, eating and drinking establishments,
commercial recreation, motels and hotels, retail services (excluding fast food restaurants and automobile
sales or service), public and quasi-public uses, and similar and compatible uses.
Density / Intensity Standards
Floor Area Ratio: 0.60
Consistent Zoning Districts
C (Commercial)
OS (Open Space)
PF (Public Facilities)
Highway Commercial (HWC)
Purposes
    1. Provide for freeway-oriented uses, such as fast food restaurants, gas stations, and other uses
        which are necessary and convenient to the travelling public.
    2. Provide for the development of highway commercial facilities concentrated in well-defined and
        well-designed areas.
    3. Create conditions conducive to a convenient and desirable environment for customers and
        employees.
    4. Protect areas in this designation from encroachment by unrelated and incompatible uses.
    5. Differentiate freeway and travel-oriented uses from those of the downtown business district and
        other commercial areas.
Allowable Uses
Hotels and motels, service stations, retail sales and services, eating and drinking establishments, other
uses catering principally to highway travelers and tourists, public and quasi-public uses, and similar and
compatible uses.
Density / Intensity Standards
Floor Area Ratio: 0.60
Consistent Zoning Districts
HWC (Highway Commercial)
OS (Open Space)
Convenience Commercial (CC)
Purposes
    1. Provide for small “convenience-oriented” commercial centers to satisfy limited shopping and
        service needs to the neighborhood in which they are located. The intent of this designation is to
                            Part I Land Use/Circulation Diagrams and Standards
                                                      6

         provide and expanded version of what has been historically known as the “corner store.” It is
         intended that this designation will not be introduced into already-developed neighborhoods, but
         will be limited to newly-developing neighborhoods around the perimeter of the city core. As these
         new neighborhoods develop, they will be farther from the center of the city, and thus it is deemed
         desirable to include well-defined and well-designed convenience commercial centers in such
         areas. Architecturally, development in this designation must be compatible with the
         neighborhood in which it is located, and be carefully regulated as to landscaping, signage, glare,
         noise, parking, and hours of operation.
    2. Create conditions conducive to a convenient and desirable environment for customers and
         employees.
    3. Differentiate convenience commercial uses from those of the downtown business district,
         highway commercial areas, and other commercial areas.
Allowable Uses
Markets (excluding gasoline sales), delicatessens (either take-out or sit-down), dry cleaners, laundries,
barber and beauty shops, and similar and compatible uses.
Density / Intensity Standards
Floor Area Ratio: 0.50
Maximum Total Floor Area per Center: 5,000 square feet
Compatible Zoning Districts
CC (Convenience Commercial)
Business and Professional (BP)
Purposes
    1. Provide for professional office development and related services.
    2. Create conditions conducive to a convenient and desirable working environment.
Allowable Uses
Administrative offices, financial institutions, professional offices (such as for architects, attorneys, dentists,
engineers, optometrists, chiropractors, physicians, real estate brokers, planning consultants, and physical
therapists), medical and dental clinics, laboratories, pharmacies, public buildings and facilities, hospitals,
retail sales of business and office supplies, other businesses serving the needs of office workers, public
and quasi-public uses, and similar and compatible uses.
Density / Intensity Standards
Floor Area Ratio: 0.60
Consistent Zoning Districts
BP (Business and Professional)
                              Part I Land Use/Circulation Diagrams and Standards
                                                         7

Heavy Commercial (HC)
Purposes
     1. Provide for wholesale uses, including bulk storage, warehouses, and other heavy commercial
          activities to serve the community, and provide employment and income to its residents.
     2. Provide for the development of heavy commercial and service facilities, concentrated in well-
          defined and well-planned areas properly located in relation to utilities, access, topography, and
          residential uses.
     3. Create conditions conducive to a convenient and desirable working environment.
     4. Control the objectionable effects of certain uses necessary in the community, but detrimental to
                    other areas.
     5. Protect areas in this designation from encroachment by uses which could be better located in
          areas not as well-suited for heave commercial activities.
Allowable Uses
Bulk storage, warehouses, service stations, automobile sales, offices, retail sales, wholesale outlets, light
manufacturing and assembly, public and quasi-public facilities, and similar and compatible uses.
Density / Intensity Standards
Floor area Ratio: 0.60
Compatible Zoning Districts
HC (Heavy Commercial)
OS (Open Space)
PF (Public Facilities)
Central Business District (CBD)
Purposes
     1. Provide for a broad range of pedestrian-oriented commercial, institutional, and public uses.
     2. Protect the downtown area from encroachment by unrelated and incompatible uses.
     3. Differentiate the downtown area from all other land use designations because of its unique
          character.
Allowable Uses
Retail sales, eating and drinking establishments, hotels and motels, business and professional offices,
institutional uses, government facilities, and similar and compatible uses.
Density / Intensity Standards
Floor Area Ratio: 3.00
                               Part I Land Use/Circulation Diagrams and Standards
                                                         8
Consistent Zoning Districts
CBD (Central Business District)
Historic Planned Commercial (HPC)
Purposes
    1. Provide for retail sales and services, including entertainment and other commercial activities, to
         serve the residents of the community with a historic setting.
    2. Provide for the development of light commercial facilities concentrated in well-defined and well
         designed areas which are compatible with the historic nature of the area.
    3. Create conditions conducive to a convenient and desirable environment for customers and
         employees within a historic setting.
    4. Protect areas in this designation from encroachment by heavy commercial, residential, or other
         incompatible uses which could detract from its historic value.
    5. Provide for a special review process to preserve the historic nature of the designated commercial
         area.
Allowable Uses
Professional or business offices, banks, studios, retail sales, eating and drinking establishments,
commercial, recreation, motels and hotels, retail services (excluding fast food restaurants and automobile
sales), public and quasi-public uses, and similar and compatible uses.
Density / Intensity Standards
Floor Area Ratio: 0.60
Consistent Zoning Districts
HPC (Historic Planned Commercial)
PF (Public Facilities)
OS (Open Space)
OTHER DESIGNATIONS
Planned Industrial / Cottage Industry (PI/CI)
Purposes
    1. Provide for manufacturing uses, including assembly operations and industrial services, to serve
         the community, and provide employment and income to its residents.
    2. Provide for the development of industrial facilities concentrated in well-defined and well-planned
         areas, properly located in relation to utilities, access, topography, and residential uses.
    3. Create conditions conducive to a convenient and desirable working environment.
    4. Control the objectionable effects of certain uses necessary in the community, but detrimental to
         other areas.
                            Part I Land Use/Circulation Diagrams and Standards
                                                          9
     5. Protect areas in this designation from encroachment of uses which could be better located in
         areas less suited for industrial activities.
     6. Provide an area for incubation industries or cottage industries to flourish and grow within a
         historic setting.
     7. Provide a mechanism for special review of developments to ensure that these objectives,
         together with historic preservation, are ensured.
Allowable Uses
Manufacturing, processing, assembly, outdoor storage, incidental wholesale and retail sales, public and
quasi-public uses, and similar and compatible uses.
Density / Intensity Standards
Floor Area Ratio: 0.40
Consistent Zoning Districts
PI / CI (Planned Industrial/Cottage Industry)
Open Space (OS)
Purposes
     1. Preserve and protect those areas whose primary purpose is to be open space either by natural
         attributes or design.
     2. Implement the open space policies of the General Plan.
     3. Protect areas in this designation from unrelated and incompatible uses.
Allowable Uses
Natural areas, parks, golf courses, playgrounds, agricultural uses, cemeteries, waterways and basins,
and similar and compatible uses.
Density / Intensity Standards
Floor Area Ratio: 0.60
Consistent Zoning Designations
OS (Open Space)
Public Facilities (PF)
Purposes
     1. Provide for those uses and activities associated with government agencies and philanthropic non-
         profit organizations.
     2. Protect areas in this designation from encroachment of unrelated and incompatible uses.
                             Part I Land Use/Circulation Diagrams and Standards
                                                      10
Allowable Uses
Government buildings and facilities, public libraries, museums, schools, charitable and philanthropic
institutions, water and wastewater treatment plants, substations, and similar and compatible uses.
Density/Intensity Standards
Floor Area Ratio: 0.60
Consistent Zoning Designations
PF (Public Facilities)
CIRCULATION PLAN DIAGRAM AND STANDARDS
The Circulation Plan Diagram (Figure 1-1) depicts the official classification of existing and proposed
streets and roads within the Placerville General Plan Area. The following define the various types of
roadways in the classification system.
Major Arterial - A continuous street located to serve arterial traffic and designed to minimize access to
abutting property via driveways, alleys, and business entrances. Major arterials should not penetrate
neighborhoods and should be planned so as to eliminate through traffic in residential neighborhoods and
adjacent to schools.
Minor Arterial - A continuous street located to provide direct route between, but not through separate
neighborhoods. Minor arterials should be planned to discourage through traffic in residential
neighborhoods and adjacent to schools.
Collector Street - A non-continuous street located to collect traffic from local streets and distribute it to
minor and major arterials. The difference, other than size, between a collector and an arterial is that a
collector penetrates a neighborhood while an arterial does not.
Local Street - A street, other than a collector or arterial, providing access to abutting property and
designed to discourage through-traffic.
Cul-de-sac - A local street terminating in a turning area and generally not exceeding 400 feet in length.
                            Part I Land Use/Circulation Diagrams and Standards
                                                       11
                                         STREET CLASSIFICATIONS
                 FREEWAY/EXPRESSWAY                             COLLECTOR STREETS
                 U.S. Highway 50                                Airport Road
                                                                Bee Street
                 MINOR ARTERIAL                                 Bedford Avenue
                                                                Canal Street
                 Broadway                                       Cold Springs Road
                 Carson Road                                    Combellack Road
                 Cedar Ravine Road                              Country Club Drive
                 Jacquier Road                                  Hocking Street
                 Main Street                                    Mallard Lane
                 Middletown Road                                Marshall Way
                 Mosquito Road                                  Morrene Drive
                 Placerville Drive                              Oak Terrace Road
                 Point View Drive (Portion)                     Pacific Street
                 State Route 49                                 Pierroz Road
                 State Route 193                                Schnell School Road
                                                                Smith Flat Road
                                                                Spring Street
                                                                Tunnel Street
                                                                Turner Street
                                                                Washington Street
All other City of Placerville-maintained streets are designated either local or cul-de-sac streets.
Streets and roads in Placerville shall be developed according to the standards depicted in Figures I-2
through I-7.
                              Part I Land Use/Circulation Diagrams and Standards
                                                       12
                       FIGURE I-1A
           CIRCULATION PLAN DIAGRAM
                           1 OF 2
Part I Land Use/Circulation Diagrams and Standards
                         13
                        FIGURE I-1B
            CIRCULATION PLAN DIAGRAM
                            2 OF 2
Part I Land Use/Circulation Diagrams and Standards
                         14
Part I Land Use/Circulation Diagrams and Standards
                         15
Part I Land Use/Circulation Diagrams and Standards
                         16
Part I Land Use/Circulation Diagrams and Standards
                         17
Part I Land Use/Circulation Diagrams and Standards
                         18
Part I Land Use/Circulation Diagrams and Standards
                         19
Part I Land Use/Circulation Diagrams and Standards
                         20
                    PART II
      GOALS, POLICIES, AND
IMPLEMENTATION PROGRAMS
                                                     SECTION I
                                                     LAND USE
Placerville is a small rural, but growing community that serves as the commercial and administrative
center of El Dorado County. The city is largely self-contained, providing for the residential, commercial,
and employment needs of its residents. The overall goal of the policies of this section is to preserve the
small-town, rural character of Placerville, while providing for a land use pattern and mix that meets the
residential, commercial, and employment needs of its existing and future residents.
GOALS AND POLICIES
Goal A: To provide for orderly development within well-defined urban boundaries.
Policies:
    1. The City shall give infill development of vacant lands within the city limits priority over
        development in areas to be annexed, whenever feasible.
    2. The City shall prepare and adopt an Urban Service Area Boundary identifying those areas to be
        provided full urban services within the time frame of the General Plan.
    3. Prior to annexation of any area, the City shall require preliminary planning for the area to identify
        the following:
        a. Future land uses within the area.
        b. Street and highway improvements needed within and outside the area to support the
              proposed land use.
        c.    Sewer, water, and drainage improvements needed to serve the area.
        d. Other community facilities and services that may be needed to serve the area.
        e. Estimates of cost for needed public facilities and services.
        f.    Financing mechanisms to pay for such costs.
    The preliminary plan shall be assessed to identify:
        a. Potential positive and negative impacts.
        b. Mitigation measures to eliminate or minimize and adverse impacts.
        c.    Fiscal impacts.
    4. If a proposed annexation is determined to be in the City’s interest and is consistent with the goals
        and policies of the General Plan, the area shall be pre-zoned consistent with the General Plan.
    5. The City shall develop, in cooperation with the County, a policy which deals with urban/nonurban
        development and land use which requires urban level services within Placerville’s Urban Service
        Area. It is the City’s policy that all proposed urban development within or near the City’s Sphere
        of Influence shall be annexed to the City of Placerville.
    6. The City shall encourage the continuation of agricultural, resource related, and low-intensity uses
        adjacent to Placerville’s Sphere of Influence.
                                           Part II: Section I – Land Use
                                                          1

    7. The City shall cooperate with the County in an ongoing effort to assure the achievement of
       common land use objectives for and implementation of compatible development standards within
       Placerville’s unincorporated Sphere of Influence.
    8. The City shall aggressively pursue the annexation of the Sphere of Influence of the City of
       Placerville and areas beyond the Sphere of Influence in areas that are designated for
       urbanization. Urbanized areas in close proximity to the city shall be annexed to the City of
       Placerville.
    9. The City shall prepare and adopt specific plans for areas with special planning concern, including
       the Smith Flat area and the El Dorado County Fairgrounds.
Goal B: To provide for decent housing in a suitable living environment for every resident of
Placerville, while maintaining the rural beauty that is unique to Placerville.
    1. The City shall maintain an adequate supply of land in appropriate land use designations and
       zoning categories to accommodate projected household growth and achieve residential vacancy
       rates allowing turnover with relative ease.
    2. The City shall promote the use of planned unit residential development s to maximize efficient
       and creative use of parcels while preserving trees, aesthetic rock outcrops, scenic views, open
       space, and other natural features.
    3. The City shall discourage development of small, isolated hillside residential areas that can be
       served only by long roads in steep terrain.
    4.  The City shall promote the protection and enhancement of the integrity and identity of residential
       neighborhoods.
Goal C: To protect and provide for the expansion of Placerville’s commercial services sector to
meet the needs of both Placerville area residents and visitors.
    1. The City shall promote the development and renewal of the downtown as the commercial center
       of Placerville.
    2. The City shall assist the private sector in maintaining and improving the economic viability of
       downtown through the provision of public facilities and services and the enactment of land use
       policies and decisions supportive of downtown’s primary commercial role.
    3. The City shall promote the retention and expansion of commercial businesses already located in
       Placerville.
    4. The City shall encourage the establishment of new commercial businesses in Placerville that
       provide services currently not being provided in the Placerville area, create jobs appropriate to
       the skills of the local labor force, and broaden the revenue base of the City of Placerville.
    5. The City shall promote the establishment of an area in Placerville where auto dealerships and
       automotive suppliers may cluster their operations.
    6. The City shall promote the establishment of a motel/conference center in an appropriate location
       adjacent to the downtown area.
    7. The City shall encourage and provide for office and professional uses in commercial districts,
       except on the ground floor in the downtown area.
    8. The City shall limit highway commercial uses to areas near Highway 50 interchanges, subject to
       their compatibility with adjacent areas.
                                          Part II: Section I – Land Use
                                                         2

   9.    The City’s planning for commercial areas shall be guided by the following principles:
        a. Contribute to the City’s objective to become a balanced community.
        b. Have a positive economic impact on the community.
        c.   Provide for adequate parking and vehicular access.
        d. Be designed and landscaped in a manner sensitive to Placerville’s character.
Goal D: To provide for and protect industrial development that is compatible with the community
and that enhances the employment and revenue base of the community.
   1. The City shall promote the retention and expansion of industries already located in Placerville.
   2. The City shall encourage the establishment of new industries in Placerville that have minimal
        adverse environmental effects, utilize the services of existing businesses in the Placerville area,
        create jobs appropriate to the skills of the local labor force, and broaden the revenue base of the
        City of Placerville.
   3. The City shall protect its limited industrially-designated and -zoned lands from encroachment by
        residential and other incompatible uses.
   4. The City shall promote the development of the Smith Flat area as the city’s primary industrial
        area.
   5. The City’s planning for industrial areas shall be guided by the following principles:
        a. Contribute to the City’s objective to become a balanced community.
        b. Have a positive economic impact on the community.
        c.   Be well-designed and present an attractive appearance to nearby areas.
        d. Be designed and engineered to protect and enhance the physical environment and to
             mitigate on-site and off-site impacts to the satisfaction of the City.
        e. Be designed for maximum efficiency for occupant industries.
        f.   Make efficient uses of City infrastructure investments and other City incentives.
        g. Be comprehensively planned.
Goal E: To promote the development of institutional uses that are conventionally located and
compatible with surrounding areas.
   1. The City shall encourage new institutional uses to locate near similar existing uses.
   2. The City shall encourage the restoration of historic buildings for institutional uses.
   3. The City shall ensure that future expansion of Marshall Hospital and related facilities shall occur
        in the manner that has the least disruptive impact on surrounding neighborhoods.
Goal F: To provide for a land use pattern that protects and enhances Placerville’s natural, open
space, cultural, and scenic resources.
   Goals, policies, and implementation measures concerning natural, cultural, and scenic resources are
   contained in Section V.
                                          Part II: Section I – Land Use
                                                         3

Goal G: To provide for a land use pattern that minimizes the exposure of residents and
development to hazardous conditions and nuisances, such as geologic hazards, flooding,
wildland fires, hazardous materials, and noise.
    Goals, policies, and implementation measures concerning health and safety are contained in Section
    VI.
Goal H: To promote future land use development surrounding the Placerville Airport that is
compatible with the noise, safety, airspace protection, overflight and other special characteristic
policies and maps of the Placerville Airport Land Use Compatibility Plan.
    Goals, policies and an implementation measure concerning land use development surrounding the
    Placerville Airport are contained in Section VI.
IMPLEMENTATION PROGRAMS
    1. The City shall undertake a study to define an Urban Service Area boundary to identify those
        areas to be provided full urban services within the time frame of the General Plan. The City shall
        adopt an Urban Service Area boundary and shall use the Urban Service Area boundary as the
        basis for requesting that LAFCO revise Placerville’s Sphere of Influence.
        Responsibility:
            City Council
            Development Services Department
        Time Frame:
            FY 90-91
    2. The City shall adopt an annexation policy that requires preparation of a preliminary plan for areas
        proposed for annexation to identify the following:
            a. Future land uses within the area.
            b. Street and highway improvement needed within and outside the area to support the land
                 use.
            c.   Sewer, water, and drainage improvements needed to serve the area.
            d. Other community facilities and services which may be needed.
            e. Estimates of costs for needed public facilities and services.
            f.   Financing mechanisms to pay for such costs.
            The policy shall also provide that the preliminary plan shall be assessed to identify:
            a. Potential positive and negative impacts.
            b. Mitigation measures to eliminate or minimize any adverse impacts.
            c.   Fiscal impacts.
                                         Part II: Section I – Land Use
                                                        4

Responsibility:
            City Council
            Development Services Department
   Time Frame:
            FY 90-91
3. The City shall review and revise, as necessary, the Zoning Ordinance to accomplish the following
   purposes:
   a. Ensure consistency with the General Plan in terms of zoning districts and development
       standards.
   b. Ensure consistency with the General Plan in terms of the distribution and boundaries of
       zoning districts.
   c.  Provide for planned unit residential development.
   d. Provide for density bonuses for projects that reserve units for low and/or moderate    income
   households.
   e. Provide for buffering between industrial and other uses.
   f.  Establish slope density standards for hillside development.
   Responsibility:
       City Council; Development Services Department
   Time Frame:
       FY 89-90
4. The City shall prepare and adopt a specific plan for the development of El Dorado County
   Fairgrounds property.
   Responsibility:
       City Council
       Development Services Department
   Time Frame:
       FY 90-91
5. The City shall prepare and adopt a specific plan for the development of the Smith Flat area.
   Responsibility:
       City Council
       Development Services Department
   Time Frame:
       FY 91-92
                                  Part II: Section I – Land Use
                                                 5

6. The City shall prepare and adopt specific plans for other areas of Placerville as deemed
   necessary to implement the General Plan.
   Responsibility:
      City Council
      Development Services Department
   Time Frame:
      As needed
                                 Part II: Section I – Land Use
                                                6

                                                      SECTION II
                                                       HOUSING
                       Excerpt from the City of Placerville's General Plan Housing Element
             for the 2013-2021 planning period, adopted February 11, 2014 via Resolution 8168.
   Copies of the complete document, including Community Profile, Constraints and Resources Sections,
        are on file at City Hall and available upon request from the Development Services Department.
CHAPTER V. HOUSING STRATEGY
INTRODUCTION
Contents of the Housing Strategy
This chapter of the Housing Element contains the City’s strategy for meeting housing needs identified in
Chapter II, the use of resources available to the City, and the reduction of barriers to the availability of
housing for all residents as described in Chapter III. As required by state law, this chapter contains
quantified (numerical) objectives for housing construction, housing rehabilitation, and the preservation of
affordable housing, with an eight-year program of actions that:
      •   Provides regulatory concessions and incentives, and uses local, federal, and state financing and
          subsidy programs to support the development of affordable housing;
      •   Identifies adequate sites with appropriate zoning, development standards, services and facilities
          to encourage the development of a variety of types of housing for all income levels;
      •   Assists in the development of adequate housing to meet the needs of low- and moderate-income
          households;
      •   Addresses, and where appropriate and legally possible, removes governmental constraints to the
          maintenance, improvement, and development of housing, including housing for all income levels
          and housing for persons with disabilities;
      •   Conserves and improves the condition of the existing affordable housing stock, which may
          include addressing ways to mitigate the loss of dwelling units demolished by public or private
          action;
      •   Promotes housing opportunities for all persons regardless of race, gender, religion, sex, marital
          status, ancestry, national origin, color, familial status, or disability, and
      •   Preserves assisted housing developments for lower-income households.
The following section sets forth the City’s goals, policies, and programs for the 2013-2021 period. The
goals and policies discussed in this section address state requirements under Housing Element law, and
respond to the issues identified in the previous sections.
Trends Influencing the Housing Strategy
Placerville has, historically, been the center of social and commercial services for the Sierra foothills
region of El Dorado County, which has naturally attracted a high percentage of low-income and special
needs residents to the City. Most of the multi-family housing constructed in Placerville over the past 20
years has been subsidized rental housing affordable to very-low- and low-income households. At the
same time, Placerville has experienced a growing influx of higher-income residents who desire the quality
of life offered by the Sierra foothills region. This trend is beneficial to the City in that is provides
opportunities to diversify the local economy and attract higher-paying jobs for City residents.
In conjunction with strategies to improve older neighborhoods in the City, the City hopes that a wider
variety of housing will also attract a wider range of employment and economic development opportunities
                                            Part II - Section II – Housing
                                                           7

for the City’s low- and moderate-income households, allowing them more opportunities to afford housing.
Placerville’s housing strategy is shaped by these trends and is based on three principles:
     •    The City needs to create a more balanced community, which requires that it attract middle- and
          upper-income residents;
     •    The City must also address the significant unmet needs of its current low-income residents, and
     •    With economic growth comes additional affordable housing need, as many of the jobs to be
          created in Placerville will pay low-to-moderate wages.
Coordination of the Housing Strategy
The Development Services Department is the City entity primarily responsible for implementing the
housing programs. However, several programs also involve cooperation with other public and private
entities, including the City Administration and Engineering Divisions, El Dorado County Housing Authority,
local lenders and real estate agents, and non-profit developers.
Within the Administration Department, the Grants Administration Division will have the primary role of
coordinating the implementation of the programs. Staff from the Grants Administration Division will meet
with representatives of other agencies, track the implementation of the programs in this chapter, report on
progress and problems in implementation, and recommend revisions to implementation measures and
techniques to improve the achievement of program objectives. The designated staff member will meet
with representatives of the various City divisions, departments, and non-profit agencies as needed, but no
less than annually, to review implementation progress and identify solutions to implementation problems.
GOALS AND POLICIES
Goal A: To designate sufficient land to accommodate Placerville’s share of El Dorado County’s
future housing needs
Policies:
     1. City will maintain an inventory of vacant residential sites, to be updated annually.
     2. As needed, the City will annex land within its Sphere of Influence (SOI) to maintain an adequate
          supply of residential land.
     3. The City will promote infill development by identifying suitable sites, design goals, and potential
          development incentives.
Goal B: To facilitate the development of housing for special needs households
     1. The City will allow overnight shelters and transitional housing facilities for homeless individuals
          and families in appropriate zoning districts.
     2. The City will implement state and federal requirements for persons with disabilities in new
          residential developments.
     3. The City will facilitate the development of senior housing by working with senior housing providers
          to identify adequate sites, assisting in the acquisition of funds for low-income senior housing, and
          providing development incentives.
     4. The City shall encourage housing that is affordable to the local workforce by identifying funding
          sources and potential sites that would make the production of such housing financially feasible.
                                            Part II - Section II – Housing
                                                           8

Goal C: To facilitate the development of housing affordable to lower- and moderate-income
households
   1. The City will encourage the use of density bonuses and regulatory incentives as tools to assist
        affordable housing development.
   2. The City will pursue state and federal funding to assist in developing housing affordable to low-
        and moderate-income households.
   3. The City will review the Zoning Ordinance, permit processes, and development fees to identify
        and remove potential constraints to the development of a range of housing for all income levels
        and needs.
   4. The City will review and, if necessary, revise its Hillside Development Standards to reduce their
        cost impact on housing while protecting the health and safety of Placerville residents and the
        character of the City.
Goal D: To promote equal housing opportunity for all residents
   1. The City will continue to distribute information on fair housing laws to residents, and refer
        discrimination complaints to the State Fair Employment and Housing Commission.
   2. The City will cooperate with local homebuilders, real estate agents, and lenders to conduct an
        annual fair-housing public information campaign.
Goal E: To preserve the existing housing stock
   1. The City will continue to provide rehabilitation assistance to low- and moderate-income
        households.
   2. The City will conduct a housing condition survey to identify areas of the community most in need
        of rehabilitation assistance.
   3. The City will continue to conduct code enforcement inspections on a complaint basis to ensure
        that the housing stock remains in habitable condition.
   4. The City will continue to preserve historic structures within the City by encouraging re-use of
        viable buildings within historic districts.
Goal F: To conserve existing affordable housing opportunities
   1. The City will continue to cooperate with the El Dorado County Housing Authority to provide rental
        assistance to Placerville residents.
   2. The City will continue to monitor the status of the government-assisted housing in Placerville and
        preserve the affordability of these units.
   3. The City will conserve and improve mobile home parks that can meet minimum health and safety
        standards by working with property owners and residents to obtain funds for park improvements
        and/or conversion of parks to resident ownership.
Goal G: To promote residential energy conservation
   1. The City will continue to implement the energy conservation standards under Title 24 of the
        California Code of Regulations (state building code standards).
                                          Part II - Section II – Housing
                                                         9

    2. The City will continue to distribute information on weatherization programs, and pursue funding
        sources for weatherization assistance for low- and moderate-income households.
    3. The City will promote energy conservation through its land use planning and development
        standards.
IMPLEMENTATION PROGRAMS
Goal A: To designate sufficient land to accommodate Placerville’s share of El Dorado County’s
future housing needs
PROGRAM 1. Available Land Inventory
Action:                 The City will maintain an updated inventory of vacant residential parcels in the
                        City, and provide an annual report to the City Council and Planning Commission
                        regarding the same.
Discussion:             The Housing Resources section contains an inventory of vacant land sufficient to
                        meet the City’s RHNP allocation for the 2013-2021 planning period. In order to
                        provide accurate information to prospective developers, particularly developers of
                        low- and moderate-income housing, the City will maintain an updated inventory
                        of vacant residential parcels within the City. Information on these parcels will be
                        available at City Hall, posted on the City’s website, provided to local homebuilder
                        organizations, and provided to non-profit homebuilders. The City will submit an
                        annual report on the vacant land inventory to the City Council and Planning
                        Commission in conjunction with the General Plan annual report.
Responsibility:         Development Services Department.
Funding Source:         General Fund.
Timeframe:              First update completed with adoption of Housing Element; subsequent updates
                        to be completed by September each year 2014-2021.
Objective:              Accommodate at least 372 additional housing units, including 133 extremely-low,
                        very-low- and low-income housing units.
PROGRAM 2. Infill Development and Potential Re-Use Sites
Action:                 In conjunction with the updated vacant land inventory, the City will identify
                        suitable sites for infill development and re-use, including commercially zoned
                        properties. Before seeking to annex land within the Sphere of Influence, the City
                        will encourage the development of these infill sites where adequate public
                        facilities and services are already in place and where small projects can be
                        integrated with existing neighborhoods. The City will provide the following
                        incentives for infill development and property re-use:
                        •    Conduct a site inventory of commercial properties in zones that permit
                             residential uses to note property characteristics and physical conditions of
                             buildings (for sites that are not vacant) that would lend themselves to the
                             feasibility of housing or mixed-use development. A preliminary inventory is
                             provided as Appendix B.
                        •    Approve density bonuses for projects that include affordable housing (see
                             Program 13).
                                          Part II - Section II – Housing
                                                         10

                 •     Allow exceptions or alternative approaches to meeting zoning standards that
                       are consistent with standards met by surrounding properties.
                 •     Promote infill development and property re-use opportunities on the City’s
                       web site, distribute the infill/re-use site inventory to local homebuilder groups
                       and non-profit organizations, and provide the inventory to interested
                       individuals at the City’s permit counter.
                 •     Complete a development feasibility study that provides concept-level design
                       alternatives for infill properties with the greatest potential to include
                       affordable housing.
Discussion:      The City believes that the infill/re-use site inventory and the proposed incentives
                 will increase interest in the development of housing or mixed-use projects in, or
                 adjacent to, commercial zones, particularly on sites close to the downtown area.
                 Such development would support several of the City’s General Plan orderly
                 development and infill development policies. The site inventory will also provide
                 the City with greater specificity regarding the potential to develop housing close
                 to services, transit, and jobs.
Responsibility:  Development Services Department.
Funding Source:  General Fund, Caltrans Transportation Planning Grants, CDBG, Air Quality
                 Control or SACOG planning grants.
Timeframe:       Update infill/re-use site survey and conduct feasibility study by September 2017
                 and update annually thereafter; distribute inventory to developers at least once a
                 year.
Objective:       Provide additional opportunities to accommodate at least 372 additional housing
                 units (see Program 1).
PROGRAM 3. High-Density Development – Unmet Need
Action:          The City has an adequate inventory of potential sites for high density zoning to
                 more than meet its needs for the 2008-2013 and 2013-2021 planning periods.
                 The City shall monitor its inventory of available higher density residential sites as
                 necessary to ensure adequate availability over the entire 2013-2021 planning
                 period. The City shall also investigate with housing developers and applicants
                 potential parcels for higher density designation in an effort to generate potential
                 housing for affordable income families.
                 A) To accommodate the unmet housing need of 106 units for lower income
                       households identified during the 2008-2013 Housing Element planning
                       period, the City will rezone land to accommodate this need.
                 B) To accommodate the unmet housing need of 133 units for lower income
                       households identified during the 2013-2021 Housing Element planning
                       period, the City will rezone land to accommodate this need.
                 Rezoned land will permit a minimum density of 20 units per acre, and permit
                 owner-occupied or multifamily residential uses by right, with compliance with
                 local design standards, but without discretionary action.
                 The sites to be rezoned may include, but are not limited to, the potential sites
                 identified in Table 40 and Appendix E. Appropriate sites will be vetted and
                                  Part II - Section II – Housing
                                                  11

                        selected through a rezoning process in accordance with legal requirements and
                        the requisite CEQA analysis.
Responsibility:         Development Services Department.
Funding Source:         General Fund.
Timeframe:              A) Rezoning to accommodate land inventory to support an unmet need of
                             106 units for lower-income households during the 2008-2013 Housing
                             Element shall be completed within one year of Housing Element
                             adoption.
                        B) Rezoning to accommodate land inventory to support an unmet need of
                             133 units for lower-income households for the 2013-2021 Housing
                             Element planning period shall be completed within three years of
                             Housing Element adoption.
Objective:              Increase the City’s vacant land inventory and opportunities for development of
                        housing affordable to lower-income households.
PROGRAM 4. Single-Room Occupancy Units
Action:                 State law requires that jurisdictions identify zoning districts available to
                        encourage and facilitate a variety of housing types, including single-room
                        occupancy units (SROs). Currently, the City’s Zoning Ordinance does not define
                        or address SROs.
                        The City shall revise the Zoning Ordinance to define SROs, identify the zones in
                        which they are permitted and establish regulatory standards that encourage and
                        facilitate single-room occupancy units.
Responsibility:         Development Services Department.
Funding Source:         General Fund.
Timeframe:              Within one year of Housing Element adoption.
Objective:              Increase opportunities for development of housing affordable to lower-income
                        households.
Goal B: To facilitate the development of housing for special needs households.
PROGRAM 5. Public Outreach
Action:                 The City will coordinate an annual workshop with employers, members of the
                        housing community including the homeless and the disabled, and City officials to
                        identify the housing needs of the City and take appropriate action as necessary
                        as part of the annual progress report pursuant to Government Code Section
                        65400.
Discussion:             The City recognizes the need for and benefit of a thorough and comprehensive
                        public participation process. The City will coordinate annual workshops with a
                                         Part II - Section II – Housing
                                                        12

                  variety of participants including housing advocates, employers, service providers,
                  public agencies and the public at large, with the goal of bringing ideas from the
                  community forward for the City to consider.
Responsibility:   Development Services Department.
Funding Source:   General Fund.
Timeframe:        The first workshop shall occur by May 2014 and annually thereafter.
PROGRAM 6. Employee Housing
Action:           The State’s Employee Housing Act (Health and Safety Code 17000) requires that
                  each city and county permit and encourage the development of employee
                  housing as a means of addressing the housing for seasonal farmworkers.
                  The City recognizes the need for housing opportunities for this special needs
                  household, as identified in the Housing Element. To address the employee
                  housing need and to comply with the Employee Housing Act, the Zoning
                  Ordinance shall be revised to meet the local government land use and zoning
                  requirements under the State’s Employee Housing Act. A residential structure
                  providing accommodation for six or fewer agricultural employees will be
                  designated a single-family residential use and to be allowed by right in any zone
                  that allows single-family residential uses (Health and Safety Code Section
                  17021.5).
                  The RE, Estate Residential (Section 10-5-4) zone shall be revised to permit
                  employee housing consisting of no more than 36 beds in a group quarters or 12
                  units or spaces designed for use by a single family or household as an
                  agricultural use (Health and Safety Code Section 17021.6). The City has one
                  parcel containing approximately twenty-one (21) acres, and less than one (1)
                  acre of another parcel that are zoned RE.
Responsibility:   Development Services Department.
Funding Source:   General Fund.
Timeframe:        Within one year of Housing Element adoption.
Objective:        Increase opportunities for development of housing affordable to seasonal
                  farmworkers.
PROGRAM 7. Transitional, Supportive and Emergency Housing
Action:           Meeting annually with local non-profit and governmental service providers to
                  assess the shelter needs of the community and work with non-profit
                  organizations to identify suitable sites for the placement of facilities.
Discussion:       In 2012 the City amended the Highway Commercial (HWC) Zone designation,
                  adding emergency shelters, supportive housing and transient housing facilities as
                  uses allowed by right for at least one emergency shelter or transient housing
                  facility for year-round use which meets the needs to serve local homeless and
                  transient housing needs. Shelters will only be subject to development and
                                   Part II - Section II – Housing
                                                  13

                  management standards that apply to residential or commercial uses within the
                  HWC zone.
                  In May 2013 the City amended the Zoning Ordinance, adding state statutory
                  definitions for transitional housing and supportive housing, and added each of
                  these uses in all single-family and multi-family residential zones as permitted
                  uses. These amendments fell short of the requirements of SB2, in that
                  transitional and supportive housing must be allowed in all zones which permit
                  residential uses. Program 8 herein is included to address this unintended issue.
                  In order to meet the community need for transitional housing and emergency
                  shelters, the City will meet annually with local non-profit and governmental
                  service providers to assess the shelter needs of the community. If additional
                  transitional housing or shelter capacity is needed in the community, the City will
                  work with the stakeholders to identify a suitable site for the placement of a
                  facility.
Responsibility:   Development Services Department.
Funding Source:   General Fund for administration, Emergency Housing Assistance Program (state
                  program that uses federal funds), Supportive Housing Program (federal program
                  that facilitates the transition of homeless persons to independent living).
Timeframe:        Meet annually, assist non-profit organizations in applying for funding. Amend
                  Zoning Ordinance within one year of adoption of the Housing Element.
Objective:        Assist with funding and development for an emergency shelter or transitional
                  housing facility, as identified herein, and ensure that the proposed project is
                  processed ministerially, to meet local needs consistent with SB2. The City shall
                  also consider permit and impact fee waivers and other credits in consideration for
                  such payment.
PROGRAM 8. Transitional and Supportive Housing Zoning Amendments
Action:           Amend the Zoning Ordinance to permit transitional and supportive housing as
                  residential uses within Placerville’s mixed-use zones (e.g. Business Professional
                  (BP), Central Business District (CBD), Commercial (C), Convenience
                  Commercial (CC), Highway Commercial (HWC), subject only to those restrictions
                  that apply to other residential uses in the same zone.
Responsibility:   Development Services Department.
Funding Source:   General Fund
Timeframe:        Within one year of Housing Element adoption.
Objective:        Increase opportunities for development of transitional and supportive housing; to
                  be consistent with the requirement of SB 2.
PROGRAM 9. Accommodate Housing for Persons with Disabilities
Action:           The City will continue to permit accessory structures, building modifications, and
                  site plans that provide accessibility for persons with disabilities and will continue
                  to implement state building standards for handicapped accessibility. The City will
                  promote its policies and development standards for persons with disabilities
                                   Part II - Section II – Housing
                                                  14

                 through information provided at City Hall, pre-application meetings, a link on the
                 City website detailing the process for requesting reasonable accommodation,
                 and a notice to the Alta Regional Center.
                 The City shall also encourage housing developers of new subdivisions to
                 construct units within an overall housing development that are accessible to
                 persons with disabilities and the aging. To illustrate this encouragement, the City
                 enthusiastically supported an "Independent Life Skills Training Center" on a
                 parcel approved within the Placerville Heritage Homes Subdivision along Ray
                 Lawyer Drive. This facility when constructed would be for people with physical
                 and developmental disabilities to learn living skills in a residential setting. Mother
                 Lode Rehabilitation Enterprises, Inc., or M.O.R.E. is expected to operate this
                 facility once it is built. To help facilitate this construction and others like it, the City
                 will explore reductions and/or fee waivers of traffic and park development impact
                 fees that it controls.
Discussion:      As a part of the Housing Element Update, the City reviewed the Zoning
                 Ordinance to identify potential constraints to persons with disabilities. The review
                 revealed no specific constraints to persons with disabilities. In order to ensure
                 that zoning requirements and City policies continue to accommodate persons
                 with disabilities, Placerville will continue to implement state building standards for
                 accessibility and continue to provide reasonable accommodations for persons
                 with disabilities.
Responsibility:  Development Services Department.
Funding Source:  General Fund.
Timeframe:       Ongoing.
Objective:       Improve housing accessibility for persons with disabilities.
PROGRAM 10. Housing for Developmentally Disabled Persons
Action:          The housing needs of persons with disabilities, including persons with
                 developmental disabilities, are typically not addressed by Title 24 Regulations.
                 The housing needs of persons with disabilities, in addition to basic affordability,
                 range from slightly modifying existing units to requiring a varying range of
                 supportive housing facilities.
                 To accommodate residents with developmental disabilities the City will assist
                 State and Federal monies, as funding becomes available, in support of housing
                 construction and rehabilitation targeted for persons with disabilities, including
                 developmental disabilities. Placerville will also provide regulatory incentives, such
                 as expedited permit processing and fee waivers and deferrals, to projects
                 targeted for persons with disabilities, including persons with developmental
                 disabilities. The City shall reach out annually to developers of supportive housing
                 to encourage development of projects targeted for special needs groups.
                 Placerville will work with the Alta California Regional Center to implement an
                 outreach program informing families within the City of housing and services
                 available for persons with developmental disabilities. Information will be made
                 available on the City's website.
Responsibility:  Development Services Department
                                   Part II - Section II – Housing
                                                  15

Funding Source:         General Fund
Timeframe:              Ongoing, 2014-2021.
Objective:              To encourage the development or rehabilitation of one housing unit per year of
                        the planning period specifically for persons with developmental disabilities
                        through annually outreach to developers and state or federal funds; to initiate a
                        cooperative outreach program with the Alta California Regional Center by 2014.
PROGRAM 11. Senior Housing
Action:                 The City will identify funding sources for the development of senior housing, and
                        facilitate senior housing development through the density bonus program
                        (Program 13), identification of suitable development sites (Programs 1–2),
                        through other development incentives such as reduced parking, which can be
                        granted in conjunction with the density bonus provision, and through retrofits of
                        existing residential and non-residential facilities for adaptability to serve the
                        needs of disabled seniors and their guests. The City will promote these potential
                        incentives by providing information to developers at pre-application meetings,
                        notifying non-profit organizations, and providing a link on the City website to its
                        affordable and senior housing policies.
Discussion:             Based on the data contained in the Community Profile, the senior population in
                        the City is projected to increase during the planning period. Much of this growth
                        will be the result of in-migration from the surrounding areas, rather than from the
                        aging-in-place of the existing population. Many retirees are choosing to relocate
                        to the Sierra Nevada foothills, including Placerville. Though many initially buy
                        homes, the maintenance responsibilities may become too burdensome as they
                        continue to age, and the households may opt for smaller senior housing units,
                        including assisted living complexes. Based on the projected growth in the senior
                        population and the resulting demand for senior housing, the City will identify
                        potential funding sources and work with non-profit developers to facilitate the
                        development of affordable housing and the retrofit of existing residences for
                        accessibility. In addition to identifying funding sources, the City can facilitate
                        senior housing through the density bonus program, and identifying suitable sites
                        for senior housing development.
Responsibility:         Development Services Department.
Funding Source:         General Fund.
Timeframe:              Ongoing.
Objective:              Assist in the development of at least one senior housing project that includes a
                        continuum of care options, from completely independent living to fully-assisted
                        care.
Goal C: To facilitate the development of housing affordable to lower- and moderate-income
households
PROGRAM 12. Workforce Housing
Action:                 The City may prepare a study of options to provide housing that is affordable to,
                        and meets the needs of, residents who are employed locally (workforce housing).
                        The City Council will determine the need for such a study, as indicated below,
                                         Part II - Section II – Housing
                                                        16

                 based on the availability of state funding. If prepared, the study will consist of two
                 parts:
                 1. A survey of major employers to assess the wages of the local workforce. This
                      survey will assist the City in determining the mix of affordability levels
                      appropriate for the City workforce. The City will update the wage study every
                      two years.
                 2. A Workforce Housing Policy Report that addresses:
                      •   Infill development workforce and self-help opportunities, including
                          densities, development standards and possible development incentive
                          programs;
                      •   Recommendations for revisions or additions to existing City regulations
                          or policies to encourage infill development, and in particular the infill
                          development of workforce housing units;
                      •   Recommendations for policies and measures to maintain long-term
                          affordability of units developed in the Workforce Housing Design
                          Program, including identification of funding programs and development
                          resources;
                      •   Recommendations for the marketing of workforce housing units to
                          maximize existing local resident workforce;
                      •   A mix of unit types, sizes and prices to match with local workforce needs.
                 The City will promote the results of the Workforce Housing Study, if prepared,
                 through a link to its website, distribution of the study to local homebuilder
                 organizations and non-profit housing providers, and realtor organizations, and
                 meetings with housing providers to determine their interest in developing
                 workforce housing.
Responsibility:  Development Services Department.
Funding Source:  General Fund, CDBG Planning Grant, other sources identified in Program 14.
Timeframe:       Determine the need and apply for a CDBG planning grant, if appropriate, by
                 spring of 2015.
Objective:       Complete at least one housing development that provides very-low-income, low-
                 income, and moderate-income housing units.
PROGRAM 13. Density Bonus
Action:          Promote the density bonus as a tool to assist in the development of affordable
                 housing by providing program information at City Hall, promoting the use of the
                 program at pre-application conferences, providing a link on the City’s website,
                 and through distribution of the Workforce Housing Study (see Program 12).
Discussion:      The City currently provides density bonus provisions for developments that
                 include affordable housing for lower-income households or qualifying residents,
                 such as elderly households, up to the maximum bonus permissible under state
                 law of 35 percent, either individual or combined for any single project.
                 All projects that are eligible for a density bonus shall receive between one and
                 three incentives if requested. As with the density bonus, the intent of the
                 incentives is to further encourage the construction of affordable housing. The
                                  Part II - Section II – Housing
                                                 17

                 number of incentives increases proportionally with the amount of affordable
                 housing provided. The breakdown is as follows:
                 •   One incentive for projects that provide at least the minimum percentage of
                     affordability required to receive a density bonus as described above, as well
                     as development of a project intended for senior citizens;
                 •   Two incentives for projects that provide at least two times the minimum
                     percentage of affordability required to receive a density bonus as described
                     above, or
                 •   Three incentives for projects that provide at least three times the minimum
                     percentage of affordability required to receive a density bonus as described
                     above.
                 Incentives may include but are not limited to:
                 •   A reduction in development standards (reduction in lot sizes, setbacks, lot
                     coverage, building height, etc.),
                 •   A reduction in architectural design requirements,
                 •   A density bonus greater than the amount required by state law, and/or
                 •   Other regulatory incentives proposed by the developer that would result in
                     identifiable, financially sufficient, and actual cost reductions.
Responsibility:  Development Services Department, Planning Commission, City Council.
Funding Source:  General Fund
Timeframe:       Complete program brochure and website link by December 2014. Ongoing
                 operation of the program thereafter, amending the program as necessary to
                 comply with potential future changes to state law.
Objective:       To increase awareness of density bonuses and other incentives for affordable
                 housing.
PROGRAM 14. Pursue State and Federal Funding
Action:          The City will continue to pursue available state and federal funding sources in
                 cooperation with private developers, non-profit housing corporations, the El
                 Dorado County Housing Authority and Community Services Department, and
                 other interested entities to assist in meeting the needs of extremely-low, low- and
                 moderate-income households. Based on meetings (at least annually) with non-
                 profit developers and service providers, the City will identify the funding sources
                 most appropriate to meet the needs of residents, and apply for funds, or assist
                 other entities in applying for funds, during available funding cycles. City
                 assistance to other entities will include, but not be limited to:
                 •   Providing data that is necessary for a funding request, and
                 •   Expediting permit decisions on proposed projects that require City approval
                     or that will be more competitive with City approval, prior to submitting funding
                     requests.
                 Potential funding sources include, but are not limited to:
                 •   California Multi-family Housing Program:
                 •   California Housing Finance Agency (HELP Program)
                                  Part II - Section II – Housing
                                                 18

                 •    California Housing Finance Agency direct lending programs (single-family
                      and multi-family)
                 •    Low-Income Housing Tax Credits (state & federal)
                 •    CalHome Program
                 •    Federal Home Loan Bank – Affordable Housing Program
                 •    Federal Department of Housing and Urban Development Programs – Section
                      221(d), Section 202 (elderly), Section 811 (persons with disabilities)
                 •    Child Care Facilities Finance Program (administered through the State of
                      California), Special Housing Needs and Supportive Services
                 As part of this program, the City will specifically seek or support applications for
                 funding programs, at least twice in each planning period, that target the
                 development of housing affordable to extremely-low-income households. The
                 City will establish special incentives and concessions beyond what is already
                 required through density bonus law, or other mechanisms such as priority
                 processing and fee deferrals to encourage the development of housing
                 affordable to extremely-low-income households.
Responsibility:  Development Services Department.
Timeframe:       Meet annually with interested entities to determine funding priorities for the
                 subsequent 24 months. Establish specific incentives for the development of
                 housing for extremely-low-income households in 2014. Apply for funding, or
                 assist other entities in applying for funding, based on state and federal funding
                 cycles. For most state programs (except those that have continuous application
                 periods), applications are due either during the fall or in late winter. For most
                 federal housing and supportive service programs administered by HUD,
                 application deadlines are during the late spring/early summer. Other state/federal
                 funding opportunities will be pursued based on individual funding deadlines and
                 priorities established through annual meetings between the City and interested
                 entities.
Objective:       Increase the effective use of state and federal funds in support of affordable
                 housing, shelter, and housing-related services.
PROGRAM 15. Permit and Development Impact Fees
Action:          In order to ensure that City permit and development impact fees do not constrain
                 the development of housing, the City will review its fee structure annually and will
                 report the findings to the City Council and Planning Commission in conjunction
                 with the annual report on the General Plan. While fees typically represent the
                 cost of providing public facilities and services, the up-front cost can present a
                 significant burden to developers, especially in the case of affordable housing. If
                 the annual review determines that fees are constraining the development of
                 affordable housing in the City, Placerville will offer one of several options to
                 housing providers:
                 •    Deferment of fees until project completion or occupancy;
                 •    Payment of fees over a 12-month or longer period after project completion, or
                 •    Reduction of fees for specific facilities or services for which the applicant can
                      show a connection between the lower fee and lower facility/service demand
                      from project residents.
                                  Part II - Section II – Housing
                                                 19

                   Placerville will notify affordable housing providers of options to reduce the up-
                   front cost of fees through information provided at the City’s permit counter, a
                   website link, and pre-application meetings.
Responsibility:    Development Services Department, Planning Commission, City Council.
Funding Source:    General Fund for program administration.
Timeframe:         Annually.
Objective:         Reduce the initial cost-impact of City fees on affordable housing projects.
PROGRAM 16. Self-Help Housing
Action:            The City will continue to work with non-profit developers in the area to develop
                   self-help housing (housing in which the eventual owner participates in its
                   construction under the supervision of a building contractor). The City can
                   facilitate the development of the self-help housing through a variety of means,
                   including:
                   •    Obtaining financing, including CDBG and HOME (see Program 14 for
                        discussion of the City’s role in funding assistance);
                   •    Identifying an appropriate site for a self-help housing project and pursuing
                        state and federal funds for the purchase of the site;
                   •    Reduction in the up-front costs of development impact fees (see Programs
                        15 and 18), or
                   •    Other regulatory incentives, including density bonus and streamlined permit
                        processing (see Program 13).
Discussion:        The City will attempt to facilitate a self-help housing project during the 2013—
                   2021 period. A self-help project could be designed as part of the City’s Workforce
                   Housing Study (see Program 12).
Responsibility:    Development Services Department.
Funding Source:    CDBG, HOME, CHFA HELP Program.
Timeframe:         As part of annual meetings with non-profit housing providers, identify
                   opportunities for self-help housing projects.
Objective:         207 additional ownership housing units—50 very-low-income and 56 low-income.
PROGRAM 17. First Time Homebuyer Assistance
Action:            Recognizing the need for homebuyer assistance, the City will encourage
                   developers and other entities to design a first-time homebuyer program, which
                   could include down payment assistance loans and/or grants, and assistance with
                   closing costs. Once presented with a program design which will meet the needs
                   of its residents, the City will assist in the application for funds. In helping to
                   promoting the program, the City will provide information at City Hall, provide a
                   link on the City website, and help distribute information to area real estate firms,
                   lenders, and homebuilders.
Discussion:        Currently, the City does not operate a first-time homebuyer program. Housing
                   costs during the 2008-2013 Housing Element planning period were reduced due
                                    Part II - Section II – Housing
                                                   20

                 to the economic condition of the housing industry in California and other parts of
                 the U.S. Should housing costs in the region rise over the 2013-2012 planning
                 period, as expected from their 2012 lows, low- and moderate-income households
                 will have increasingly limited options for home purchase. In encouraging the
                 establishment of first-time homebuyer programs, the City will seek collaboration
                 with non-profit organizations, county agencies, and/or local lenders.
Responsibility:  Development Services Department, City Council.
Funding Source:  CDBG, HOME, CHFA HELP Program, Federal Home Loan Bank Board
                 Affordable Housing Program.
Timeframe:       Beginning in fiscal year 2018, meet with non-profit organizations, El Dorado
                 County agencies and/or lenders interested in offering FTHA programs to review
                 suitability for Placerville residents. Help developers apply for funding as soon
                 thereafter as feasible based on demand and administrative capacity.
Objective:       Assist very-low-income households, low-income households, and moderate-
                 income households in the purchase of a first home.
PROGRAM 18. Statewide Community Infrastructure Program (SCIP)
Action:          Implement the Statewide Community Infrastructure Program (SCIP) to assist in
                 the financing of certain capital improvement charges (CICs) and impact fees.
Discussion:      The City intends to implement this program for all projects, particularly housing
                 projects, to provide housing developers this program to finance impact fees.
                 If a developer/property owner chose to participate in SCIP, the selected public
                 capital improvements and the development impact fees owed to the City would
                 be financed by the issuance of tax-exempt bonds by California Statewide
                 Communities Development Authority (CSCDA). CSCDA would impose a special
                 assessment on the owner’s property tax bill to repay the portion of the bonds
                 issued to finance the fees paid with respect to the property and the public capital
                 improvements benefiting the property. With respect to the impact fees, the
                 developer may either pay the impact fees at the time of permit issuance and
                 receive reimbursement from the SCIP bond proceeds when the SCIP bonds are
                 issued, or the fees will be funded directly from the proceeds of the SCIP bonds. If
                 the property owner pays the impact fees in advance, the City is required to pay
                 the fees to SCIP. If the property owner does not pay the impact fees in advance,
                 SCIP holds onto the bond proceeds representing the fees. In either case, the
                 fees are subject to requisition by the City at anytime to make authorized fee
                 expenditures. By holding and investing the money until it is spent, SCIP is able to
                 monitor the investment earnings (which come to the City for federal tax law
                 arbitrage purposes). SCIP encourages the City to spend the proceeds before any
                 other fee revenues of the City. If the fees are paid by the property owner and
                 bonds are never issued, the fees would be returned to the City by SCIP. In this
                 way, the City is never at risk of losing the impact fees.
Responsibility:  Development Services Department.
Funding Source:  General Fund.
Timeframe:       Ongoing.
                                  Part II - Section II – Housing
                                                 21

Objective:            Assist in funding/financing of CICs and impact fees for all forms of residential
                      projects.
Goal D: To promote equal housing opportunity for all residents
PROGRAM 19. Fair Housing
Action:               The City will continue to promote equal housing opportunity for all residents by
                      supporting efforts of community groups (such as the Housing Resources Board)
                      that provide counseling, investigatory, legal, or referral services to victims of
                      discrimination by:
                      •    Training staff who have contact with the public on how to receive and refer
                           fair housing complaints;
                      •    Posting and distributing fair housing information at City Hall and other
                           community facility locations, and
                      •    Working with local lenders, rental property owners, real estate, and legal
                           service organizations to conduct fair housing training, and identify an annual
                           community event at which fair housing information can be distributed.
Responsibility:       Development Services Department.
Funding Source:       General Fund.
Timeframe:            Ongoing referral and distribution of information.
Objective:            Increase community awareness of fair housing.
Goal E: To preserve the existing housing stock
PROGRAM 20. Housing Rehabilitation
Action:               The City will continue to promote low-interest and deferred-payment loans for
                      housing rehabilitation for eligible owner-occupied and renter-occupied units.
                      Funds may be used to correct any health and safety issue within a housing unit.
                      In cases where a housing unit is overcrowded, funds can be used for a room
                      addition.
                      The City provides information on the rehabilitation program at City Hall, and
                      through its code enforcement activities. The City also has a link on its website to
                      the Grants Administration division. This link will be enhanced with more specific
                      program information and a downloadable program application.
Discussion:           The economic downturn and an increase in costs associated with the upkeep
                      and maintenance of housing units were evident during the 2008-2013 planning
                      cycle. Pursuing CDBG and/or other funding to reinstitute this program is a priority
                      for the 2013 fiscal year.
Responsibility:       Development Services Department.
Funding Source:       CDBG, HOME, State Multi-family Housing Program and Affordable Housing
                      Program (through the Federal Home Loan Bank Board).
Timeframe:            Annual applications for funding. Provide ongoing assistance as funds are
                      available.
                                      Part II - Section II – Housing
                                                     22

Objective:        Rehabilitate two homes per year when funds are available.
PROGRAM 21. Housing Conditions Survey
Action:           The City will conduct a Housing Conditions Survey to identify areas to target
                  code enforcement, rehabilitation assistance, and neighborhood improvement
                  efforts.
Discussion:       The most recent Housing Conditions Survey for Placerville was completed in
                  1998. Since nearly 50 percent of housing units in the City were built prior to
                  1970, an updated Housing Conditions Survey will assist the City in targeting its
                  efforts for housing and neighborhood improvement, thereby conserving the
                  existing housing in the community.
Responsibility:   Development Services Department.
Funding Source:   CDBG Planning Grant.
Timeframe:        Update the Housing Conditions Survey by fiscal year 2015-2016. Update the
                  Survey every five years thereafter.
Objective:        To maintain a relatively current and relevant database of housing conditions.
PROGRAM 22. Code Enforcement
Action:           The City will continue to conduct code enforcement inspections on a complaint
                  basis. Eligible property owners will be directed to the City’s rehabilitation program
                  for assistance in correcting code violations.
Discussion:       The City Building Division is responsible for enforcing both state and City
                  regulations governing maintenance of all buildings and property. Due to currently
                  minimal City staffing levels, code enforcement is complaint-based. The Building
                  Division responds to approximately 100 complaints per year.
Responsibility:   Building Division.
Funding Source:   General Fund, inspection fees. See Program 16 for Housing Rehabilitation
                  Funding sources.
Timeframe:        Ongoing.
Objective:        To correct building code violations before they become serious health and safety
                  hazards to human habitation.
PROGRAM 23. Historic Preservation
Action:           The City will encourage the preservation of historic homes and buildings by:
                  •    Continuing to review requests for demolition of buildings within historic
                       districts;
                  •    Utilizing the California State Historical Building Code to recognize the unique
                       construction issues inherent in maintaining and adaptively reusing historic
                       homes and buildings.
                  •    The establishment of historic districts;
                                   Part II - Section II – Housing
                                                  23

                      •     Continuing to allow the re-use of historic buildings as residential uses, and
                      •     Identifying potential funding sources to assist in the preservation of historic
                            structures and referring property owners to those sources.
Responsibility:       Development Services Department.
Funding Source:       General Fund. See Program 16 for housing rehabilitation funding sources.
Timeframe:            Ongoing.
Objective:            Preserve the historic/architectural integrity of historic residential structures.
Goal F: To conserve existing affordable housing opportunities
PROGRAM 24. Housing Choice Voucher Program
Action:               The City will continue to cooperate with the El Dorado County Housing Authority
                      in its administration of the Federal Housing Choice Voucher (formerly called
                      "Section 8") rental assistance program to maintain the availability of housing
                      vouchers in Placerville. The City's role will be to:
                      •     Provide necessary documentation to the Housing Authority to apply for
                            annual commitments from the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban
                            Development;
                      •     Encourage rental property owners who have participated in the City’s
                            Housing Rehabilitation Program to participate in the Housing Choice Voucher
                            Program;
                      •     Provide information on the rental assistance program in the City’s newsletter,
                            and at City Hall, and
Responsibility:       Development Services Department, El Dorado County Housing Authority.
Funding Source:       HUD Housing Choice Vouchers for rental assistance, General fund for outreach
                      activities.
Timeframe:            Ongoing.
Objective:            Increase rental property owner participation in the Housing Choice Voucher
                      Program.
PROGRAM 25. Preservation of "At-Risk" units
Action:               The City will work with property owners, other public agencies, and non-profit
                      housing organizations to preserve existing subsidized rental housing. To
                      encourage existing owners to maintain the affordability of such rental housing,
                      the City would assist owners in applying for state or federal assistance for
                      refinancing, acquisition, and/or rehabilitation.
                      The City will monitor properties identified as being potentially at-risk to ensure
                      that property owners comply with state and federal notification requirements. For
                      properties that are within 24 months of potential conversion, the City will meet
                      with property owners to determine their plans and the type(s) of assistance
                      desired, if any, to maintain the affordable status of the rental housing units. For
                      owners who intend to sell their rental properties, the City will identify interested
                                       Part II - Section II – Housing
                                                      24

                 non-profit organizations willing to acquire and continue operating the rental
                 properties as affordable housing.
Discussion:      As a part of the Housing Element Update, the City analyzed all assisted housing
                 to determine whether any units were at risk of converting to market-rate uses.
                 Based on this analysis, the City determined that 67 units are at risk during this
                 planning period. The City will monitor the assisted housing units to ensure that
                 property owners comply with state and federal notification requirements if there is
                 change in funding status or eligibility to convert based on changes in federal
                 regulations. For owners who intend to sell their rental properties, the City will
                 identify interested non-profit organizations willing to acquire and continue
                 operating the rental properties as affordable housing.
Responsibility:  Development Services Department.
Funding Source:  General Fund.
Timeframe:       January 2017; Monitor the assisted housing units at risk by contacting the
                 property owner to determine whether there is a change in status or eligibility.
Objective:       Preserve affordable rental housing units.
PROGRAM 26. Mobilehome Parks
Action:          The City will work with the mobile home park owners and the El Dorado County
                 Community Services Department to access state and federal funds for park
                 improvements and potential conversion to tenant ownership, if desired by both
                 the park owner and residents. The City will meet with the park owners to discuss
                 their long-term goals for the properties and the feasibility of preserving the parks.
                 If park conversion to tenant ownership is desired, the City will assist residents in
                 identifying an experienced non-profit organization that can facilitate the park
                 conversion.
Discussion:      Two mobile home parks located in Placerville contain 162 spaces total. One of
                 these parks contains seven spaces while the other contains 155 spaces. These
                 mobile home parks provide a source of affordable housing and homeownership
                 for low-income households. Note that The California Department of Housing and
                 Community Development lists nine other registered mobile home parks in the
                 Placerville area containing over 400 mobile home spaces. These parks are
                 located outside the City, however.
Responsibility:  Development Services Department.
Funding Source:  CDBG, HOME, California Housing Finance Agency HELP program, California
                 Mobile Home Park Resident Ownership Program.
Timeframe:       The City will continue to monitor and meet with park owners each year to identify
                 park improvements and mobile home rehabilitation or replacement needs. Assist
                 property owners and/or residents in accessing state or federal funding, as
                 requested and needed. If park conversion to resident ownership is a desired
                 alternative, the City will assist park residents in identifying a non-profit
                 organization that can assist in the conversion process.
Objective:       Preserve mobile home park spaces (including space in the one mobile home
                 park on the City limit line), if determined to be feasible.
                                 Part II - Section II – Housing
                                                25

Goal G: To promote residential energy conservation
PROGRAM 27. Weatherization & Energy Conservation
Action:              The City will distribute information on energy efficiency and weatherization
                     programs offered by PG&E and others in conjunction with the City rehabilitation
                     program. In addition, the City will identify additional funding sources for
                     weatherization improvements to lower-income households and provide this
                     information housing rehabilitation program participants. A potential funding
                     source is the Property Assessed Clean Energy (PACE), a program the City and
                     El Dorado County are considering jointly participating in during 2013. PACE is a
                     loan program that helps pay the upfront costs of energy efficient upgrades for
                     homes and businesses. Loans are repaid over a typical term of 15-20 years
                     through an annual assessment on the home and business owners' tax bills.
                     The City will continue to permit energy efficiency and weatherization
                     improvements as eligible activities under its housing rehabilitation program.
Responsibility:      Development Services Department.
Funding Source:      CDBG, HOME, PACE, if initiated in 2013, and General Fund as needed.
Timeframe:           Ongoing.
Objective:           Increase the energy efficiency of older residential structures and reduce energy
                     costs.
PROGRAM 28. Energy Conservation for New Residential Development
Action:              The City will continue to enforce state energy efficiency requirements for new
                     residential construction (Title 24 of the California Code of Regulations) and shall
                     encourage, through the City’s plan review process, additional energy
                     conservation measures with respect to the siting of buildings, landscaping, and
                     solar access. In addition, the City shall promote and encourage construction
                     within new residential development to accommodate energy efficient upgrades in
                     the future (e.g. plumbing conduit and roof supports for photo voltaic panels, or
                     conduit for plug-in electric vehicles, etc.) In order to promote the use of energy-
                     efficient construction, the City will provide information on energy conservation
                     measures with development application packets.
Responsibility:      Development Services Department.
Funding Source:      General Fund.
Timeframe:           Ongoing.
Objective:           Increase the energy efficiency in new residential developments.
                                     Part II - Section II – Housing
                                                    26

                                                     SECTION III
                                                 TRANSPORTATION
Placerville is both defined and constrained by its network of highways, roads, streets, transportation
facilities, and pedestrian facilities. Traffic congestion has become a major concern in Placerville as new
development has generated additional traffic, and as through-traffic on Highways 49 and 50 has
increased. The overall goal of the policies of this section is to promote the development of a circulation
system for all modes of transportation that is correlated with the planned land use pattern and that
facilitates easy access through and within Placerville.
GOALS AND POLICIES
Goal A: To provide a circulation system that is correlated and adequate to support existing and
proposed land uses, thereby providing for the efficient movement of goods and services within
and through Placerville.
Policies:
     1. The City shall strive to attain the highest possible traffic levels of service consistent with the
          financial resources available and within the limits of technical feasibility.
     2. Streets shall be dedicated, widened, extended, and constructed according to the City’s Master
          Street Plan and the street cross-sections shown in the Street Standards figures in Part I. Rights-
          of-way shall be reserved according to the specifications of the Master Street Plan. Deviations
          from the street cross-sections shown in Part I shall be allowed based upon a determination by the
          Public Works Director that safe and adequate public access and circulation are preserved by
          such deviations.
     3. Major circulation improvements should be completed as abutting lands develop or redevelop, with
          dedication of right-of-way and construction of improvements required as a condition of approval.
          Where the City may deem it appropriate, a property owner can be allowed to enter into a Street
          Frontage Improvement Agreement in lieu of construction of improvements if the majority of the
          neighborhood or area is presently unimproved. However, the City should require a minimum level
          of improvements to ensure adequate accessibility for vehicles and emergency equipment.
     4. The City shall maintain and repair streets according to the priorities set out in the City’s Street
          Maintenance Plan.
     5. The City shall ensure that all newly-developing areas are served by at least two means of access.
     6. The City shall discourage the creation of long dead-end roads and cul-de-sac streets by providing
          for connections between such streets and secondary access to areas served by such streets.
     7. The City shall prohibit the development of private streets in new residential projects, except in
          extraordinary circumstances. In such cases, the private streets shall be developed to City street
          standards.
     8. The City shall continue to explore the feasibility of developing a beltway road system.
     9. The City shall aggressively pursue state and federal funding to implement the City’s Circulation
          Plan.
     10. The City recognizes that there is a relationship between transportation planning in the country
          and transportation planning in the city. It is the policy of the City to work closely with the
                                        Part II - Section III – Transportation
                                                           27

        transportation agencies of the County and the City to solve transportation problems that affect all
        levels of government.
Goal B: To promote the development of a circulation system that preserves the historic nature
and character of neighborhoods and districts, reinforces neighborhood identity and integrity, and
minimizes adverse impacts on hillsides and vegetation.
    1. New local streets shall be designed to discourage heavy through-traffic within residential
        neighborhoods.
    2. The City shall attempt to minimize traffic congestion in the downtown area by studying the
        feasibility of constructing “beltways” around the northerly and southerly portions of the city,
        thereby providing alternate routes for through traffic.
    3. The City shall coordinate with state and federal efforts to improve the flow of traffic through
        Placerville on Highway 50. The City shall continue to review alternatives for solving traffic
        congestion related to Highway 50.
    4. The City shall support the relocation of Highway 49 to an alternate route through Placerville.
    5. The City shall attempt through siting and design of new development in hillside and
        environmentally sensitive areas to minimize the need for substantial grading and removal of
        vegetation.
Goal C: To minimize traffic accidents and hazards.
Policies:
    1. The City shall discourage the creation or continuance of traffic hazards in new development and
        other proposals requiring the City to exercise its discretionary authority.
    2. In the development of new projects, the City shall give special attention to maintaining adequate
        corner-sight distances at city street intersections and at intersections of city streets and private
        access drives and roadways.
    3. The City shall identify and remove, as feasible, obstacles limiting corner-sight distances at city
        street corners.
    4. The City shall maintain a program of identification and surveillance of high traffic accident
        locations, with emphasis on early detection and correction of conditions which could potentially
        constitute traffic hazards.
Goal D: To ensure the adequate provision of both on-street and off street parking.
Policies:
    1. If future growth in traffic volumes necessitates removal of on-street parking places to provide
        additional traffic lanes, the lost on-street spaces should be replaced with an equal number of off-
        street spaces within the same vicinity.
    2. The City shall require all new development to provide an adequate number of off-street parking
        spaces to accommodate the typical parking demands of the type of development proposed for the
        site. In the downtown area, new developments may, at the City’s discretion, pay in-lieu parking
        fees.
                                       Part II - Section III – Transportation
                                                          28

    3. The City shall allow parking variances only under the most unusual circumstances, and only after
        all other possible actions and conditions have been identified and studied. In such cases, the City
        may require the payment of in-lieu fees sufficient to cover the current costs of land acquisition
        and construction of parking spaces.
    4. The City shall research the ability to use redevelopment financing to provide parking downtown.
        The City shall ensure that a majority of property owners are in favor of this program prior to
        implementation.
Goal E: To provide a safe and secure bicycle route system.
Policies:
    1. The City shall develop an inner-city bicycle route master plan.
    2. Wherever possible, bicycle facilities should be separate from roadways and walkways.
    3. The City shall limit on-street bicycle routes to those streets where the available roadway width
        and traffic volumes permit safe coexistence of bicycle and motor vehicle traffic.
    4. The City shall promote the development of bicycle routes that follow the contours of the land and
        are compatible with the terrain.
    5. The City shall promote the development of bicycle routes in major development areas and along
        railroad rights-of-way.
    6. The City shall promote development of bicycle routes and/or trails that connect parks and schools
        that link the Ray Lawyer Drive/Placerville Drive area with downtown, and that link Apple Hill area
        with Placerville.
    7. The City shall encourage the development of a bike trail through the city utilizing the Southern
        Pacific and Michigan/California Railroad rights-of-way. This trail could provide an opportunity to
        connect to other trail systems such as the American River Bikeway in Sacramento County.
    8. Any future development adjacent to a bike trail shall be required to analyze impacts of the
        development on the bike trail and mitigate to the greatest extent possible identified impacts.
Goal F: To promote convenient and safe pedestrian circulation.
Policies:
    1. Pedestrian circulation needs and convenience in the downtown shall be given priority over the
        needs of through-traffic.
    2. The City shall continue to enforce its program requiring adjoining property owners to repair and
        replace sidewalks in older neighborhoods to increase pedestrian safety and convenience.
    3. In approving development projects, the City shall continue to require the construction of sidewalks
        connecting major pedestrian destinations, such as schools, hospitals, and government centers.
    4. Where deemed necessary and appropriate, the City shall undertake construction of sidewalks
        connecting major pedestrian destinations, such as schools, hospitals, and government centers.
                                    Part II - Section III – Transportation
                                                       29

    5. The City shall require all developments with a density of R1-2,000 or greater to provide a
         sidewalk on at least one side of any street that is developed as part of the project or is used as a
         perimeter street by that project.
    6. The City shall require all multi-family developments to provide sidewalks on both sides of any
         street that is developed as part of the project and on one side of any street that is used as a
         perimeter street by that project.
    7. The City shall promote the construction of pedestrian overpasses along Highway 50 in
         conjunction with future highway construction.
Goal G: To maintain coordinated, efficient bus service that provides an effective alternative to
private automobile use.
Policies:
    1. The City shall encourage Greyhound Lines and El Dorado County Transit to maintain, at a
         minimum, their present levels of service in the Placerville area.
    2. The City shall work closely with Greyhound and El Dorado County Transit in coordinating bus
         stop locations and bus schedules to facilitate transfers between bus systems.
Goal H: To promote the continued maintenance, preservation, and improvement of the Placerville
Airport.
Policies:
    1. The City shall continue to support the operation of the Placerville Airport as a general aviation
        airport for the benefit of area residents, tourists, and industry. The airport should continue to be
        made available for emergency aviation purposes and to serve the needs of federal and state
        agencies.
    2. The City shall provide for land use surrounding the Placerville Airport that is consistent with the
        Airport Land Use Compatibility Plan.
Goal I: To provide for safe pedestrian access for Placerville residents, with emphasis on routes to
and from school.
    1. The City will work with the local school districts to provide sidewalks or walkways along routes
        used by school children on their way to and from school.
IMPLEMENTATION PROGRAMS
    1. The City shall maintain a master list and map of the most recent available traffic counts. The
        master list and map shall be updated with traffic counts taken in connection with project traffic
        studies and by special counts conducted by the City as necessary.
        Responsibility:
             Public Works Department
        Time Frame:
             Ongoing
                                      Part II - Section III – Transportation
                                                         30

2. The City shall prepare and adopt a Master Street Plan covering a 10-year period and showing the
   existing and proposed ultimate right-of way and street width for each road segment within the city
   limits. The Master Street Plan shall also indicate the necessary right-of-way to be acquired or
   dedicated, the proposed improvements, and the expected method of financing the roadway
   improvements (i.e., City-funded or property owner/developer-funded). The Master Street Plan
   shall be regularly updated.
   Responsibility:
        City Council
        Public Works Department
   Time Frame:
        FY 91-92, as needed thereafter
3. The City shall undertake a study of the need for and feasibility of developing a beltway road
   system around Placerville.
   Responsibility:
        City Council
         Public Works Department
   Time Frame:
        FY 91-92
4. The City shall periodically review proposed roadway improvements and update cost estimates for
   improvements to be City-funded.
   Responsibility:
        City Council
        Public Works Department
   Time Frame:
        Ongoing
5. The City shall prepare and adopt a Master Street Maintenance Plan setting priorities and
   schedules for street maintenance and repairs.
   Responsibility:
        City Council
        Public Works Department
   Time Frame:
        FY 91-92, as needed thereafter
6. The City shall prepare and adopt corner sight-distance standards for new development.
   Responsibility: City Council; Public Works Department
                                Part II - Section III – Transportation
                                                   31

   Time Frame: FY 91-92
7. The City shall prepare and maintain a pin map or a location-indexed file of traffic accidents
   occurring within the city limits. The City shall prepare and adopt procedures for using these
   records for identification and surveillance of high accident locations to detect and correct
   potentially hazardous conditions.
   Responsibility:
       Public Works Department
   Time Frame:
       FY 89-90, ongoing
8. The City shall review and revise, as necessary, off-street parking standards of the Zoning
   Ordinance. Such revision shall be based on a survey of the parking requirements of other
   Northern California communities and an assessment of the adequacy of the City’s current
   standards.
   Responsibility:
       City Council
       Public Works Department
       Development Services Department
   Time Frame:
        FY 89-90
9. The City shall prepare and adopt a Bicycle Route Master Plan and appropriate bicycle lane and
   street standards.
   Responsibility:
       City Council
       Public Works Departmen
        Development Services Department
   Time Frame:
       FY 91-92
                                Part II - Section III – Transportation
                                                   32

                                                   SECTION IV
                                     PUBLIC FACILITIES AND SERVICE
Placerville’s development is dependent on an elaborate network of public facilities and services. The City
of Placerville provides most of the key facilities and services required to support growth, such as sewer
service, police and fire protection, and parks. The overall goal of the policies of the section is to promote
the provision of an adequate level of services to support existing and future development and to protect
the public’s health and safety.
GOALS AND POLICIES
Goal A: To maintain an adequate level of service in the City’s water system to meet the needs of
existing and projected development.
Policies:
    1. The City shall work with the El Dorado Irrigation District to develop new water storage facilities
         and major distribution lines as necessary to serve new development.
    2. The City will continue its program of upgrading water lines to provide adequate water supply and
         fire flow rates.
    3. The City shall promote water conservation both in City operations and private development to
         minimize the need for the use of additional water supplies and to minimize sewer flows.
    4. The City shall continue to assess a capital improvement fee on all new commercial, industrial,
         and residential development sufficient to fund system-wide capacity improvements. The capital
         improvement fee schedule shall be periodically reviewed and revised as necessary.
    5. The City shall monitor water flows through the City’s water system to identify areas of potential
         water loss and cases of under billing for water service and shall make improvements in the
         systems as necessary.
Goal B: To maintain an adequate level of service in the City’s sewage collection and disposal
system to meet the needs of existing and projected development.
Policies:
    1. The City shall develop new sewage treatment and trunkline capacity as necessary to serve new
         development.
    2. New sewer service shall not be extended to areas outside the city limits prior to annexation
         unless owners of property connecting to the sewer system agree to annex to the City at some
         future date. Existing commitments for sewer service outside the city limits shall continue to be
         honored.
    3. Development of individual septic systems shall be allowed only where the City makes a finding
         that it cannot feasibly provide public sewer service, and such systems shall be used only until
         such time as City sewer service becomes available.
    4. The City shall comply with the Regional Water Quality Control Board’s regulations and orders
         concerning effluent treatment.
    5. The City shall continue its program of upgrading sewer lines to minimize inflow and infiltration
         problems and increase capacity.
                               Part II - Section IV – Public Facilities and Services
                                                        33

    6. The City shall continue to work with neighboring jurisdictions and the Regional Water Quality
        Control Board in seeking an areawide solution to water quality problems in the American River
        watershed.
    7. The City shall continue to assess a capital improvement fee on all new commercial, industrial,
        and residential development sufficient to fund systemwide capacity improvements. The capital
        improvement fee schedule shall be periodically reviewed and revised as necessary.
Goal C: To maintain an adequate level of service in the City’s drainage system to accommodate
runoff from existing and projected development and to prevent property damage due to flooding.
Policies:
    1. The City shall continue to complete gaps in the drainage system in areas of existing
        development.
Goal D: To establish and maintain a park system and recreation program that are suited to the
needs of Placerville residents and visitors.
Policies:
    1. The City shall expand the community and neighborhood park system with the goal of providing
        park facilities within reasonable walking distance of all city residents.
    2. City park acquisition and development efforts shall be based on a goal of five acres of usable
        developed neighborhood and community parkland per 1,000 residents within the city limits.
    3. The City shall continue to assess park development fees on all new residential development
        sufficient to fund citywide park improvements.
    4. The City shall give priority in its park acquisition and development program to parks for active
        recreation over parks for passive recreation.
    5. The City shall give joint use of school facilities, including college and County Office of Education
        facilities, a high priority in its park development program.
    6. The City shall aggressively pursue State funding programs for park acquisition and development
        to augment City revenues to the extent State funding is available.
    7. The City shall explore alternative approaches to financing parkland development, including park
        assessment districts, County collection of parkland development fees, and increases in user fees
        for County residents.
    8. The City shall encourage the County to provide additional parkland for residents in the
        unincorporated Placerville area.
    9. The City shall, within fiscal limitations, develop another baseball field on the west side of the city
        and develop a park that includes a swimming pool on the east side of the city.
    10. The City shall promote the provision of private open space and recreational facilities as part of
        new residential developments.
    11. The City shall continue cooperative agreements with the school districts for the use of school
        facilities for City-sponsored recreation programs.
                                Part II - Section IV – Public Facilities and Services
                                                         34

    12. The City shall periodically survey community attitudes and preferences for recreational programs.
Goal E: To ensure that at least the current levels of public police and fire services are maintained
as new development occurs.
Policies:
    1. The City shall endeavor through adequate staffing and patrol arrangements to maintain the
        minimum feasible police response times for emergency calls. The City’s response time goals
        shall be three minutes for emergency calls, seven minutes for priority calls, and ten minutes for
        routine calls.
    2. The City shall endeavor to maintain adequate staffing for fire prevention, subject to fiscal
        limitations.
    3. The City shall encourage the Placerville Fire District endeavor to achieve and maintain a fire
        insurance (ISO) rating of 4 or better within the Placerville city limits.
    4. The City shall support the Placerville Fire District in establishing additional fire stations where
        needed in order to maintain maximum coverage and minimum response times throughout its
        service area.
    5. The City shall attempt to offset the need for new fire department staff and equipment and to
        improve fire safety by requiring built-in fire protection equipment in new development.
Goal F: To provide for the educational needs of Placerville residents.
Policies:
    1. The City shall assist the Placerville Unified Elementary School District in locating and acquiring
        appropriate sites for new elementary schools as they are needed.
    2. The City shall cooperate with the Placerville Unified Elementary School District and the El Dorado
        Union High School District in collecting school impact fees.
    3. The City shall encourage the location of a permanent campus for Cosumnes River College within
        the City of Placerville.
Goal G: To provide for the health care needs of Placerville residents.
Policies:
    1. The City shall support the continued provision of a full range of medical services and Marshall
        Hospital and the expansion of its facilities.
    2. The City shall encourage the development of additional medical practices and convalescent
        homes to serve the area’s growing population.
IMPLEMENTATION PROGRAMS
    1. The City shall prepare and adopt a five-year Capital Improvement Program. The CIP shall be
        updated, reviewed for consistency with the General Plan, and adopted annually.
        Responsibility:
                              Part II - Section IV – Public Facilities and Services
                                                        35

       City Council
       Planning Commission
       City Manager
       Public Works Department
   Time Frame:
       FY 89-90, annually thereafter
2. The City shall adopt standards for built-in fire protection in new development in high and
   extremely high fire hazard areas as shown in Figure VIII-3 in the General Plan Background
   Report.
   Responsibility:
       City Council
        Fire Department
   Time Frame:
        FY 90-91
                        Part II - Section IV – Public Facilities and Services
                                                  36

                                                    SECTION V
                             NATURAL, CULTURAL, AND SCENIC RESOURCES
Because of its location and its history, Placerville’s natural, cultural, and scenic resources are varied and
rich. Its water resources, surrounding agricultural lands, mineral resources, vegetation, and wildlife are
intrinsically valuable and at the same time largely define the quality of life in Placerville. These natural
resources are also responsible for its early settlement by Native Americans and later for its founding and
development as a Gold Rush boomtown. The overall goal of the policies of this section is to preserve,
protect, enhance, and promote Placerville’s valuable natural, cultural, and scenic resources.
Goal A: To conserve water resources and protect water quality within the Placerville area.
Policies:
     1. The City shall promote water conservation in both public and private developments.
     2. The City shall encourage agricultural operators to use the Irrigation Management (IMS) water
          conservation program of the El Dorado Irrigation District.
     3. The City shall encourage the use of treated wastewater for irrigation of pasture land, golf courses,
          and other open-space areas, consistent with health standards.
     4. The City shall encourage the use of native drought-resistant plants in both public and private
          landscaping.
     5. The City shall require in new development sound anti-pollution practices to protect water quality.
     6. The City shall prohibit establishment of mining operations in and near streams, lakes and
          reservoirs.
     7. The City shall condition approvals of development in hillside areas to minimize erosion and silt
          flows into watercourses.
Goal B: To prevent the premature conversion of agricultural lands and to protect the soil
resources of the Placerville area.
     1. The City shall preserve, to the maximum extent possible, those soils most suitable for intensive
          agricultural production and encourage their continued use for agricultural purposes.
     2. The City shall direct development incompatible with agricultural activities away from valuable
          agricultural lands and into areas of lesser agricultural importance.
     3. The City shall encourage the County’s continued use of Williamson Act contracts in the areas
          surrounding Placerville’s Sphere of Influence.
     4. The City shall site and condition approvals of developments in areas of steep slopes and with
          erosive soils to minimize the need for grading and shall require reseeding and landscaping of
          disturbed areas, matting of steep cut slopes, and construction of retention basins.
     5. The City shall require stockpiling of topsoil and construction sites for replacement following
          construction.
     6. The City shall condition development approvals to minimize unnecessary compaction of soils that
          would reduce its permeability.
                           Part II - Section V – Natural, Cultural and Scenic Resources
                                                         37

7.      The City shall, to the maximum extent possible, prevent the dumping of wastes and other
        substances, such as pesticides, soil sterilants, and toxic wastes, harmful to soil structure, soil
        organisms, or fertility.
Goal C: To encourage continued mining activity in the Placerville area while ensuring such
operations do not have a significant adverse affect on the natural environment and are not
disruptive of the community social values.
Policies:
    1. The City shall promote the protection and conservation of significant mineral deposits in the
        Placerville area, as classified by the State Geologist and designated by the State Mining and
        Geology Board, and require buffering around mining operations to prevent encroachment by
        incompatible uses.
    2. The City shall condition future mining development approvals to minimize their adverse
        environmental effects and shall require reclamation of the site following the cessation of mining
        operations.
    3. The City shall prohibit development of mining operations in and near streams, creeks, and other
        waterways.
Goal D: To protect Placerville’s natural vegetation and diverse wildlife.
Policies:
    1. The City shall make every effort to protect riparian vegetation. To this end, buildings and
        improvements shall be set back from watercourses.
    2. The City shall ensure that channel improvements to and tree and brush clearance activities along
        creeks within the city do not unnecessarily disturb riparian vegetation.
    3. New development shall be sited to protect native tree species, riparian vegetation, important
        concentrations of natural plants, and important wildlife habitat, to minimize visual impacts and to
        provide for continuity of wildlife corridors.
    4. The City shall use parkland and open-space areas with subdivisions to preserve natural areas
        and wildlife habitat.
    5. The City should develop an area with a good representation of plant communities and wildlife as
        a nature study area.
    6. To retain the natural landscape character of Placerville, introduced plants in public and private
        landscaping should be subordinate to and compatible with existing natural landscape.
    7. The City shall encourage creative site planning which will minimize the destruction of trees.
    8. The City shall condition development approval to minimum grading, disturbance of root systems,
        and compaction of soil under the drip line of trees during construction.
    9. The City shall seek to protect and manage Placerville’s tree cover to maximize ecological and
        aesthetic values consistent with the reasonably economic enjoyment of private property. To this
        end, the City shall adopt and enforce a Historical Tree Ordinance.
                         Part II - Section V – Natural, Cultural and Scenic Resources
                                                       38

    10. The City shall annually promote Arbor Day.
    11. The City shall take action to ensure the protection of Hangtown Creek and the creek area.
Goal E: To protect air quality in the Placerville area.
Policies:
    1. The City shall monitor research on the links between air pollution and the use of fireplaces and
        wood-burning stoves. If this link is demonstrated and if federal and state air quality standards for
        particulates are exceeded in the Placerville area, the City shall undertake educational programs
        and regulatory actions, as necessary, to minimize emission from these sources. The Oregon
        State Wood-burning Stove Standards shall be used as guidelines until the State of California
        adopts wood-burning stove standards.
    2. The City shall discourage backyard burning of debris.
Goal F: To promote energy and resource conservation.
Policies:
    1. The City shall support car pooling and help to identify appropriate locations for parking lots for car
        pools.
    2. The City shall promote the use of solar and other non-fossil fuel energy sources.
    3. The City shall encourage creativity in the planting of both deciduous and evergreen trees that will
        provide maximum sun exposure to buildings during the winter and provide maximum shade
        during the summer.
    4. The City shall support recycling programs operated by businesses and charities.
Goal G: To preserve and enhance Placerville’s historical heritage.
Policies:
    1. The City shall set as a high priority the protection and enhancement of Placerville’s historically
        and architecturally significant buildings and sites.
    2. The City shall encourage all public and private efforts to preserve and promote Placerville’s
        historical heritage for economic benefits associated with increasing tourist trade.
    3. The City shall prepare, maintain, and regularly update an inventory of buildings, sites, cemeteries,
        parks, and other artifacts of historical and architectural significance.
    4. The City shall designate the historic section of downtown Placerville as a specific design review
        area with due concern and respect for businesses and property owners’ interests.
    5.   The City shall work with property owners in seeking registration of historical structures as State
        Historic Landmarks and/or listing on the National Register of Historic Places.
    6. The City shall support the efforts of property owners to preserve and renovate historic and
        architecturally significant structures. Where buildings cannot be preserved intact, the City shall
        seek to preserve the building facades.
                         Part II - Section V – Natural, Cultural and Scenic Resources
                                                       39

    7. The City shall promote awareness of the significance of Placerville’s historical features through
        such means as walking tours, a docent program, appropriate monuments, plaques and markers,
        and pamphlets and interpretive displays.
    8. The City shall promote and support events of historic significance such as Wagon Train Days.
    9. The City shall encourage the inclusion of studies of the history of the Placerville area in local
        school curricula.
    10. The City shall work closely in promoting and protecting Placerville’s historic heritage with
        historical and heritage organizations, including those along the Highway 49 “Gold Chain.”
    11. The City shall pursue all available state and federal funding to the extent these funding sources
        exist to support local historical preservation and promotion programs.
Goal H: To protect Placerville’s Native American heritage.
Policies:
    1. The City shall not knowingly approve any public or private project that may adversely affect an
        archeological site without consulting the California Archeological Inventory at California State
        University, Sacramento, conducting a site evaluation as may be indicated, and attempting to
        mitigate any adverse impacts according to the recommendations of a qualified archeologist. City
        implementation of this policy shall be guided by Appendix K of the State CEQA Guidelines.
    2. The City shall refer development proposals that may adversely affect archeological sites to the
        California Archeological Inventory at California State University, Sacramento.
    3. The City shall work closely in promoting and protecting Placerville’s Native American heritage
        with historical and archeological organizations, including those along Highway 49 “Gold Chain.”
Goal I: To protect and enhance Placerville’s community character and scenic resources.
Policies:
    1. Those positive aspects and attributes of the city which are controllable, and which contribute to
        the quality of life of the city and its environment, shall be preserved and perpetuated. Placerville’s
        positive aspects and attributes are its rural country atmosphere, historical heritage, small town
        atmosphere, compatible neighborhoods and development, and lack of congestion.
    2. The City shall, to the maximum extent possible, minimize the visual impact of development on the
        most visible hillsides and the primary and secondary ridgelines as shown on Figure IX-1 in the
        Background Report.
    3. The City shall, to the maximum extent possible, prevent the scarring of hillsides and ridgetops by
        excessive grading. To this end, grading elevations shall be required in conjunction with site
        development plans.
    4. The City shall condition development approvals to protect natural features such as rock outcrops
        and trees.
    5. The City shall preserve creeks in as natural a state as possible.
    6. The City shall promote the development of streamside mini-parks.
                          Part II - Section V – Natural, Cultural and Scenic Resources
                                                        40

    7. The City shall protect the visual character of scenic street and highway corridors.
    8. The City shall promote citizen involvement in city beautification programs.
Goal J: To provide a cultural center within Placerville.
Policies:
    1.   The City shall pursue, to the maximum extent possible, the construction of a cultural center
        within the city.
IMPLEMENTATION PROGRAMS
    1. The City shall post and distribute information on water conservation, including that provided by
        the El Dorado Irrigation District.
        Responsibility:
             Public Works Department
             Development Services Department
        Time Frame:
             Ongoing
    2. The City shall be resolution promote “Water Conservation Month” each May.
        Responsibility:
             City Council
        Time Frame:
             Annually
    3. The City shall prepare and adopt a grading and erosion and sediment control ordinance.
        Responsibility:
             Public Works Department
        Time Frame:
             FY 90-91
    4. The City shall review and amend its mining and reclamation regulations consistent with the
        policies of this section and to provide the following:
        a. Declare that mining operations are not allowed by right anywhere within Placerville.
        b. Require a conditional use permit for all mining operations.
        c.   Prohibit surface entry for mining within a radius of 1,000 feet of any residence.
        d. Restrict mining activities to 500 feet or more below the surface of the ground.
                          Part II - Section V – Natural, Cultural and Scenic Resources
                                                        41

   e. Require satisfactory engineering and geological surveys as a condition of permit approval.
   f.   Require an environmental impact report as a condition of permit approval.
   g. Declare that the issuance of a conditional use permit will not be detrimental to the public
       health, safety, and welfare, nor injurious to any neighborhood.
   h. Prohibit the development of any mining operations in or near streams, creeks, and other
       waterways.
   Responsibility:
       City Council
       Development Services Department
   Time Frame:
       FY 90-91
5. The City shall amend the Zoning Ordinance to require setbacks from watercourses in accordance
   with Policy V.D.1.
Responsibility:
   City Council
   Development Services Department
Time Frame:
   FY 89-90
6. The City shall prepare and adopt a heritage tree ordinance to protect mature trees over a
   specified size.
Responsibility:
   City Council
   Development Services Department
Time Frame:
   FY 90-91
7. The City shall prepare and adopt and open-space and/or conservation easement program for the
   protection of open space and scenic areas.
Responsibility:
   City Council
   Development Services Department
Time Frame:
   FY 90-90
                   Part II - Section V – Natural, Cultural and Scenic Resources
                                                 42

8. The City shall conduct a survey of historic and architecturally significant buildings, structures, and
    sites in the immediate Placerville area. The resulting inventory shall be regularly updated.
Responsibility:
    Development Services Department
Time Frame:
    FY 91-92; ongoing
9. The City shall designate the downtown as a specific design review area and adopt zoning
    regulations and a historic building code for structures located downtown.
Responsibility:
    City Council
    Development Services Department
Time Frame:
    FY 91-92
10. The City shall establish an agreement with the California Archeological Inventory at California
    State University, Sacramento, for review of development proposals that may adversely impact
    archeological sites.
Responsibility:
    Development Services Department
Time Frame:
    FY 91-92
11. The City shall identify and evaluate scenic street and highway corridors and amend its land use
    regulations to protect these corridors.
Responsibility:
    City council
    Development Services Department
Time Frame:
    FY 91-92
12. The City shall require as a condition of approval for subdivision and parcel maps, easements to
    be reserved for the protection of open space when portions of subdivisions or parcel maps have
    been identified as an open space resource.
                     Part II - Section V – Natural, Cultural and Scenic Resources
                                                   43

Responsibility:
   City Council
   Planning Commission
   Development Services Department
Time Frame: Ongoing
                Part II - Section V – Natural, Cultural and Scenic Resources
                                              44

                                                       SECTION VI
                                                 HEALTH AND SAFETY
Planning for Placerville’s development must take into account a wide range of environmental hazards.
Some are natural, such as seismic shaking, some are entirely man-made, such as noise, and others are
natural hazards that are exacerbated by man, such as development in a floodplain or a wildland fire
hazard area. Many of the hazards can simply be avoided in the development process through locational
decisions, while others can be tolerated or minimized by including mitigation measures in the planning
and land use process. The overall goal of the policies in this section is to minimize the public health and
safety threats and nuisances to residents and minimize the potential for property damage and loss.
To promote land use development surrounding the Placerville Airport that is compatible with the noise,
safety, airspace protection, overflight and other special characteristic policies and maps of the Placerville
Airport Land Use Compatibility Plan (ALUCP), and to make the General Plan consistent with the ALUCP
as required under Government Code Section 65302.3, the following from the ALUCP are incorporated
into this Section of the General Plan by reference:
     •    “Glossary of Terms,” pages vii to xviii;
     •    Chapter 2: Basic Provisions;
     •    Chapter 3: ALUC Review Process
     •    Chapter 4: Land Use Compatibility Criteria;
     •    Chapter 6: PLA-1: Placerville Airport Policies and Compatibility Maps;
     •    Chapter 9: Background Data: Placerville Airport and Environs
          (Res. 8105, June 25, 2013)
GOALS AND POLICIES
Goal A: To prevent loss of lives, injury and property damage due to geological hazards.
Policies:
     1. Lands with significant, identified geological hazards shall be designated for open-space and low
          intensity uses until it becomes feasible to mitigate the health and safety risks.
     2. The City shall require the following information and plans to be submitted for all projects subject
          to discretionary review by the City in areas of moderate or high slope instability and areas with
          identified soil instability problems.
          •    Engineering geologic report
          •    Soils and foundation engineering report
          •    Grading, erosion, and sediment control plan
          •    Plan review letter evidencing review of all proposed development by a qualified engineering
               geologist
          •    As-built construction report, including building plans, explanation and discussion of any
               deviations from the approved grading plan, the location and results of field tests, results of
               laboratory tests, and a statement that the work was performed under the supervision of and
               in accordance with recommendations of the engineering geologist and/or soils engineer
          •    Signature of an engineering geologist certified by the State of California and/or a soils
               engineer registered in the State of California.
     3. The City shall ensure that both public and private developments in areas with significant identified
          geological hazards are sited to minimize the exposure of structures and improvements to damage
          resulting from geological hazards and to minimize the aggravation of off-site geological hazards.
                                        Part II - Section VI – Health and Safety
                                                            45

     4. Development in areas of lava-caped underground streams shall be property engineered to allow
         for the free flow of water.
     5. The suitability of soil and/or rock formations should be one of the prime considerations for
         determining the type and intensity of development permitted.
     6. The City shall establish an ongoing program to collect and maintain current geological data.
     7. The City shall retain on an ongoing basis a qualified consulting geologist to assist the City in
         updating its geological data and to review geological reports prepared in connection with new
         development projects.
Goal B: To prevent loss of lives, injury, and property damage due to the collapse of buildings and
critical facilities and to minimize disruption of essential services in the event of an earthquake.
     1. The City shall, as required by State law, inventory all potentially hazardous buildings within the
         city and develop a mitigation program, including requirements for strengthening buildings,
         changing the use of the buildings to an acceptable occupancy level, or demolishing the buildings.
     2. The City should ensure that all public facilities, such as buildings, water tanks, and reservoirs, are
         structurally sound and able to withstand seismic shaking and the effect of seismically-induced
         ground failure.
     3. The City shall ensure that privately-owned and maintained above-ground petroleum products
         storage tanks and their retaining walls are structurally sound and able to withstand seismic
         shaking and the effects of seismically-induced ground failure.
Goal C: To prevent loss of lives, injury, and property damage due to flooding.
     1. The City shall continue to participate in the National Flood Insurance Program. To this end, the
         City shall ensure that local regulations are in full compliance with standards adopted by the
         Federal Emergency Management Agency.
     2. New residential development shall be constructed so that the lowest floor is at least one foot
         above the 100-year flood level.
     3. Non-residential development shall be anchored and flood-proofed to prevent damage from 100-
         year flood, or alternatively, elevated to at least one foot above the 100-year flood level.
     4. Existing development shall comply with policies VI.C.2 and VI.C.3 when improvements are
         made costing at least 50 percent of the current market value of the structure before the
         improvements.
     5. The City shall provide for channel improvements to and tree and brush clearance along
         watercourses in Placerville to reduce flooding.
Goal D: To prevent loss of lives, injuries, and property damage due to wildland and urban fires.
     1. Areas of high and extreme fire hazards shall be the subject of special review, and building and
         higher intensity uses shall be limited unless the hazards are mitigated to a point acceptable by
         the Fire Department.
     2. All new development in areas of high and extreme fire hazards as shown in Figure VIII-3 in the
         Background Report shall be constructed with fire retardant roof coverings.
                                     Part II - Section VI – Health and Safety
                                                         46

   3. The City shall require the installation of an approved interior sprinkler system in all new
        combustible woodframe commercial buildings of 5,000 square feet or more.
   4. All new development in areas of high and extreme fire hazards as shown in Figure VIII-3 in the
        Background Report shall provide for clearance around the structures and the use of fire resistant
        groundcover.
   5. The City shall encourage the Placerville Fire Department to maintain a regular program of fire
        inspection for commercial and industrial buildings.
   6. The City will ensure in approving and constructing new roads and streets that they are adequate
        in terms of width, turning radius and grade to facilitate access by firefighting apparatus. All plans
        for new streets for areas within the Urban Service Area and/or sphere of influence of the City
        shall be reviewed by the Placerville Fire Department to ensure that City standards are met since
        there is a high probability that these areas will be annexed to the City at some point in the future.
   7. All new development shall be required to meet the minimum fire flow rates and other standards
        specified by the City’s Fire Code.
   8. Future roadway systems and networks shall be designed with at least one means of egress other
        than the access in all developing areas.
   9. The City shall not approve any medium or high density residential developments unless they are
        served by a street system with at least two streets capable of carrying peak load traffic.
   10. Parcel splits and multi-family developments shall not be allowed in areas served by narrow streets
        until minimum access can be guaranteed to emergency vehicles at all times.
   11. In approving commercial, industrial, and multi-family developments, the City shall ensure all
        structures are located within 150 feet of an access useable by fire trucks.
   12. Existing streets shall be upgraded to meet City Subdivision Ordinance standards wherever
       possible.
   13. Parking shall be restricted on streets less than 28 feet in width curb to curb.
   14. The City shall continue to aggressively enforce its fire code and weed abatement regulations.
   15. The City shall encourage the Placerville Fire District to enact and enforce a weed abatement
       ordinance for the unincorporated area within the Fire District’s service area.
   16. The City shall strive to restrict vehicular access and recreational use of undeveloped foothill areas
       during critical fire hazard periods.
   17. The City shall adopt a uniform system for numbering structures, residences, and businesses.
   18. The City shall remove obstructions obscuring street signs and require that house numbers be
       legible from the street. Commercial structures with rear street access shall be identified with the
       business name and street address in a clear and conspicuous manner on the rear of the building.
Goal E: To minimize crime and promote the personal security of Placerville residents.
   1. The Placerville Police Department shall continue to promote neighborhood security programs and
       provide crime prevention training for neighborhood groups and associations.
                                    Part II - Section VI – Health and Safety
                                                        47

    2. Residential areas shall be designed to ensure the provision of adequate police services and to
        promote self-policing of individual communities.
    3. The City shall promote the design of new development and the installation of security equipment
        aimed at crime prevention. To this end, the Police Department shall review proposed
        subdivisions, medium and high density projects, and commercial and industrial projects to ensure
        that these features are considered in the design of the projects.
Goal F: To protect Placerville residents from the effects of hazardous materials.
    1. City approvals of all new development shall consider the potential for the production, use,
        storage, and transport of hazardous materials and provide for reasonable controls on such
        hazardous materials.
    2. Within its authority, the City shall regulate the production, use, storage, and transport of
        hazardous materials to protect the health of Placerville residents.
    3. The City shall work with the County in implementing the County’s Hazardous Materials Area Plan
        and acknowledges the County as lead agency for hazardous materials management and
        disclosure.
    4. The City shall work with the County in establishing an Annual Citizens’ Hazardous Materials
        Clean-up Day.
Goal G: To ensure that City emergency procedures are adequate in the event of potential natural
or man-made disasters.
    1. The City shall maintain and periodically update the City’s Emergency Plan. As part of the periodic
        update, the City shall review County and State emergency response procedures that must be
        coordinated with City procedures.
    2. The City shall conduct periodic emergency response exercises to test the effectiveness of City
        emergency response procedures.
Goal H: To protect the public from the hazards posed by old mine shafts and openings.
    1. The City shall enforce the Nuisance Abatement Ordinance requiring the identification and capping
        of all abandoned mine shafts and openings.
Goal I: To protect the residents of Placerville from the harmful effects of exposure to excessive
noise.
    1. The City shall attempt, insofar as possible, to protect areas within the city where the present
        noise environment is considered acceptable.
    2. Areas within Placerville exposed to existing or projected exterior noise levels exceeding 60dB Ldn
        shall be designated as noise-impacted areas.
    3. Areas within Placerville shall be designated as noise-impacted if exposed to existing or projected
        exterior noise levels exceeding the performance standards in Table II-1.
    4. New development of residential or other noise-sensitive land uses will not be permitted in noise-
        impacted areas unless effective mitigation measures are incorporated into the project design to
        reduce noise levels to:
                                   Part II - Section VI – Health and Safety
                                                       48

     a. 60 dB Ldn or less in outdoor activity areas, and interior noise levels to 45 dB Ldn or less,
         where the noise source is preempted from local control (i.e. traffic on public roadways,
         railroads and airports). In areas where it is not possible to reduce exterior noise levels to 60
         dB Ldn or less using a practical application of the best available noise-reduction technology,
         an exterior noise level of up to 65 dB Ldn will be allowed. Under no circumstances will
         interior noise levels be permitted to exceed 45 dB Ldn with the windows and doors closed.
     b. Achieve compliance with the standards in Subsection 4.a. and with the performance
         standards set out in Table II-1, where the noise source is subject to local control (i.e., non-
         traffic related).
5. When industrial, commercial, or other land uses, including locally-regulated noise sources, are
    proposed for areas containing noise-sensitive land uses, noise levels generated by the proposed
    use shall not exceed the standards in Subsection 4.a. or the performance standards set out in
    Table II-1.
6. Where the development of residential or other noise-sensitive land use is proposed for a noise-
    impacted area, an acoustical analysis shall be prepared at the applicant’s expense. The
    acoustical analysis shall:
    a. Be prepared by a qualified acoustical consultant experienced in the fields of environmental
        noise assessment and architectural acoustics.
    b. Include representative noise level measurements with sufficient sampling periods and
        locations to adequately describe local conditions.
    c.  Include estimated noise levels in terms of Ldn and/or the standards in Table II-1 for existing
        and projected future noise levels, with a comparison made to the adopted policies of this
        subsection.
    d. Include recommendations for appropriate mitigation to achieve compliance with the adopted
        policies of this subsection. Where the noise source in question consists of intermittent single
        events, the report must address the effects of maximum noise levels in sleeping rooms in
        terms of possible sleep disturbance.
    e. Include estimates of noise exposure after the prescribed mitigation measures have been
        implemented. If compliance with the policies of this subsection will not be achieved, a
        rationale for acceptance of the project must be provided.
7. Noise level criteria applied to land uses other than residential or other noise-sensitive uses shall
    be consistent with recommendations of the California Office of Noise Control (see Table II-2).
8. The City shall enforce the Noise Insulation Standards of Title 24 of the California Administrative
    Code and Chapter 35 of the Uniform Building Code concerning the construction of new multiple
    occupancy dwellings such as hotels, apartments, and condominiums.
9. Noise exposure information developed during the community noise survey descried in the
    Background Report shall be used as a guideline for the development of a community noise
    control ordinance to address noise complaints, and to provide local industry with performance
    standards for future development and equipment modifications. The ordinance should be
    consistent with the “Model Community Noise Control Ordinance” prepared by the California Office
    of Noise Control in 1977 with modifications made to reflect local concerns and conditions.
10. The rerouting of Highway 49 should be investigated for noise impacts on proposed land uses.
                               Part II - Section VI – Health and Safety
                                                   49

    11. New equipment and vehicles purchased by the City shall comply with noise level performance
        standards consistent with the best available noise reduction technology.
    12. The Placerville Police Department shall actively enforce requirements of the California Vehicle
        Code relating to vehicle mufflers and modified exhaust systems.
    13. The City shall monitor noise levels on Highway 50 and encourage the installation of noise barriers
        or noise attenuating vegetation if noise levels reach an unacceptable level.
    14. The use of solid barriers, earth mounds, and vegetation should be utilized as a means of
        screening noise sources from adjacent land uses.
    15. The City shall encourage acoustically compatible land uses and require noise attenuation
        measures, when necessary, in the vicinity of the Placerville Airport. The City shall ensure that
        land use approvals in the City are consistent with the Placerville Airport Land Use Compatibility
        Plan.
Goal J: To promote land use development surrounding the Placerville Airport that is compatible
with the noise, safety, airspace protection, overflight and other special characteristic policies and
maps of the Placerville ALUCP.
Policies:
    1. The City shall amend the General Plan as required under Government Code Section 65302.3 so
        that it is consistent with the ALUCP, incorporating by reference the following from the ALUCP into
        this Section of the General Plan:
        •    “Glossary of Terms,” pages vii to xviii;
        •    Chapter 2: Basic Provisions;
        •    Chapter 3: ALUC Review Process
        •    Chapter 4: Land Use Compatibility Criteria;
        •    Chapter 6: PLA-1: Placerville Airport Policies and Compatibility Maps;
        •    Chapter 9: Background Data: Placerville Airport and Environs
    2. The City shall ensure that land use approvals in the City are consistent with the Placerville Airport
        Land Use Compatibility Plan through the adoption of an airport overlay zone that references the
        policies and maps of the ALUCP.
                                     Part II - Section VI – Health and Safety
                                                         50

                                                   TABLE II-1
                              NOISE LEVEL PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
                              FOR NEW PROJECTS AND DEVELOPMENTS
Noise created by non-preempted noise sources* associated with new projects or developments shall be
controlled so as not to exceed the noise level standards set forth below as measured at any affected
residential land use situated in either the incorporated or unincorporated areas. New residential
development shall not be allowed where the ambient noise level due to non-preempted noise sources will
exceed the noise level standards set forth below.
                                                                  Exterior Noise Level Standards dBA
                             Cumulative Number of
                                                                   Daytime                  Nighttime
        Category            minutes in any one-hour
                                                              7 a.m. to 10 p.m.          10 p.m. to 7 a.m.
                                    time period
             1                           30                          50                        45
             2                           15                          55                        50
             3                            5                          60                        55
             4                            1                          65                        60
             5                            0                          70                        65
Each of the noise level standards specified above shall be reduced by five dBA for simple tone noises,
noises consisting primarily of speech or music, or for recurring impulsive noises.
*A preempted noise source is one that is regulated by the State or Federal Government at the source
such as automobiles, railroads, and airports.
                                    Part II - Section VI – Health and Safety
                                                        51

                                                           TABLE II-2
                       LAND USE COMPATIBILITY FOR COMMUNITY NOISE ENVIRONMENTS
                                           COMMUNITY NOISE EXPOSURE
      LAND USE CATEGORY                              Ldn OR CNEL, dB
                                         55      60      65    70    75    80
Residential – Low Density
Single Family, Duplex,                                                                              Interpretation
Mobile Homes
Residential – Multi-Family
                                                                                    Normally Acceptable
                                                                                    Specified land use is satisfactory, based
                                                                                    upon the assumption that any buildings
Transient Lodging -
                                                                                    involved are of normal conventional
Motels, Hotels                                                                      construction, without any special noise
                                                                                    insulation requirements.
Schools, Libraries, Churches,
Hospitals, Nursing Homes
                                                                                    Conditionally Acceptable
                                                                                    New construction or development should be
                                                                                    undertaken only after a detailed analysis of
Auditoriums, Concert, Halls,
                                                                                    the noise reduction requirements is made
Amphitheatres                                                                       and needed noise insulation features
                                                                                    included in the design. Conventional
                                                                                    construction, but with closed windows and
                                                                                    fresh air supply systems or air conditioning
Sports Arena, Outdoor Spectator
                                                                                    will normally suffice.
Sports
Playgrounds, Neighborhood
                                                                                    Normally Unacceptable
Parks                                                                               New construction or development should
                                                                                    generally be discouraged. If new
                                                                                    construction or development does proceed,
                                                                                    a detailed analysis of the noise reduction
Golf Courses, Riding Stables,
                                                                                    requirements must be made and needed
Water Recreation, Cemeteries                                                        noise insulation features included in the
                                                                                    design.
Office Buildings, Business
Commercial and Professional
                                                                                    Clearly Unacceptable
                                                                                    New construction or development should
                                                                                    generally not be undertaken.
Industrial, Manufacturing,
Utilities, Agriculture
Source: California Office of Noise Control
                                           Part II - Section VI – Health and Safety
                                                               52

IMPLEMENTATION PROGRAMS
   1. The City shall prepare, maintain, and regularly update an Index to Geological Reports which shall
      include reports prepared for both public and private projects.
      Responsibility:
           Development Services Department
      Time Frame:
           Ongoing
   2. The City shall maintain an official Geological Map showing basic geology and the location of
      geological hazards. The Geological Map shall be regularly updated on the bases of geological
      reports prepared and filed in connection with development projects and water well logs and
      subsurface information developed in connection with public projects.
      Responsibility:
               Development Services Department
      Time Frame:
               Ongoing
   3. The City shall inventory all potentially hazardous buildings within the city and adopt a mitigation
      program, including requirements for strengthening buildings, changing the use of the buildings to
      an acceptable occupancy level, or demolishing the buildings.
      Responsibility:
           City Council
           Building Department
      Time Frame:
           FY 90-91
   4. The City shall prepare and adopt a uniform system for numbering structures, residences, and
      businesses.
      Responsibility:
           City Council
           Fire Department
      Time Frame:
           FY 90-91
   5. The City shall prepare and adopt an ordinance requiring that street numbers be legible from the
      street.
      Responsibility:
                                 Part II - Section VI – Health and Safety
                                                     53

       City Council
       Fire District
       Police Department
   Time Frame:
       FY 90-91
6. The City shall amend the Zoning Ordinance to include hillside zoning provisions to relate land use
   intensity and minimum lot size to the degree of slope and to implement other policies of the
   General Plan.
   Responsibility:
       City Council
       Development Services Department
   Time Frame:
       FY 90-91
7. The City shall prepare and adopt a noise ordinance consistent with the policies of this section.
   Among other things, the ordinance shall limit residential construction noise to specified daylight
   hours and regulate such nuisances as barking dogs.
   Responsibility:
       City Council
       Development Services Department
   Time Frame:
       FY 90-91
8. The City shall continue to review and amend, as necessary, fire codes with respect to safety
   considerations.
   Responsibility:
       City Council
        Fire Department
   Time Frame:
       Ongoing
9. The Placerville Police Department shall continue to promote neighborhood security programs and
   provide crime prevention training for neighborhood groups and associations.
   Responsibility:
       Police Department
   Time Frame:
                              Part II - Section VI – Health and Safety
                                                  54

         Ongoing
10. The City shall adopt an ordinance requiring businesses manufacturing, storing, using, or
    transporting significant quantities of hazardous materials to identify annually such materials and
    their quantities. The City shall maintain current inventory of such materials by location for use by
    the Fire Department and the Development Services Department.
    Responsibility:
         City Council
         Fire Department
    Time Frame:
         FY 89-90
11. The City shall adopt an ordinance requiring installation of an approved interior sprinkler system in
    all new combustible wood frame commercial buildings of 5,00 square feet or more.
    Responsibility:
         City Council
         Fire Department
    Time Frame:
         FY 89-90
12. To implement Policies 1 and 2 of Goal J the City shall incorporate by reference the “Glossary of
    Terms,” provisions, review process, noise, safety, airspace protection, overflight and other special
    characteristic compatibility policies and maps contained in the following sections of the Placerville
    Airport Land Use Compatibility Plan, as may be amended from time to time.
         •   “Glossary of Terms,” pages vii to xviii;
         •   Chapter 1: Introduction;
         •   Chapter 2: Basic Provisions;
         •   Chapter 3: ALUC Review Process
         •   Chapter 4: Land Use Compatibility Criteria;
         •   Chapter 6: PLA-1: Placerville Airport Policies and Compatibility Maps;
         •   Chapter 9: Background Data: Placerville Airport and Environs
    The City shall also adopt an airport overlay zone that references the policies and maps of the
    ALUCP.
    Responsibility:
         City Council
         Development Services Department
    Time Frame:
         Spring 2013
                                Part II - Section VI – Health and Safety
                                                    55

                                                    SECTION VII
                                               COMMUNITY DESIGN
Placerville’s rich Gold Rush era in its history has had a great influence on the physical layout and
character of the city. Because of community design established very early in its history, Placerville has an
identifiable community structure with a variety of components.
Community design provides a strong, pleasant “sense of place” and local identity through the harmonious
composition of physical elements such as its foothill environment, small-town rural atmosphere, vistas,
focal points of interest, landmarks, historic downtown, streetscapes, and many residential neighborhoods
each of which has a character of its own.
Placerville has a historical identity as a city incorporated in 1857, occupying the same city hall for over
100 years. Through the 1988 population of Placerville was approximately 8,000, its perceived size
measured by its activity is one of over 40,000. Being the county seat of El Dorado County it functions as a
hub city. To travelers, it is the gateway to the El Dorado National Forest with its wilderness areas and
outdoor recreational opportunities.
In order to create a community environment with harmony among its components, it is necessary for the
City to guide the design of the components. The Community Design section illustrates design concepts
which are applicable to Placerville’s natural and physical identity. The Community Design section
expresses these concepts through goals, policies, and implementation measures.
The overall goal of the policies of this section is to preserve and enhance the existing community
character and sense of place by developing projects and programs that build upon positive design
features. The Community Design section emphasizes the following qualities:
    •    Physically – the forested, foothill landscape characters
    •    Socially – the small town, rural atmosphere
    •    Institutionally – a prospering local and regional business center and county seat
    •    Historically – heritage with emphasis on the Gold Rush period
Visual Structure of Placerville
There are many influences that contribute to the image of Placerville, such as its social meaning, its
function, its history, and even its name. Hangtown, the historical name of Placerville, certainly gives
meaning to the historical image of the city. The image of Placerville is thus an overlap of many individual
images.
The Community Design section, to a great extent, is concerned with the physical and visual attributes of
Placerville. Attributes that say to out-of towners and its citizens, “This is Placerville.”
Downtown
The downtown area is one of the most defined districts in the city by virtue of the clarity of its character.
Unlike many cities the downtown area of Placerville has definable and visible edges, bounded on the
north by Highway 50, on the south by Miner’s Ridge, on the east by the Druids Monument and Cedar
Ravine, and on the west by Sacramento Street.
                                     Part II - Section VII – Community Design
                                                          56

The Main Street segment of the downtown has an unusually rich complement of historic buildings. There
are many buildings built in the 1850s and 1960s as well as a number of buildings representative of the
early 1900s, the 1920s, and the 1930s. In the aggregate, these buildings define the overall character of
the downtown area and its historic nature contributes to its aesthetic values as well as providing
economic benefit from tourist trade.
Residential Areas
One of Placerville’s unique resources is the visual diversity of the city’s residential neighborhoods.
Contrasted with the grid-type arrangement of most cities and towns, Placerville’s residential streets are
arranged to conform to ridges and ravines. Lot sizes in residential neighborhoods vary from extremely
small lots (often with little or no parking) to large parcels of rural acreage. The variety of architectural
styles of Placerville homes is as varied as the winding streets themselves. Placerville’s housing mix
(predominantly lower and middle income level homes) is made up of styles popular from the Gold Rush
era to the present. The character of residential areas continues to change as growth occurs and vacant
land is in-filled with residential development.
A problem associated with Placerville’s large number of older homes is that there are many pockets of
older, deteriorating homes in need of rehabilitation. Often these areas are parallel to the larger
thoroughfares: Highway 50, Highway 49, and Pacific Street. Many of Placerville’s historic himes were
destroyed when Highway 50 was expanded. Many, if not most, of the remaining historic homes are
heavily impacted by heavy traffic and noise from Highway 50 and 49.
Another unique aspect of Placerville’s residential areas is the interspersal of mixed land use found
throughout the city. Areas that are primarily residential contain storage warehouse, light industrial, small
commercial and service enterprises. In many cases the non-residential uses predated the development of
the neighborhood itself.
Streets
The visual character of Placerville’s city streets is richly varied. The diversity of the terrain and the type of
land use often determine the nature of the streets, which range from broad thoroughfares to small, single-
lane carriage roads.
The rugged, varying shape of the land causes many street design problems:
     •   Adequate visibility for safety is severely hampered due to narrow winding streets that are
         overburdened by more traffic than they were designed to carry.
     •   Many of Placerville’s streets are private roads and are in poor condition due to inadequate
         maintenance.
     •   Streets laid out before the advent of present day traffic conditions now have on-street parking that
         is inconvenient and limits visibility.
     •   Many older streets are often in a state of alteration due to realignment, reconstruction, widening,
         or repair.
Highway 50
Highway 50 is a State-designated scenic route that serves as a major link between Sacramento and
South Lake Tahoe. Many local and out of town travelers use this route for access to wilderness and
outdoor recreations areas.
                                     Part II - Section VII – Community Design
                                                          57

Highway 50 is an important “path” through Placerville, but, unfortunately, it literally severs the city into two
halves and impedes pedestrian and vehicular traffic moving north and south. Because of its dominating
scale, Highway 50 visually overwhelms the surrounding structures and scars the cityscape with barren cut
banks and limited landscaping. Compounding this visual impact on Placerville are three traffic lights, road
cuts and fills, signs and poorly designed access ramps and intersections.
Although Highway 50 is Placerville’s most significant view corridor, its maintenance is the responsibility of
Caltrans. Fortunately, Caltrans is receptive to local input and has shown a willingness to study problems
created by Highway 50 in Placerville.
Placerville Drive
Placerville Drive, by virtue of its geographical location, is a distinctly separate district within the city of
Placerville. Its entry/exit points are at each end of its length where it intersects Highway 50. Placerville
Drive is dominated by strip commercial uses, and most of the corridor is visually chaotic and unappealing.
Only a few isolated portions have any appreciable landscape quality in its foreground views. Otherwise it
virtually lacks visual amenities. Because of its negative visual character, Placerville Drive is a major
liability in terms of its value as a scenic resource.
However, Placerville Drive offers a bounty of design possibilities which can be incorporated into the
planning of its development as a major thoroughfare with curbs, gutters, and sidewalks.
Broadway
Broadway runs in an east-west direction between Mosquito Road and Newtown Road. Its parallel
boundaries are the Highway 50 embankment to the north and ridge lines and cut banks to the south.
Although Broadway is a single street, it is frequently perceived as two distinct sections (upper and lower)
due to its two different uses and identities.
Lower Broadway is a largely highway oriented and linear commercial strip. It is characterized by many
fast food restaurants, gas stations, and small cluster shopping centers. The shopping centers generally
have unrelieved expanses of blacktop parking that line the street between the store fronts and the
thoroughfare. Signage consists largely of pole signs and large plastic signs. The result is a street that is
visually cluttered and unappealing due to its lace of integrity and character. However, some newer
development, including some fast food restaurants, have been built to higher standards and attractive
buildings and landscaping have been introduced. Because of the success and intensity of business on
Broadway, congested traffic conditions often result.
Upper Broadway is, as yet, predominantly open, treed land with portions of undisturbed creek. There are
scattered commercial enterprises including three motels and a bus station. Other uses are mixed
business and professional, residential, and retail. Traffic is free flowing and uncongested.
Architecture
Architecture is the visible and permanent physical face that a town or city puts forward to the world.
Architecture can establish a positive image and can have a major effect on establishing the identity of
town.
Signage
Commercial signs can have either a positive or a negative influence on their surroundings. Attractive
signs encourage people toward an area; whereas uncontrolled signs can repel potential customers
because their visual clutter and confusion give a sense of shoddiness and hucksterism. City control of
signs allows all business establishments to compete with the same set of rules and prevents large, well-
financed corporations from starting an expensive sings “arms race” with local businesses.
                                     Part II - Section VII – Community Design
                                                          58

Development in the Smith Flat Area
The following are general guidelines for the future development of the Smith Flat area. A specific plan for
the area should be based on these general guidelines.
Historic Planned Commercial
The portion of Smith Flat along Smith Flat Road designated for Historic Planned Commercial is intended
to have special historic design standards relating to signs, lighting, roads, fencing, and other criteria. It is
intended to have a special street/tree theme. Rather than requiring a specified number of trees planted in
a row, every “so many” feet, design standards in this area should require that specific tree species
(approximately five) are incorporated into the various plans and plantings that go on in the area. The main
theme of the Historic Planned Commercial area is to preserve the existing historic uses and structures in
the district and to enhance the area through new development. New development shall be rigidly
controlled to ensure that it is not in conflict with the area’s historic nature.
Planned Residential Development/Historic
The area north of the Historic Commercial area is designated for Planned Residential/Historic. This area
is currently developing as a residential area. Development in this area shall be single family residential
controlled to be compatible with the historic district adjoining it.
Bikeway/Park
The railroad right-of way surrounds the historic commercial and residential areas. There is currently
(1989) an active project to purchase and develop it into a bike trail. This bike trail should be enhanced
and incorporated into the development theme of the area. It possibly could be enlarged with a new park
incorporated into it on the western side.
Planned Industrial/Cottage Industry
The existing Cornett Lumber Mill is designated Planned Industrial/Cottage Industry. The lumber mill
should be allowed to continue in operation. However, should it ever cease operation, this area should be
redeveloped into a Planned Industrial use to allow for uses such as cottage industries, possibly
commercial/industrial uses related to the Apple Hill area, and some marketing.
Agricultural/Commercial
The area north of the lumber mill currently has agricultural and farm-related uses. Agricultural uses are
encouraged to continue. As adjacent development proceeds, however, there may be pressure for this
area to develop with other uses. The Agricultural Commercial designation allows for arts and crafts,
antiques, gift shops, food, candy sales, rides (e.g., hay rides, horseback rides, small trains), camping/RV,
picnicking, farmer’s market, Christmas trees, fruits, and crops.
Rural Residential
Directly surrounding the entire Smith Flat area is a buffered area of one-to five-acre parcels, developed in
a rural residential use. The area to the west of Jaquir is currently being used in an agricultural operation.
The area to the east of Jaquir and south of Carson Road is currently rural, basically a lava cap, and
undeveloped. This area would lend itself to one to five acre development.
Sphere of Influence
                                    Part II - Section VII – Community Design
                                                         59

It is proposed that the Sphere of Influence boundary be extended to include the entire General Plan Area,
including the rural residential areas. Since there are sewer lines in this area, sewer service could be
extended to serve the entire area within the proposed Sphere of Influence.
Adjoining Commercial South of Freeway
To ensure that commercial development south of the freeway does not conflict with uses in the Smith Flat
area, design guidelines should be established for their development. These shall be distinct from the
Historic Planned Commercial area in Smith Flat, yet allow for compatibility with this area.
Fairgrounds
Future development of the El Dorado County Fairgrounds shall require a specific plan. The Fairgrounds
provide one of the biggest and most important open space uses in the Placerville Drive area. Future plans
for the development of the area should take this into consideration and whenever possible incorporate
park-like uses.
GOALS AND POLICIES
Goal A: To preserve and enhance the overall visual attributes of Placerville.
Policies:
      1. The City shall protect and manage Placerville’s tree cover for ecological, aesthetic, and economic
          reasons.
      2. The City shall encourage creative site planning for developments in hillside and environmentally
          sensitive areas to preserve the ridgelines and minimize the need for substantial grading and
          vegetation removal.
      3. The City shall encourage the reclamation of scarred hillsides.
      4. The City shall make every effort to protect riparian vegetation. To this end, buildings and
          improvements will be set back from watercourses.
      5. To retain the natural landscape character of Placerville, introduced plants in public and private
          landscaping should be subordinate to and compatible with existing natural vegetation. The use of
          native and drought-resistant plants will be encouraged.
      6. The City shall maintain and/or enhance the visual character of scenic street and highway
          corridors.
      7.   The City shall promote citizen involvement in city beautification.
      8. The City shall develop design concepts and implementation plans for enhancing visual image at
          city entrances.
Goal B: To protect and upgrade the visual and historical character of downtown.
      1. The City shall establish standard criteria for streetscape planning, such as street lights,
          crosswalks, signs, landscaping, benches, trash receptacles, and other street furniture.
      2. The City shall promote the enhancement of commercial buildings and properties.
                                   Part II - Section VII – Community Design
                                                        60

    3. The City shall encourage creative uses of historic buildings which will permit their continued use
        and existence.
    4. The City shall encourage downtown property owners and merchants to develop a comprehensive
        program which will set forth common objectives for the enhancement and revitalization of the
        downtown area, and develop appropriate implementation measures.
    5. The City shall promote design concepts which will contribute to better pedestrian convenience
        and safety.
    6. The City shall encourage the visual improvement of buildings as seen from Highway 50.
    7. The City shall study and develop an improvement plan for Hangtown Creek incorporating
        pedestrian access, aesthetic enjoyment, and public safety.
    8. The City shall identify and promote the development of downtown urban spaces, such as the Bell
        Tower, Quartz Alley, and the Railroad Park.
    9. The City shall encourage public art and social events in the downtown area.
Goal C: To protect and enhance to the visual quality and neighborhood integrity of residential
areas.
    1. The City shall promote and protect residential neighborhoods from incompatible uses.
    2. New construction shall be architecturally compatible with the surrounding and/or adjacent
        neighborhoods. This policy shall be strictly enforced in designated Historic Neighborhoods.
    3. In order to preserve, rehabilitate, or recreate historic structures in deteriorating older residential
        neighborhoods, the City shall encourage alternative uses if the uses are compatible with the
        adjacent neighborhood and if adequate parking and access are available or can be provided.
    4. The City shall encourage the development of alternative major traffic routes away from older
        established neighborhoods.
    5. The City shall promote the use of planned unit residential developments to maximize efficient and
        creative use of parcels while preserving trees, aesthetic rock outcroppings, scenic views, open
        space and other natural features.
    6. The City shall encourage proper maintenance of homes, buildings, and yards to provide the best
        possible visual quality in each neighborhood.
    7. The City shall pursue beautification programs that preserve and enhance the image of Placerville.
    8. The City shall require planting of street trees (in accordance with a master street tree program) in
        all new residential areas that are substantially void of trees and other vegetation.
    9. The City shall encourage efforts to landscape and beautify existing streets.
    10. The City shall encourage the preservation of natural vegetation in new residential development
        and shall seek to preserve and manage Placerville’s tree cover to maximize ecological and
        aesthetic values.
                                   Part II - Section VII – Community Design
                                                        61

Goal D: To upgrade the visual qualities and functional efficiency of Placerville’s local streets.
   1. Future road development shall be planned to conform to the topography and to take advantage of
        views and vistas. The City shall ensure that new street projects are designed to minimize impact
        on terrain and natural vegetation.
   2. The City shall attempt to preserve existing trees within street rights-of way and encourage
        preservation of all mature trees on private property where visible from the street and where
        feasible.
   3. The City shall promote the installation and maintenance of landscaping in public and private
        areas appropriate to street type, surrounding architecture, general character of the district, and
        street beautification programs.
   4. The City shall use the city street system as the unifying framework of the community through the
        use of distinctive street design and landscape treatment.
   5. The City shall require landscaping in any street design that adversely impacts the visual character
        of a neighborhood.
Goal E: To upgrade the visual quality of the Highway 50 corridor and to better integrate the
highway into the Placerville’s overall community design framework.
   1. The City shall encourage Caltrans to continue programs to landscape the Highway 50 right-of-
        way and interchanges.
   2. The City shall encourage Caltrans to more clearly identify intersections through proper signage
        and symbols.
   3. The City shall endeavor to maintain natural land features and vegetation along Highway 50 by
        promoting high quality construction within the adjacent Highway 50 corridor.
   4. The City shall promote the enhancement and visual distinctiveness of Highway 50 entrances to
        Placerville on the west and east.
Goal F: To promote the visual enhancement of Placerville Drive.
   1. The City shall encourage the development of Placerville Drive in conformance with high design
        standards as a commercial district and discourage strip-commercial development.
   2. The City shall prepare a streetscape plan for Placerville Drive which will have as its principal
        thrust the improvement of its visual qualities.
   3. The City shall adopt strict sign control measures to improve the visual character of signs and
        provide for continuity in style.
Goal G: To promote the visual enhancement of Broadway.
   1. The City shall encourage cluster style commercial development along Broadway that strives to
        meet high design standards. These standards shall include: non-linear building massing and
        varied appearance; utilization of natural landforms; and distinctive architectural styles enhancing
        Placerville’s character.
                                   Part II - Section VII – Community Design
                                                        62

   2. The City shall encourage clustering of apartment buildings in future development to provide for
        open green spaces and naturally-forested settings.
   3. The City shall encourage the uncovering of the Hangtown Creek in future developments.
   4. The City shall develop a streetscape plan for Broadway which shall have as its principal thrust the
        improvement of Broadway’s visual qualities including the perpetuation and establishment of
        indigenous vegetation.
   5. The City shall adopt strict sign control measures to improve the visual character of signs and
        provide for continuity in style.
   6. The City shall study and develop a plan for the improvement of flow and safety of vehicular,
        pedestrian, and bicycle traffic.
   7. The City shall encourage the establishment of foot trails and bicycle paths along Hangtown Creek
        in the Broadway area.
Goal H: To promote the development of institutional uses that meet high design standards.
   1. The City shall promote good design in institutional uses that emphasizes appropriate and
        aesthetic, architectural, landscape, and streetscape treatment.
   2. The City shall promote development in and around the County Government Center that maintains
        the high architectural standards already established, blends with existing buildings, and preserves
        the area’s outdoor campus-like atmosphere.
Goal I: To promote architectural quality throughout Placerville.
   1. The City shall ensure that new development will be a positive addition to the city’s environment
        and not detract from the nature and character of appropriate nearby established development
        because of architectural style, scale, or location.
   2. The City shall encourage all new development to respect distinctive landforms and significant
        plants and plant groups in its design.
   3. The City shall encourage the restoration and reuse of older structures which contribute to
        Placerville’s character and sense of historical and cultural identity.
   4. The City shall condition development projects to minimize grading due to building and foundation
        construction.
Goal J: To promote development of aesthetic and functional signage and reduce visual clutter.
   1. The City shall only allow new signs that are appropriate in design and scale, while making
        adequate provisions for business identification.
                                   Part II - Section VII – Community Design
                                                        63

IMPLEMENTATION PROGRAMS
   1. The City shall prepare and adopt a Master Street Tree Plan establishing a limited pallet for street
      trees appropriate to various districts in the city. The City shall develop publicity materials to
      promote the implementation of the Master Street Tree Plan.
      Responsibility:
           City Council
           Development Services Department
           Public Works Department
      Time Frame:
           FY 90-91
   2. The City shall develop a beautification and community pride program and designate a committee
      to involve community service organizations in beautification projects.
      Responsibility:
           City Council
           City Manager
           Development Services Department
      Time Frame:
           FY 89-90
   3. The City shall prepare and adopt design guidelines for the downtown area. The design guidelines
      shall address, among other issues, the following: street lights; crosswalks; signs; landscaping;
      benches; trash receptacles; and other street furniture.
      Responsibility:
           City Council
           Planning Commission
           Development Services Department
           Public Works Department
      Time Frame:
           FY 90-91
   4. The City shall develop a guidebook for the physical enhancement of commercial and institutional
      buildings and properties.
      Responsibility:
           Development Services Department
           Building Department
      Time Frame:
           FY 90-91
                                Part II - Section VII – Community Design
                                                     64

5. The City shall prepare and adopt an improvement plan for Hangtown Creek providing for
    pedestrian access, aesthetic enhancement, and public safety.
    Responsibility:
         City Council
         Development Services Department
         Public Works Department
    Time Frame:
        FY 91-92
 6. The City shall undertake an urban design/landscape study for the Highway 50 corridor that
    identifies concepts and methods to:
    •    Define the entries to Placerville
    •    Improve highway landscaping
    •    Create visually inviting transitions at freeway exits
    •    Enhance visual access to Hangtown Creek
    Responsibility:
         City Council
         Development Services Department
    Time Frame:
         FY 91-92
7. The City shall petition Caltrans to complete landscaping of the Highway 50 right-of-way and
    interchanges and to implement a plan for signage and symbols clearly identifying intersections
    along Highway 50 through Placerville.
    Responsibility:
         City Council
         City Manager
         Public Works Department
    Time Frame:
         Ongoing
8. The City shall review and revise as necessary the sign provisions of its Zoning Ordinance.
    Revised sign provisions shall be consistent with the following principals:
    •    Signs should relate logically to, rather than obscure or disrupt, design elements of buildings
         to which they relate.
    •    Dimensions, subject matter, materials, color, letter styles, legibility, safety, overall effect, and
         placement in relation to the building should be taken into consideration when signs are
         reviewed for approval.
                                Part II - Section VII – Community Design
                                                     65

    •     Signs should serve primarily to identify the establishment on the site and should not compete
          for visual attention.
    •     A sign should harmonize with its building, neighborhood, and other signs in the area.
    •     The City should invite artistry and innovation in signs that improve the appearance of the
          building and the neighborhoods in which they are placed.
    Responsibility:
          City Council
          Development Services Department
    Time Frame:
          FY 90-91
9. The City shall review and revise as necessary the landscaping requirements for off-street parking
    in its Zoning Ordinance.
    Responsibility:
          City Council
          Development Services Department
    Time Frame:
          FY 90-91
10. The City shall prepare and adopt a design plan and guidelines for the Broadway area. The design
    plan and guidelines shall address, among other issues, the following: maintenance of native
    vegetation; signage; pedestrian and bicycle access along Hangtown Creek; and grading of
    hillsides.
    Responsibility:
          City Council
          Development Services Department
          Public Works Department
    Time Frame:
          FY 91-92
11. The City shall prepare and adopt a circulation plan for the Broadway area addressing the
    improvement and flow and safety of vehicular, pedestrian, and bicycle traffic.
    Responsibility:
          City Council
          Public Works Department
    Time Frame:
          FY 91-92
                                Part II - Section VII – Community Design
                                                     66

12. The City shall review and revise as necessary the aesthetic guidelines of the Historic Design
    Ordinance.
    Responsibility:
        City Council
        Development Services Department
    Time Frame:
        FY 91-92
13. The City shall establish an Appearance Review Committee composed of representatives of the
    public, business, government, and other groups and shall adopt standards and procedures for
    review of commercial and multi-family projects.
    Responsibility:
        City Council
    Time Frame:
        FY 90-91
                              Part II - Section VII – Community Design
                                                   67

                                                     SECTION VIII
                                   ADMINISTRATION AND IMPLEMENTATION
The effectiveness of the General Plan depends on its keeping pace with changing conditions and needs
and its implementation through numerous separate actions consistent with the direction set out in the
plan. The overall goal of the policies of this section is to provide for those procedures that will ensure the
plan is regularly reviewed and updated and that the policies of the plan are effectively implemented.
GOALS AND POLICIES
Goal A: To provide for the ongoing administration and implementation of the General Plan.
Policies:
    1. The City shall biennially update key data in the General Plan Background Report to assist City
         officials in their regular decision-making responsibilities and to assist the development community
         in its decision-making and in its preparation of plans and applications for development projects.
    2. The City shall biennially review the General Plan Policy Document and revise it as necessary.
    3. The General Plan shall be amended no more than four times per year. Each amendment,
         however, may include multiple changes to the General Plan.
    4. The City shall prepare, adopt, and annually update a five-year Capital Improvement Program.
         The CIP shall be reviewed for its consistency with the General Plan.
    5. The City’s Zoning Ordinance and Subdivision Ordinance shall be reviewed and amended as
         necessary to ensure consistency with the General Plan.
    6. The City shall prepare and adopt specific plans for designated areas as deemed necessary and
         appropriate.
IMPLEMENTATION PROGRAMS
    1. The City shall biennially update key data in the General Plan Background Report. The biennial
         update shall be prepared by the Development Services Department with the cooperation of City
         department heads in draft form by May 15 each update year in time for use by the City Council in
         making budget decisions. The draft of the update shall be submitted to the City Council, Planning
         Commission, City department heads, appropriate board and commissions, and interested outside
         agencies. Following its review, the update shall be published in final form by August 1. The
         update shall be made available to City officials and the public. Information in the update may be
         referenced in Environmental Impact Reports for public and private projects.
         Responsibility:
               Development Services Department
               City Department Heads
         Time Frame:
               FY 91-92; biennially thereafter
                            Part II - Section VIII – Administration and Implementation
                                                          68

2. The City shall biennially review the General Plan Policy Document, focusing principally on actions
   undertaken in the previous years to carry out the implementation programs of the Plan. The
   Planning Commission shall complete its review of the General Plan Policy Document and report
   its findings to the City Council by September 1 of each update year. The Planning Commission’s
   report shall include, as the Commission deems appropriate, recommendations for amendments to
   the General Plan.
   Responsibility:
         Planning Commission
   Time Frame:
         FY 91-92; biennially thereafter
3. The City shall prepare and annually update a five-year Capital Improvement Program. The
   Planning Commission shall review the CIP for consistency with the General Plan and report its
   findings to the City Council. The CP shall be adopted in conjunction with the annual City budget.
   Responsibility:
         City Council
         Planning Commission
         City Manager
         Development Services Department
         City Department Heads
   Time Frame:
         FY 89-90; ongoing
4. The City shall review and amend, as necessary, the City’s Zoning Ordinance and Subdivision
   Ordinance to ensure consistency with the General Plan.
   Responsibility:
         City Council
         Development Services Department
   Time Frame:
         FY 89-90
5. The City shall prepare and adopt specific plans for designated areas as deemed necessary and
   appropriate.
   Responsibility:
         City Council
         Development Services Department
   Time Frame:
         As needed
                     Part II - Section VIII – Administration and Implementation
                                                   69

6. The City shall prepare and distribute a Developer’s Handbook outlining the City of Placerville’s
   permit application and review procedures, describing the City’s development policies, standards
   and guidelines, and suggesting site design and environmental and noise impact mitigation
   approaches.
   Responsibility:
      Development Services Department
      Public Works Department
   Time Frame:
      FY 90-91
                    Part II - Section VIII – Administration and Implementation
                                                  70


































               CITY OF
     PLACERVILLE
2013—2021 HOUSING ELEMENT
        FINAL—Adopted by City Council
                      February 11, 2014
                   Resolution No. 8168
                            Lead Agency
                              City of Placerville
               Development Services Department
                     3101 Center Street, 2nd Floor
                           Placerville, CA 95667

City of Placerville 2013-2021 Housing Element—FINAL—February 2014
City of Placerville 2013-2021 Housing Element—FINAL—February 2014
City of Placerville 2013-2021 Housing Element—FINAL—February 2014
                 ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
                         CITY OF PLACERVILLE
                     2013—2021 Housing Element
                                    Placerville
                                  City Council
                                    Patricia Borelli
                                     Carl Hagen
                                     Carol Patton
                                   Wendy Thomas
                                    Trisha Wilkins
                                    Placerville
                           Planning Commission
                                   Michael Drobesh
                                    Michael Frenn
                                    George Lowry
                                      Les Russell
                                    Placerville
                Development Services Department
                                Pierre Rivas, Director
                            Andrew Painter, City Planner
                     Erica Inderlied, Administrative Secretary
                                           ~
With acknowledgment to the contributions of Mike Webb and Andrea Stevenson
       City of Placerville 2013-2021 Housing Element—FINAL—February 2014

                               TABLE OF CONTENTS
I.         INTRODUCTION                                           1
A. Purpose and Content of Housing Element                                        1
B. State Requirements                                                            2
C. Data Sources and Methodology                                                  3
D. Community Profile and Major Findings                                          3
E. Housing Constraints                                                           4
F. Housing Resources                                                             4
G. Housing Element 2008-2013 Accomplishments & Evaluation                        5
H. Housing Element Policies and Programs                                        21
I. Public Participation                                                         23
J. General Plan Consistency                                                     25
K. Other Statutory Compliance                                                   27
II.        COMMUNITY PROFILE                                      30
A. Introduction                                                                 30
B. Population Characteristics                                                   31
C. Housing Stock Characteristics                                                38
D. Employment                                                                   44
E. Special Housing Needs                                                        46
F. Homeless and Other Groups in Need of Temporary and Transitional Affordable
         Housing                                                                56
G. Assisted Housing Projects At-Risk of Conversion                              59
H. Opportunities for Energy Conservation                                        62
I. Regional Housing Needs                                                       64
J. Unmet 2008-2013 Regional Housing Needs                                       66
III.        CONSTRAINTS                                           67
A. Government Constraints                                                       67
B. Programs that Reduce Government Constraints                                  90
C. Environmental and Public Service Constraints                                 92
D. Market Constraints                                                           99
IV.         RESOURCES                                             103
A. Land Resources to Accommodate Housing                                       103
B. Administrative Resources for Housing                                        114
C. Financial Resources for Housing                                             116
             City of Placerville 2013-2021 Housing Element—FINAL—February 2014
                                                 i

V.        HOUSING STRATEGY                                       122
A. Introduction                                                               122
B. Housing Goals and Policies                                                 124
C. Housing Programs                                                           126
VI.         APPENDICES                                           149
APPENDIX A. QUANTIFIED OBJECTIVES                                             149
APPENDIX B. UPZONING/REZONING ANALYSIS                                        150
APPENDIX C. UTILITY INFRASTRUCTURE                                            153
APPENDIX D. AVAILABLE LAND INVENTORY                                          154
APPENDIX E. CITY OF PLACERVILLE POTENTIAL LOW INCOME HOUSING
        LAND INVENTORY                                                        155
            City of Placerville 2013-2021 Housing Element—FINAL—February 2014
                                               ii

                                         INDEX OF TABLES
Table 1: 2008-2013 Housing Element Accomplishments & Evaluation                  6
Table 2: Population Trends                                                      32
Table 3: Population Projections                                                 32
Table 4: Age Distribution                                                       33
Table 5: Race/Ethnicity                                                         34
Table 6: Changes in Household Type (Occupied Housing Units)                     35
Table 7: Median Income by Jurisdiction                                          36
Table 8: Poverty Status in 2010                                                 37
Table 9: Housing by Type                                                        38
Table 10: Tenure by Jurisdiction (2010)                                         39
Table 11: Elderly Households by Tenure (2010)                                   39
Table 12: Housing Vacancy: Placerville vs. El Dorado County                     40
Table 13: Overcrowding                                                          41
Table 14: Market-Rate Rents (2009)                                              42
Table 15: Housing Affordability by Income Level                                 43
Table 16: Overpayment by Tenure                                                 43
Table 17: Year Housing Built                                                    44
Table 18: County and City Unemployment Rates, 2013                              44
Table 19: Employment by Industry                                                45
Table 20: Major Employers in Placerville                                        45
Table 21: County and City Unemployment Rates, 2013                              46
Table 22: Senior Care Facilities                                                48
Table 23: Placerville Household Size by Tenure                                  54
Table 24: Inventory of Publicly Assisted Multi-Family Housing                   61
Table 25: Regional Housing Needs Plan Allocation for Placerville 2013-2021)     64
Table 26: Progress in Meeting RHNA Allocation January 1, 2013 Through June 2013 65
Table 27: Remaining RHNA Need Based on Units Built/Under Construction           66
Table 28: Land Use Categories Permitting Residences                             68
Tables 29 and 30: Residential Development Standards: Residential and Commercial
        Districts                                                               70
Table 31: Housing Types Permitted by Zone                                       71
Table 32: Placerville Street Standards                                          86
Table 33: Water Demand within the City Water Service Area                       93
Table 34: Wastewater Collection System Pipeline Length by Age of Construction   95
Table 35: Wastewater Collection System Pipeline Material of Construction        96
Table 36: Construction Costs—Placerville                                       101
Table 37: Comparison of Fees by Jurisdiction                                   102
Table 38: Inventory of Residentially Zoned Suitable and Available Land with
        Potential to Accommodate Moderate and Above Moderate Income Units      108
Table 39: Approved Tentative Residential Housing Development Subdivisions      110
Table 40: Summary of Potential Rezoning Sites with Potential to Accommodate Low,
        Very Low and Extremely Low Housing Units                               111
Table 41: Comparison Summary of 2013-2021 RHNA Sites and Site Inventory        112
            City of Placerville 2013-2021 Housing Element—FINAL—February 2014
                                               iii

Table 42: Special Needs Housing Land Availability                              113
Table 43: Financial Resources for Affordable Housing (Federal)                 117
Table 44: Financial Resources for Affordable Housing (State)                   119
Table 45: Financial Resources for Affordable Housing (Private)                 121
Table 46: Quantified Objectives (October 2013 to October 2021)                 149
Table 47: Gross and Potential Units from APNs 323-570-01 and 323-570-37        151
Table 48: Potential Uses within Placerville Drive Development Plan Area        152
                                       INDEX OF FIGURES
Figure 1: Middletown Road / Cold Springs Road / Placerville Drive              150
Figure 2: Central Village Core                                                 151
Figure 3: Green Valley Rd. /Placerville Drive                                  151
Figure 4: Oetting Property Project Site                                        151
Figure 5: Utility Infrastructure                                               153
Figure 6: Available Land Inventory                                             154
Figure 7: Potential Low-Income Housing Sites                                   155
Figures 8 & 9: Site 1—Mallard Lane Photos                                      157
Figure 10: Site 1—Mallard Lane Location Map                                    157
Figure 11: Site 2—Country Club Drive Location Map                              159
Figures 12, 13 & 14: Site 2—Country Club Drive Photos                          159
Figure 15: Site 3—Coloma Road Photo                                            161
Figure 16: Site 3—Coloma Road Location Map                                     161
Figure 17: Site 4—Adams Way Location Map                                       163
Figure 18: Site 5—Cold Springs Road Location Map                               164
Figure 19: Site 6—Green Valley Road Photo                                      166
Figure 20: Site 6—Green Valley Road Map                                        166
Figure 21: Site 7—Green Valley Road Photo                                      168
Figure 22: Site 7—Green Valley Road Location Map                               168
Figures 23 & 24: Site 8—Ray Lawyer Drive Photo                                 170
Figure 25: Site 8—Ray Lawyer Drive Location Map                                170
Figure 26: Site 9—New Morning Court Location Map                               172
Figure 27: Site 10—Airport Road and Valley Court Photo                         173
Figure 28: Site 10—Airport Road and Valley Court Location Map                  174
             City of Placerville 2013-2021 Housing Element—FINAL—February 2014
                                                iv

I.                                             INTRODUCTION
A. Purpose and Content of Housing Element
The Housing Element of the City’s General Plan is designed to provide the City with a
coordinated and comprehensive strategy for promoting the production of safe, decent,
and affordable housing within the community. A priority of both state and local
governments, Government Code Section 65580 states the intent of creating housing
elements:
        The availability of housing is of vital statewide importance, and the early
        attainment of decent housing and a suitable living environment for every
        California family is a priority of the highest order.
According to state law, the Housing Element has two main purposes:
    1.  To provide an assessment of both current and future housing needs and
        constraints in meeting these needs, and
    2.  To provide a strategy that establishes housing goals, policies, and programs.
                                      Photo by Andrea Stevenson
Beyond state law requirements, Placerville has areas of special priority that provide
additional purpose to the Housing Element. Unique conditions and market forces in
Placerville require that the Housing Element focus on concerns such as topography, the
presence of natural resources, and the preservation of the historic character of the
community. State-mandated concerns and the local concerns combine to set the
foundation upon which this Housing Element is built.
The Housing Element is typically a five-year plan, which differs from other General Plan
             City of Placerville 2013-2021 Housing Element—FINAL—February 2014
                                                 I-1

Elements which typically cover a twenty-year timeframe. The Housing Element serves as
an integrated part of the General Plan, but is updated more frequently to ensure its
relevancy and accuracy. The Housing Element identifies strategies and programs that
focus on:
         Matching housing supply with need;
         Providing a variety of housing choices throughout the community;
         Assisting in the provision of affordable housing;
         Removing governmental and other constraints to housing development, and
         Promoting fair and equal housing opportunities.
The Housing Element consists of the following major components:
         A profile and analysis of the City's demographics, housing characteristics, and
         existing and future housing needs (Chapter II);
         An identification of constraints to housing production, preservation, and
         maintenance, such as market factors, governmental regulations, and
         environmental limitations, and possible mitigation measures (Chapter III);
         Resources for housing construction, preservation, and maintenance, including
         land on which housing can be built, financial, and administrative resources
         (Chapter IV), and
         A Housing Strategy to address the City's identified housing needs, including an
         assessment of past accomplishments, goals, policies, programs, and quantified
         objectives (Chapter IV).
B. State Requirements
The California Legislature has identified the attainment of a decent home and suitable
living environment for every resident as the State’s major housing goal. Recognizing the
important role of local planning programs in pursuing this goal, the Legislature has
mandated that all cities and counties prepare a Housing Element as part of their
comprehensive General Plan. Section 65302(c) of the Government Code sets forth the
specific components to be contained in a community’s Housing Element.
State law requires Housing Elements to be updated at least every five years to reflect a
community’s changing housing needs and new statutory requirements. The present
Housing Element is designated to cover the 2013-2021 planning period.
A critical measure of compliance with state Housing Element law is the ability of a
jurisdiction to accommodate its share of the regional housing construction needs. For the
City of Placerville, its share of the region’s housing construction needs under the
Sacramento Area Council of Governments (SACOG) Regional Housing Needs Plan is 372
housing units between 2013 and 2021. Of the 372 units, 39 are expected to be affordable
             City of Placerville 2013-2021 Housing Element—FINAL—February 2014
                                               I-2

for extremely low income households, 39 for very-low-income households and 55 for
low-income households.
C. Data Sources and Methodology
In preparing the Housing Element, an array of information sources were used. Wherever
possible, data profiles provided by SACOG in 2012 served as the baseline for
demographic information. Additional data sources included 2010 Census data, including
2006-2012 American Community Survey data, the California Department of Finance
(population projections and housing units), HUD 2005-2009 Comprehensive Housing
Affordability Strategy data, employment data from the Employment Development
Department, and HCD income limit data. The most current data available from social
service agencies, private non-profit organizations that serve special needs groups,
various City of Placerville departments, El Dorado County, and other agencies was also
used in the update.
D. Community Profile and Major Findings
Placerville began as a gold rush town in the early years of California’s history as a state.
Placerville’s heritage is reflected in the historical, nineteenth-century architecture of its
downtown core. One of its first known names was "Dry Diggins" because the gravel had
to be carried to water to pan for gold. Later, Placerville was known as "Hangtown" due to
several hangings of criminals in town. The area is now known for its agriculture,
recreation, tourism, history, and lumber industries rather than for its gold. In addition,
Placerville is the County Seat and the center of financial, commercial, civic, and
government activity for much of El Dorado County.
The population of the City has increased modestly since 2000 by approximately 8
percent. The population is projected to continue to increase as rising congestion in
Sacramento and the attractive quality of life of the Sierra Nevada foothills region
continues to entice families with children and retirees to relocate in Placerville and other
areas of El Dorado County. Given current growth trends, the City’s population could
double by 2020, according to projections from SACOG.
Among the changes in the City’s population since 2000 have been a decrease in the
proportion of persons 35 to 44 years of age (14.8 percent to 10.8 percent), and persons 5 to
19 years of age (21.8 percent to 13 percent). Conversely, there has been an increase in the
proportion of persons age 45 to 74 (from 29.5 percent to 35 percent) and persons of
Hispanic or Latino origin (from 6 percent to 13 percent).
The City experienced two contrasting trends: a slight decrease in the percentage of family
households and couples with children, but a slight increase in the average household
size.
             City of Placerville 2013-2021 Housing Element—FINAL—February 2014
                                               I-3

Median Citywide household income in 2010—$52,216—was about 75 percent of the
median income countywide. Incomes in Placerville are affected by the level of wages of
jobs held by Placerville residents and the high percentage of residents on public
assistance or retirement income.
The median sales price of a single-family home decrease twenty percent between 2003
and 2012. This decrease was attributed to the economic downturn during the latter years
of that period.
The housing stock in Placerville consists primarily of single-family homes, which account
for approximately two-thirds of all housing units in the City. A majority of the housing
stock consists of older housing units—half of the City’s housing stock is over 30 years of
age and many homes are more than 50 years old. Given that major rehabilitation is more
likely as the housing stock ages, the Housing Element places an emphasis on identifying
the housing conditions in the City and providing rehabilitation assistance to residents.
Special needs populations comprise a sizeable portion of the population, including 28
percent of households headed by an elderly person and 22 percent of the population with
one or more disabilities, ranging from mobility limitations to mental health concerns to
chronic illnesses. The City works with several county, state, and non-profit agencies to
provide services to these populations.
E. Housing Constraints
Local policies and regulations can affect the price and availability of housing, both
positively and negatively, particularly for low- and moderate-income residents of
Placerville. Land use controls, site improvement requirements, permit and development
impact fees, permit processing procedures, and other factors may constrain the
maintenance, development, and improvement of housing.
Non-governmental constraints, such as the cost of land, construction costs, and
environmental conditions, can also impact the supply and cost of housing. The City can
influence these costs to the extent that Placerville provides adequate sites for housing
development to meet future housing needs and pursues, or assists others in pursuing,
state and federal funds to subsidize affordable housing developments that face high land
and/or construction costs.
F. Housing Resources
The City of Placerville has at its disposal a number of resources to meet housing needs.
Among the most important of these resources is land to accommodate future housing
construction. The City has identified over 421 acres of residentially zoned and designated
land that could accommodate 1,100 or more dwelling units, depending on the average
density of residential developments.
             City of Placerville 2013-2021 Housing Element—FINAL—February 2014
                                               I-4

Several public and private agencies and for-profit developers are active in El Dorado
County to assist the City in administering housing programs, construct affordable
housing, and provide services to lower-income and special needs groups. Among these
are the El Dorado County Community Services Department, the El Dorado County Area
Agency on Aging, Home of Elder and Adult Resource Team (HEART), Mercy Housing,
Habitat for Humanity and the CBM Group.
In addition, the City has identified several state, federal, and private funding programs
(operated by financial institutions that are either members of the Federal Home Loan
Bank Board or have established Community Reinvestment Act programs). Funding
programs available to the City are primarily operated by the California Department of
Housing and Community Development, the Federal Department of Housing and Urban
Development, and the Federal Rural Housing Services division of the Department of
Agriculture.
G. Housing Element 2008-2013 Accomplishments & Evaluation
In order to craft an effective housing strategy for the 2013 to 2021 planning period, the
City must assess the achievements of its existing housing programs. This analysis is
provided as Table 1.
                                      Photo by Andrea Stevenson
             City of Placerville 2013-2021 Housing Element—FINAL—February 2014
                                                I-5

                                          Table 1: 2008-2013 Housing Element Accomplishments & Evaluation
       PROGRAM NAME                                  DESCRIPTION                                                   OBJECTIVE MET?
                             The City will maintain an updated inventory of vacant residential Yes.
                             parcels in the City, and provide an annual report to the City
      1. VACANT LAND
                             Council and Planning Commission.                                  The City has maintained and routinely updated its
      INVENTORY
                                                                                               inventory of vacant residential parcels within the City and
                             Objective: Accommodate at least 388 additional housing units,     provides the same to the public at large. This inventory of
I-6                          including 106 extremely-low-, very-low- and low-income housing vacant sites listed by address, parcel number, and zoning
                             units.                                                            has been completed and posted on the City website.
                       In conjunction with the updated vacant land inventory, the City
                       will identify suitable sites for infill development and re-use,         Yes.
      2. INFILL
                       including commercially zoned properties. Before seeking to
      DEVELOPMENT
                       annex land within the Sphere of Influence, the City will                The City has identified suitable sites for infill and re-use
      AND SITES WITH
                       encourage the development of these infill sites where adequate          for both residential and non-residential areas of the
      RE-USE POTENTIAL
                       public facilities and services are already in place and where small     community as discussed in Program 1.
                       projects can be integrated with existing neighborhoods.
                                             City of Placerville 2013-2021 Housing Element—FINAL—February 2014
                                                                               I-6

      PROGRAM NAME                                DESCRIPTION                                                       OBJECTIVE MET?
                         Meeting annually with local non-profit and governmental service        Substantially. City Staff has met with service providers on
                         providers to assess the shelter needs of the community and work        many occasions in the 2011-2012 planning period
                         with non-profit organizations to identify suitable sites for the       regarding shelter needs, opportunities and issues. A
                         placement of facilities, as required by Senate Bill SB2.               temporary tented shelter encampment was authorized in
                                                                                                2012 under a temporary use permit to accommodate as
                         Objective: Assist with funding and development for an                  many as twenty adults. This temporary permit is set to
                         emergency shelter or transitional housing facility, as identified      expire in November 2013.
                         herein, and ensure that the proposed project is processed
                         ministerially, to meet local needs consistent with SB2. The City       In 2012 per SB2, the City amended the Zoning Ordinance
                         shall also consider permit and impact fee waivers and other            by defining an emergency shelter, and then added an
      3. TRANSITIONAL,   credits in consideration for such payment.                             emergency shelter as a use permitted within the HWC,
I-7
      SUPPORTIVE AND                                                                            Highway Commercial Zone.
      EMERGENCY          For transitional and supportive housing, zoning will be amended
      HOUSING            to permit these uses as residential uses and only subject them to June 2013, the City amended the Zoning Ordinance by
                         those restrictions that apply to other residential uses of the same categorizing transitional and supportive housing as a
                         type in the same zone.                                              residential service facility, a use permitted within each of the
                                                                                             City’s residential zones.
                                                                                                Additional amendments to the Zoning Ordinance are
                                                                                                needed to fully comply with the requirements of SB2 to
                                                                                                permit transitional and supportive housing as residential
                                                                                                uses in Placerville’s mixed-use zones (BP, CBD, C and
                                                                                                HWC), subject to those restrictions that apply to other
                                                                                                residential uses of the same type in the same zone. A new
                                                                                                program for the 2013-2021 planning period is proposed to
                                                                                                address these amendments.
                                          City of Placerville 2013-2021 Housing Element—FINAL—February 2014
                                                                            I-7

       PROGRAM NAME                                DESCRIPTION                                                   OBJECTIVE MET?
                      The City will continue to permit accessory structures, building
                                                                                              Yes. The City continues to enforce Title 24 regarding
                     modifications, and site plans that provide accessibility for
                                                                                              handicapped access standards and improvements thereof,
                     persons with disabilities and will continue to implement state
                                                                                              providing consultations and handouts regarding the same.
      4. ACCOMMODATE building standards for handicapped accessibility. The City will
                                                                                              The City provides complimentary "walk-throughs" to
      HOUSING FOR    promote its policies and development standards for persons with
                                                                                              address accessibility constraints.
      PERSONS WITH   disabilities through information provided at City Hall, pre-
      DISABILITIES   application meetings, a link on the City website detailing the
                                                                                              The City’s Request for Reasonable Accommodation ordinance
                     process for requesting reasonable accommodation, and a notice
                                                                                              (Section 10-3-12), that describes the reasonable
                     to the Alta Regional Center.
                                                                                              accommodation process, is accessible from the City’s
                     Objective: Improve housing accessibility for persons with
                                                                                              Planning Division webpage.
                     disabilities.
                       The City will identify funding sources for the development of
                       senior housing, and facilitate senior housing development
                       through the density bonus program (Program 7), identification of       No. However, a 39 unit senior housing development is
I-8                    suitable development sites (Programs 1–3), and through other           currently under construction. The Eskaton Village
                       development incentives such as reduced parking, which can be           development involves several attached single-family
                       granted in conjunction with the density bonus provision. The           residential, senior citizen restricted units that were entitled
      5.SENIOR HOUSING
                       City will promote these potential incentives by providing              without a density bonus request.
                       information to developers at pre-application meetings, notifying
                       non-profit organizations, and providing a link on the City             This program will be continued for the 2013-2021
                       website to its affordable and senior housing policies.                 planning period in an effort to foster the creation of senior
                       Objective: Assist in the development of at least one senior            housing within the City.
                       housing project that includes continuum of care options, from
                       completely independent living to fully-assisted care.
                                                                                              No. Potential funding sources necessary to prepare a
                            The City may prepare a study of options to provide housing that
                                                                                              workforce housing study were not available to the City
                            is affordable to, and meets the needs of, residents who are
      6. WORKFORCE                                                                            during the planning period. This was primarily due to
                            employed locally (workforce housing).
      HOUSING                                                                                 formal adoption of the 2008-2013 Housing Element in
                            Objective: Complete at least one housing development that
                                                                                              February 2012.
                            provides very-low-income, low-income, and moderate-income
                                                                                              Continuation of this program for the 2013-2021 planning
                            housing units.
                                                                                              period is proposed.
                                            City of Placerville 2013-2021 Housing Element—FINAL—February 2014
                                                                              I-8

       PROGRAM NAME                                 DESCRIPTION                                                      OBJECTIVE MET?
                       Amend the City’s density bonus program to include the new
                       changes under state law. Continue to promote the density bonus
                       as a tool to assist in the development of affordable housing by
                                                                                        Yes.
                       providing program information at City Hall, promoting the use
      7. DENSITY BONUS
                       of the program at pre-application conferences, providing a link
                       on the City’s website, and through distribution of the Workforce The City’s Affordable Housing Density Bonus Ordinance
                       Housing Study (see Program 7).                                   was adopted by City Council Action in March 2013,
                                                                                        consistent with state statute.
                            Objective: To increase awareness of density bonuses and other
                            incentives for affordable housing.
I-9                         The City will continue to pursue available state and federal
                            funding sources in cooperation with private developers, non-
                            profit housing corporations, the El Dorado County Housing
                            Authority and Community Services Department, and other
                                                                                                   No.
                            interested entities to assist in meeting the needs of extremely-low,
      8. PURSUE STATE
                            low- and moderate-income households. Based on meetings (at
      AND FEDERAL                                                                                  The City has met with non-profit developers and service
                            least annually) with non-profit developers and service providers,
      FUNDING                                                                                      providers to jointly pursue assistance in meeting the needs
                            the City will identify the funding sources most appropriate to
                            meet the needs of residents, and apply for funds, or assist other      of low- and moderate income households. As funding
                            entities in applying for funds, during available funding cycles.       opportunities become available, the City intends to submit
                                                                                                   grant applications during available funding cycles.
                             Objective: Increase the effective use of state and federal funds in
                            support of affordable housing, shelter, and housing-related
                            services.
                                             City of Placerville 2013-2021 Housing Element—FINAL—February 2014
                                                                               I-9

          PROGRAM NAME                           DESCRIPTION                                                    OBJECTIVE MET?
                         In order to ensure that City permit and development impact fees
                         do not constrain the development of housing, the City will
                         review its fee structure annually and will report the findings to
         9. PERMIT AND   the City Council and Planning Commission in conjunction with          No. There were no affordable housing projects approved
         DEVELOPMENT     the annual report on the General Plan. While fees typically           during the planning period.
         IMPACT FEES     represent the cost of providing public facilities and services, the
                         up-front cost can present a significant burden to developers,         Continuation of this program for the 2013-2021 planning
I - 10
                         especially in the case of affordable housing.                         period is proposed.
                         Objective: Reduce the initial cost-impact of City fees on
                         affordable housing projects.
         10. SELF-HELP
         HOUSING                                                                           No. Historically, the City has assisted non-profit housing
                         The City will continue work with non-profit developers in the
                                                                                           developers in obtaining financing and developing self-help
                         area to develop self-help housing (housing in which the eventual
                                                                                           projects, however these activities did not occur in the
                         owner participates in its construction under the supervision of a
                                                                                           2008-2013 planning period. Continuation of this program
                         building contractor).
                                                                                           for the 2013-2021 planning period is proposed.
                                         City of Placerville 2013-2021 Housing Element—FINAL—February 2014
                                                                          I - 10

         PROGRAM NAME                          DESCRIPTION                                                     OBJECTIVE MET?
                        The City will review the Hillside Development Standards to
                        revise the slope/density formula to reduce the minimum
                        required lot size in relation to increasing slope on sites with
                        average slopes between 10 and 30 percent. In addition to the
                        review of the Development Standards, the City will encourage
                        the use of the Planned Development process as a tool to cluster
                        housing development on the less restricted areas of a site. As       Yes. The City strongly encourages the use of its Planned
                        means of facilitating use of the Planned Development process,        Development Ordinance to maximize density and
                        the City will provide information at its permit counter, provide a   minimize impacts on hillside development. Information
         11. HILLSIDE
I - 11                  link on the City’s website, distribute information on the planned    regarding the same is distributed locally via the City
         DEVELOPMENT
                        development requirements and slope density regulations to local      website.
                        homebuilder organizations, and use pre-application meetings as a
                        means of discussing alternative approaches to development on         Per City Council direction and public comment regarding
                        hillsides.                                                           grading impacts associated with sites on slopes 20% or
                                                                                             more, this program was not completed.
                        Objective: Increase residential development potential on
                        moderately sloped sites while preserving as much of the natural
                        contour of slopes as possible, reducing safety impacts from
                        disturbed slopes, and reducing the appearance of bulk of hillside
                        homes, particularly on ridge lines or in prominent locations
                        visible from significant distances.
                                        City of Placerville 2013-2021 Housing Element—FINAL—February 2014
                                                                         I - 11

          PROGRAM NAME                           DESCRIPTION                                                    OBJECTIVE MET?
                                                                                               Yes. In 2012, the City adopted two amendments to the
                                                                                               Zoning Ordinance:
                                                                                                       Permitting mobile home parks as a conditional
                                                                                                       use in the RE, R1-A, R1-20,000, R1-10,000, R1-
                          As a part of the Housing Element Update, the City reviewed the
                                                                                                       6,000, R-2, R-3, R-4 and R-5 residential zones, as
         12. ZONING       Zoning Ordinance to identify potential constraints to housing
                                                                                                       authorized under state law;
         ORDINANCE        development. The review identified potential constraints with
         REVISIONS        respect to mobile home parks and cumulative zoning.
                                                                                                       Authorized that single-family and non-residential
                          Objective: Facilitate the development of alternative housing and             development are conditional uses in multi-family
                          to retain multi-family residential zoned land inventory.                     districts. This further limited the placement of
I - 12                                                                                                 single-family homes to parcels where
                                                                                                       development of multi-family housing is
                                                                                                       infeasible, such as small or irregularly-shaped
                                                                                                       parcels.
                          Recognizing the need for homebuyer assistance, the City will
                          design a first-time homebuyer program, which could include           No.
         13. FIRST-TIME   down payment assistance loans and/or grants, and assistance with
         HOMEBUYER        closing costs. After the City determines the program design most     Due to the economic downturn during much of the
         ASSISTANCE       appropriate to meet the needs of residents, the City can apply for   planning period, new home construction was nearly non-
                          funds. In promoting the program, the City will provide               existent. This Program will be continued for the 2013-
                          information at City Hall, provide a link on the City website, and    2021 planning period to seek funding as/if it becomes
                          distribute information to area real estate firms, lenders, and       available.
                          homebuilders.
                                          City of Placerville 2013-2021 Housing Element—FINAL—February 2014
                                                                           I - 12

          PROGRAM NAME                              DESCRIPTION                                                      OBJECTIVE MET?
                            The City will continue to promote equal housing opportunity for
                            all residents by supporting efforts of community groups (such as
                            the Housing Resources Board) that provide counseling,
                            investigatory, legal, or referral services to victims of
                            discrimination by:                                               Yes/Ongoing
         14. FAIR HOUSING
                            Training staff who have contact with the public on how to              This program is ongoing to ensure new City personnel are
                            receive and refer fair housing complaints; Posting and distributing    trained on the receiving of fair housing complaints. Fair
                            fair housing information at City Hall and other community facility     Housing information is posted in the Development
                            locations, and Working with local lenders, rental property owners,     Services Department, the City’s webpage.
                            real estate, and legal service organizations to conduct fair housing
                            training, and identify an annual community event at which fair
                            housing information can be distributed. Objective: Increase
                            community awareness of fair housing.
I - 13                                                                                             In September 2013 the City was awarded a $250,000
                                                                                                   Community Development Block Grant (CDBG) for
                                                                                                   owner-occupied units. The City estimates a total of six (6)
                                                                                                   individuals are anticipated beneficiaries of this loan
                            The City will continue to promote low-interest and deferred-           program within the following income categories:
                            payment loans for housing rehabilitation. Both owner-occupied
                            and renter-occupied units are eligible to receive loans under the      Low/Moderate Income (Between 51% - 80% of state
         15. HOUSING        program. The City’s program provides a maximum loan amount             median income) – 2 individuals;
         REHABILITATION     of $40,000 per unit ($50,000 for historic residences) to
                            homeowners and rental property owners whose tenants earn less          Very Low-Income (Between 31% - 50% of state median
                            than 80 percent of the El Dorado County median family income.          income) – 2 individuals;
                            Funds may be used to correct any health and safety issue within a
                            housing unit. In cases where a housing unit is overcrowded, funds      Extremely Low-Income (Below 30% of state median
                            can be used for a room addition.                                       income) – 2 individuals.
                                                                                                   The City will assist in the distribution of these funds to
                                                                                                   income qualified applicants during the 2013-2021
                                                                                                   planning period.
                                            City of Placerville 2013-2021 Housing Element—FINAL—February 2014
                                                                             I - 13

         PROGRAM NAME                           DESCRIPTION                                                  OBJECTIVE MET?
                                                                                            No.
                                                                                            A Housing Conditions Survey was not completed during
                                                                                            the 2008-2012 planning period. Potential funding sources
                        The City will conduct a Housing Conditions Survey to identify       necessary to prepare a survey were not available to the
         16. HOUSING
                        areas to target code enforcement, rehabilitation assistance, and    City during the planning period. This was primarily due to
         CONDITIONS
                        neighborhood improvement efforts.                                   formal adoption of the 2008-2013 Housing Element in
         SURVEY
                                                                                            February 2012.
                        Objective: To maintain a relatively current and relevant database
I - 14                  of housing conditions.                                              Should CDBG funding sources be available in the next
                                                                                            planning period or CDBD funding cycle, the City intends
                                                                                            to apply for funding. This Program will be continued for
                                                                                            the 2013-2021 planning period as funding become
                                                                                            available.
                        The City will continue to conduct code enforcement inspections
                                                                                            Yes.
                        on a complaint basis. Eligible property owners will be directed to
         17. CODE
                        the City’s rehabilitation program for assistance in correcting code
         ENFORCEMENT                                                                        The City continues its code enforcement activities,
                        violations.
                                                                                            conducting approximately 100 such inquiries annually,
                                                                                            and performs 1,000 to 1,500 daily routine building
                        Objective: To correct building code violations before they
                                                                                            inspections annually.
                        become serious health and safety hazards to human habitation.
                                        City of Placerville 2013-2021 Housing Element—FINAL—February 2014
                                                                         I - 14

         PROGRAM NAME                              DESCRIPTION                                                      OBJECTIVE MET?
                          The City will encourage the preservation of historic homes and
                          buildings by:
                              Continuing to review requests for demolition of buildings
                                                                                                  No.
                              within historic districts;
                              Directing eligible households to the rehabilitation program,
         18. HISTORIC         which provides up to $50,000 of assistance for historic             The City could apply for funding for this program if
         PRESERVATION         homes;                                                              federal or state funding becomes available. The City
                                                                                                  continues to encourage historic preservation of homes
                              Continuing to allow the re-use of historic buildings as             and buildings Citywide. However, the City’s rehabilitation
                              residential uses;                                                   program was not funded during the planning period.
                              Identifying potential funding sources to assist in the
I - 15
                              preservation of historic structures and referring property
                              owners to those sources.
                          The City will continue to cooperate with the El Dorado County
                          Housing Authority in its administration of the Federal Housing
                          Choice Voucher rental assistance program to maintain the                Yes.
         19. HOUSING      availability of housing vouchers in Placerville. The City's role will
         CHOICE VOUCHER   be to provide necessary documentation to the Housing Authority          The City continues to cooperate with the El Dorado
         PROGRAM          to apply for annual commitments from the U.S. Department of             County Housing Authority on the Federal Voucher
                          Housing and Urban Development; encourage rental property                program and provides necessary documentation to the
                          owners who have participated in the City’s Housing                      U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development.
                          Rehabilitation Program to participate in the Housing Choice             Information about rental assistance is made available to
                          Voucher Program; provide information on rental assistance               the public at City Hall.
                          program at City Hall; and, provide a website link to the Housing
                          Authority.
                                           City of Placerville 2013-2021 Housing Element—FINAL—February 2014
                                                                            I - 15

          PROGRAM NAME                                    DESCRIPTION                                                      OBJECTIVE MET?
                                 The City will work with property owners, other public agencies,
                                 and non-profit housing organizations to preserve existing
                                 subsidized rental housing. To encourage existing owners to
                                 maintain the affordability of such rental housing, the City would
                                 assist owners in applying for state or federal assistance for
                                 refinancing, acquisition, and/or rehabilitation.                        Yes.
         20. PRESERVATION
         OF "AT-RISK" UNITS The City will monitor properties identified as being potentially at-         No existing subsidized rental housing was converted or
                            risk to ensure that property owners comply with state and federal            was modified to eliminate their affordability during the
                            notification requirements. For properties that are within the 24             planning period. The City continues to monitor at-risk
                            months of potential conversion, the City will meet with property             rental properties and will include this program during the
I - 16                      owners to determine their plans and the type(s) of assistance                2013-2021 planning period.
                            desired, if any, to maintain the affordable status of the rental
                            housing units. For owners who intend to sell their rental
                            properties, the City will identify interested non-profit
                            organizations willing to acquire and continue operating the rental
                            properties as affordable housing.
                                 The City will work with the mobile home park owners to access
                                 state and federal funds for park improvements and potential             Yes .
         21. MOBILE HOME         conversion to tenant ownership, if desired by both the park
         PARKS                   owner and residents. The City will meet with the park owners to         The City met with mobile home park owners during the
                                 discuss their long-term goals for the properties and the feasibility    2008-2012 planning period. Conversion of the single
                                 of preserving the parks. If park conversion to tenant ownership is      mobile home park to tenant ownership was not identified
                                 desired, the City will assist residents in identifying an experienced   during the meeting.
                                 non-profit organization that can facilitate the park conversion.
                                                 City of Placerville 2013-2021 Housing Element—FINAL—February 2014
                                                                                  I - 16

          PROGRAM NAME                                 DESCRIPTION                                                    OBJECTIVE MET?
                        The City will distribute information on energy efficiency and                Yes.
                        weatherization programs offered by Pacific Gas & Electric and
         22.            others in conjunction with the City rehabilitation program. In               The City continues to promote energy conservation
         WEATHERIZATION addition, the City will identify additional funding sources that             programs (see CDBG program) and provides
                        offer assistance for weatherization improvements to lower-                   conservation information to the public. The City enforces
                        income households and provide this information to participants               Title 24 of the California Code of Regulations and
                        in its housing rehabilitation program. The City will continue to             provides weatherization funding via its Housing
                        permit energy efficiency and weatherization improvements as                  Rehabilitation program. This program will be included
I - 17                  eligible activities under its housing rehabilitation program.                during the 2013-2021 planning period to meet objectives.
                               The City will continue to enforce state energy efficiency
         23. ENERGY            requirements for new residential construction (Title 24 of the        Yes.
         CONSERVATION          California Code of Regulations) and shall encourage, through the
         FOR NEW               City’s plan review process, to encourage additional energy
         RESIDENTIAL           conservation measures with respect to the siting of buildings,        The City continues to enforce the Title 24 unfunded
         DEVELOPMENT           landscaping, and solar access. In order to promote the use of         mandate. The City also enforces its own landscape and
                               energy efficient construction, the City will provide information on   water conservation rules and reviews new development
                               energy conservation measures with the development application         projects for energy conservation and solar access.
                               packets.
                                               City of Placerville 2013-2021 Housing Element—FINAL—February 2014
                                                                                I - 17

          PROGRAM NAME                      DESCRIPTION                                                   OBJECTIVE MET?
                                                                               Placerville did not meet the objective to address the shortfall of available
                                                                               land to accommodate 106 low, very low and extremely low income units
                                                                               before the October 31, 2013 end of the 2008-2013 planning period. The
                                                                               Housing Element analyzed the development potential of three sites under
                                                                               the potential R-5 zoning unit capacity of 330 units for the three sites. The
                                                                               R-5 zone with a minimum of 20 dwelling units per acre is deemed under
                            To address a shortfall of adequately zoned higher- state statute as a density sufficient to construct housing for the low, very
                            density residential sites (106 units at R-4 level  low and extremely low income categories.
         24. HIGH-DENSITY   density, the highest currently allowed by City
I - 18
         DEVELOPMENT        Code), the merits of a new Zoning Ordinance text Per Government Code Section 65584.09, if during the prior planning
                            amendment to create a new zoning designation, period the City did not make available sites to accommodate the unmet
                            R-5/High Density Residential, with a minimum portion of the Regional Housing Needs Allocation (RHNA) then the City
                            density of 20 units per acre, will be considered   must rezone or zone adequate sites within the first year of the 2013-2021
                            and vetted.                                        Housing Element planning period. This requirement is in addition to sites
                                                                               needed to accommodate the RHNA for low, very low and extremely low
                                                                               income categories for the 2013-2021 planning period. Placerville will
                                                                               revise this program for 2013-2021 to include the required rezoning of
                                                                               sites at the R-5 density necessary to meet statutory requirements and our
                                                                               low, very low and extremely low income level RHNA of 106 units for
                                                                               2008-2013 and 133 units for 2013-2021.
                                            City of Placerville 2013-2021 Housing Element—FINAL—February 2014
                                                                             I - 18

          PROGRAM NAME                            DESCRIPTION                                                   OBJECTIVE MET?
                          Implement the Statewide Community Infrastructure Program
                          (SCIP) to assist in the financing of certain capital improvement    Yes.
                          charges (CICs) and impact fees.
         25. STATEWIDE                                                                        City Council adopted resolution in 2010 joining the SCIP
         COMMUNITY        If a developer/property owner chose to participate in SCIP, the     program. To date there have been no housing
         INFRASTRUCTURE   selected public capital improvements and the development            development projects that have used the program. This
         PROGRAM (SCIP)   impact fees owed to the City would be financed by the issuance      was primarily the result of economic conditions and the
                          of tax-exempt bonds by California Statewide Communities             lack of demand for new housing post-2010.
                          Development Authority (CSCDA). CSCDA would impose a
                          special assessment on the owner’s property tax bill to repay the    SCIP brochures are made available at City Hall.
                          portion of the bonds issued to finance the fees paid with respect   Information and links to the program are provided on the
                          to the property and the public capital improvements benefiting      City website.
I - 19                    the property.
                          Implement a form-based code for the Placerville Drive               No.
                          Development and Implementation Plan (PDIP) planning area.
                          The Placerville Drive Development and Implementation Plan
                          (PDIP) includes a 400-acre mixed-use component with no density      The City was selected as a recipient for funding in 2011
         26. FORM-BASED   cap for residential uses. The PDIP currently would require          through the Sacramento Region Air Quality and Infill
         CODE             conformance with the conventional zoning which exists in the        Streamlining Program (ISP). However, due to ranking
                          PDIP planning area, which poses entitlement time and cost           fourth in the funding and selection criteria the City did
                          constraints. In this regard, the City believes that implementing    not receive program funding during.
                          form-based codes for the PDIP area will significantly reduce
                          development constraints.                                           This Housing Program will not be continued for the
                                                                                             2013-2021 planning period as funding opportunities are
                          To fund the development of form-based code for the PDIP area, no longer available. Future prioritizing by City Council to
                          the City will apply for an ISP Grant offered through the local air implement the PDIP will be weighed amongst other plan
                          quality management districts.                                      implementations, financial priorities and availabilities.
                                          City of Placerville 2013-2021 Housing Element—FINAL—February 2014
                                                                           I - 19

          PROGRAM NAME                          DESCRIPTION                                                  OBJECTIVE MET?
                         The City will coordinate an annual workshop with employers,
                         members of the housing community and City officials to identify
                         the housing needs of the City and take appropriate action as
                         necessary as part of the annual progress report pursuant to
                         Government Code Section 65400.
I - 20                                                                                     In 2012 and 2013 City representatives met with
         27. PUBLIC      The City recognizes the need for and benefit of a thorough and
                                                                                           community interest, faith based and other housing interest
         OUTREACH        comprehensive public participation process. The City will
                                                                                           groups to discuss the
                         coordinate annual workshops with a variety of participants
                         including housing advocates, employers, service providers, public
                         agencies and the public at large, with the goal of bringing ideas
                         from the community forward for the City to consider.
                                        City of Placerville 2013-2021 Housing Element—FINAL—February 2014
                                                                         I - 20

H. Housing Element Policies and Programs
To address the community conditions and housing needs identified within this Housing
Element, the City has adopted actions to facilitate the development of the regional
housing needs allocation, programs to assist in the production and rehabilitation of a
wide range of housing and shelter, as well as programs that establish supportive services
for all income levels and special needs groups. Programs included within the Housing
Element address the following goals:
         To designate sufficient land to accommodate Placerville’s share of El Dorado
         County’s future housing needs;
         To facilitate the development of housing for special needs households;
         To facilitate the development of housing affordable to low- and moderate-
         income households;
         To promote equal housing opportunities for all residents;
         To preserve the existing housing stock;
         To conserve existing affordable housing opportunities, and
         To promote residential energy conservation.
The Development Services Department is the City entity primarily responsible for
implementing the housing programs. However, several programs also involve
cooperation with other public and private entities, including the City Building and
Engineering Divisions, El Dorado County Housing Authority, local lenders and real
estate agents, and non-profit developers.
Within the City Administration Department, the Grants Administration Division will
have the primary role of coordinating the implementation of the programs. Staff from the
Grants Administration Division will meet with representatives of other agencies, track
the implementation of the programs in this chapter, report on progress and problems in
implementation, and recommend revisions to implementation measures and techniques
to improve the achievement of program objectives. The designated staff member will
meet with representatives of the various City divisions, departments, and non-profit
agencies as needed, but no less than annually, to review implementation progress and
identify solutions to implementation problems.
The policies proposed by the City to implement these goals are listed below.
         Goal A:           To Designate Sufficient Land to Accommodate Placerville’s
                           Share of El Dorado County’s Future Housing Needs
         Policy 1: The City will maintain an inventory of vacant residential sites, to be
         updated annually.
         Policy 2: As needed, the City will annex land within its Sphere of Influence (SOI)
         to maintain an adequate supply of residential land.
             City of Placerville 2013-2021 Housing Element—FINAL—February 2014
                                              I - 21

Policy 3: The City will promote infill development by identifying suitable sites,
design goals, and potential development incentives.
Goal B:            To Facilitate the Development of Housing for Special Needs
                   Households
Policy 1: The City will allow overnight shelters and transitional housing facilities
for homeless individuals and families in appropriate zoning districts.
Policy 2: The City will implement state and federal requirements for persons
with disabilities in new residential developments.
Policy 3: The City will facilitate the development of senior housing by working
with senior housing providers to identify adequate sites, assisting in the
acquisition of funds for low-income senior housing, and providing development
incentives.
Policy 4: The City shall encourage housing that is affordable to the local
workforce by identifying funding sources and potential sites that would make
the production of such housing financially feasible.
Goal C:            To Facilitate the Development of Housing Affordable to
                   Low- and Moderate-Income Households
Policy 1: The City will encourage the use of density bonuses and regulatory
incentives as tools to assist affordable housing development.
Policy 2: The City will pursue state and federal funding to assist in developing
housing affordable to low- and moderate-income households.
Policy 3: The City will review the Zoning Ordinance, permit processes, and
development fees to identify and remove potential constraints to the
development of a range of housing for all income levels and needs.
Policy 4: The City will review and, if necessary, revise its Hillside Development
Standards to reduce their cost impact on housing while protecting the health and
safety of Placerville residents and the character of the City.
Goal D:            To Promote Equal Housing Opportunity for all Residents
Policy 1: The City will continue to distribute information on fair housing laws to
residents, and refer discrimination complaints to the State Fair Employment and
Housing Commission.
Policy 2: The City will cooperate with local homebuilders, real estate agents, and
lenders to conduct an annual fair-housing public information campaign.
     City of Placerville 2013-2021 Housing Element—FINAL—February 2014
                                      I - 22

        Goal E:            To Preserve the Existing Housing Stock
        Policy 1: The City will continue to provide rehabilitation assistance to low- and
        moderate-income households.
        Policy 2: The City will conduct a housing condition survey to identify areas of
        the community most in need of rehabilitation assistance.
        Policy 3: The City will continue to conduct code enforcement inspections on a
        complaint basis to ensure that the housing stock remains in habitable condition.
        Policy 4: The City will continue to preserve historic structures within the City by
        encouraging re-use of buildings within historic districts.
        Goal F:             To Conserve Existing Affordable Housing Opportunities
        Policy 1: The City will continue to cooperate with the El Dorado County Housing
        Authority to provide rental assistance to Placerville residents.
        Policy 2: The City will continue to monitor the status of the government-assisted
        housing in Placerville and preserve the affordability of these units.
        Policy 3: The City will conserve and improve mobile home parks that can meet
        minimum health and safety standards by working with property owners and
        residents to obtain funds for park improvements and/or conversion of parks to
        resident ownership.
        Goal G:            To Promote Residential Energy Conservation
        Policy 1: The City will continue to implement the energy conservation standards
        under Title 24 of the California Code of Regulations (state building code
        standards).
        Policy 2: The City will continue to distribute information on weatherization
        programs, and pursue funding sources for weatherization assistance for low- and
        moderate-income households.
        Policy 3: The City will promote energy conservation through its land use
        planning and development standards.
I. Public Participation
Placerville’s public participation strategy included early outreach to the general public,
targeting contacts at community organizations and public agencies that serve low-
income and special needs groups, holding public workshops on the homeless in October
2012 and to solicit input on Housing Element program implementation setting in
February 2013 during a public workshop.
Public outreach included the preparation and rollout of a Housing Element Survey on
December 4, 2012. The survey was provided using a link on the City’s website and
             City of Placerville 2013-2021 Housing Element—FINAL—February 2014
                                              I - 23

Facebook page, as well as printed copies that were made available to the public at City
Council, Planning Commission, Economic Advisory Committee and Historical Advisory
Committee meetings during December 2012 and January, February and March 2013.
A total of eight (8) respondents completed and submitted the survey. A majority of those
who responded identified the following potential constraints to the maintenance,
improvement or development of housing within Placerville:
         Permit and development impact fees;
         Lack of infrastructure and land for development, and
         Lack of affordable housing to serve special needs groups (e.g. homeless,
         physically disabled, developmentally disabled, senior citizens).
A majority of the respondents support the following solutions to housing constraints:
         Explore funding sources for infrastructure (e.g. water, sewer, drainage, streets) to
         support development;
         Amend zoning development regulations as an incentive for the development of
         housing for all income levels;
         Annually review permit and development impact fees to determine if they are a
         constraint to affordable housing development;
         Provide incentives for the building of affordable rental housing to serve senior
         citizens, the developmentally disabled, the physically disabled, homeless and the
         local workforce, and
         Promote mixed-use (combined residential and commercial) development.
Proposed Housing Programs within the Housing Element address solutions to reduce or
eliminate these constraints.
The City made a diligent effort to achieve involvement of all economic segments of the
community, particularly low-income and special needs groups, in the following manner:
         Special interest groups and agencies were provided copies of the Draft Housing
         Element and encouraged to comment on it.
         Written notice of the availability of the public review and final drafts of the
         Housing Element, with an invitation to provide written comments or comment
         in person at public hearings, and
         Through posted notices in public locations and published notices in the Mountain
         Democrat.
The City has found these outreach techniques to be effective in reaching the target
audience due to the small size of Placerville. The City has made copies of the Housing
              City of Placerville 2013-2021 Housing Element—FINAL—February 2014
                                               I - 24

Element available to the public free of charge during its preparation to facilitate public
review and comment.
The Placerville Planning Commission conducted a public meeting on the Housing
Element Update on February 19, 2013 to explain the purpose and contents of the Housing
Element, state requirements, key issues to be addressed, and current housing goals and
policies. Staff discussed City accomplishments regarding the 2008-2013 planning period
Housing Program implementation; Staff also sought and received public input regarding
potential Housing Programs for the 2013-2021 planning period. Input received was
encouraging of existing programs and the retaining of those suggested by Staff.
Notices of the City Council meeting and Planning Commission public workshop/public
hearings were posted on the City’s website and Facebook page, published in the local
newspaper, and posted at City Hall. Links to the draft 2013-2021 Housing Element and
associated documents were also posted on the City’s website and Facebook page, and
hard copies were available for review at City Hall and at the El Dorado County Public
Library, Placerville Branch.
The following community organizations were notified of the draft Housing Element
availability, requesting their input and comment:
         HELP Program; League of Women Voters; El Dorado County Habitat for
         Humanity; El Dorado County Affordable Housing Coalition; El Dorado
         Community Foundation; New Morning Youth and Family Services; El Dorado
         County Senior Day Care Center; Alta California Regional Center.
J. General Plan Consistency
The Housing Element is a component of the General Plan, which provides guiding policy
for all growth and development within the community. The General Plan consists of
seven Elements that address both state-mandated planning issues plus optional subjects
that are of particular concern within Placerville. These elements are:
         Land Use;
         Housing;
         Transportation;
         Public Facilities and Services;
         Natural, Cultural, and Scenic Resources;
         Health and Safety, and
         Community Design.
State law requires consistency among Chapters of the General Plan. As such, goals and
policies contained within the Housing Element should be interpreted and implemented
consistent with the goals and policies of the rest of the General Plan. To ensure that the
contents of the 2013-2021 Housing Element maintain consistency with the other Elements
              City of Placerville 2013-2021 Housing Element—FINAL—February 2014
                                               I - 25

of the adopted General Plan, a consistency analysis of the entire document was
conducted. Following are policies from the other General Plan elements that relate to
housing. The City has found these policies consistent with the policies set forth in this
Housing Element.
       Section I. Land Use Element
       Goal A, Policy 1: The City shall give infill development of vacant lands within
       the City limits priority over development in areas to be annexed, whenever
       feasible.
       Goal B, Policy 1: The City shall maintain an adequate supply of land in
       appropriate land use designations and zoning categories to accommodate
       projected household growth and achieve residential vacancy rates allowing
       turnover with relative ease.
       Goal B, Policy 2: The City shall promote the use of planned unit residential
       developments to maximize efficient and creative use of parcels while preserving
       trees, aesthetic rock outcrops, scenic views, open space, and other natural
       features.
       Goal B, Policy 3: The City shall discourage the development of small, isolated
       hillside residential areas that can be served only by long roads in steep terrain.
       Goal B, Policy 4: The City shall promote the protection and enhancement of the
       integrity and identity of residential neighborhoods.
       Section III. Transportation Element
       Goal A, Policy 7: The City shall prohibit the development of private streets in
       new residential projects, except in extraordinary circumstances. In such cases, the
       private streets shall be developed to City street standards.
       Goal B, Policy 1: New local streets shall be designed to discourage heavy through
       traffic within residential neighborhoods.
       Section V. Natural, Cultural, and Scenic Resources Element
       Goal G, Policy 6: The City shall support the efforts of property owners to
       preserve and renovate historic and architecturally significant structures. Where
       buildings cannot be preserved intact, the City shall seek to preserve the building
       facades.
       Section VI. Health and Safety Element
       Goal C: To prevent loss of lives, injury, and property damage due to flooding.
       Policy 1. The City shall continue to participate in the National Flood Insurance
       Program. To this end, the City shall ensure that local regulations are in full
            City of Placerville 2013-2021 Housing Element—FINAL—February 2014
                                             I - 26

         compliance with standards adopted by the Federal Emergency Management
         Agency.
         Policy 2. New residential development shall be constructed so that the lowest
         floor is at least one foot above the 100-year flood level.
         Policy 3. Non-residential development shall be anchored and flood-proofed to
         prevent damage from 100-year flood, or alternatively, elevated to at least one
         foot above the 100-year flood level.
         Policy 4. Existing development shall comply with policies VII.C.2 and VII.C.3
         when improvements are made costing at least 50 percent of the current market
         value of the structure before the improvements.
         Section VII. Community Design Element
         Goal C, Policy 1: The City shall promote and protect residential neighborhoods
         from incompatible uses.
         Goal C, Policy 3: In order to preserve, rehabilitate, or re-create historic structures
         in deteriorating older residential neighborhoods, the City shall encourage
         alternative uses if the uses are compatible with the adjacent neighborhood and if
         adequate parking and access are available or can be provided.
         Goal C, Policy 6: The City shall encourage proper maintenance of homes,
         buildings, and yards to provide the best possible visual quality in each
         neighborhood.
K. Other Statutory Compliance
         1.        Flood Hazards and Flood Management
Government Code Section 65302 requires all cities and counties to amend the safety and
conservation elements of their general plans to include analysis and policies regarding
flood hazard and flood management information, beginning with the next revision of
their housing element on, or after, January 1, 2009.
As mentioned, the City's Health and Safety Element contains a goal and several policies
pertaining to flood hazards and flood safety. In 2008, during the 2008-2013 planning
period, the City revised its Municipal Code to implement these General Plan policies to
promote the public health, safety, and general welfare, and to minimize public and
private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas. Provisions added to the Municipal
Code (Title 4 of Chapter 9: Construction Regulations) are designed to protect human life
and health through flood hazard reduction. Additional provisions include the adoption
by reference of the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) Flood Insurance
Rate Maps (FIRMs), and flood boundary and floodway maps (FBFMs), and all
subsequent amendments and/or revisions to these documents. These City actions
address the requirements of Government Code Section 65302.
              City of Placerville 2013-2021 Housing Element—FINAL—February 2014
                                               I - 27

         2.      Water and Sewer Priority
Chapter 727 amended Government Code Section 65589.7(a) as follows:
The housing element adopted by the legislative body and any amendments made to that
element shall be immediately delivered to all public agencies or private entities that
provide water or sewer services for municipal and industrial uses, including residential,
within the territory of the legislative body. Each public agency or private entity
providing water or sewer services shall grant a priority for the provision of these services to
proposed developments that include housing units affordable to lower income Households
[emphasis added].
Water supplied to the City is provided by the El Dorado Irrigation District, located at
2890 Mosquito Road, Placerville, CA 95667. The Development Services Department will
deliver to the District a copy of the Housing Element following its adoption by the City
Council.
The Public Works Department (PWD) manages the City’s sanitary sewer collection
system. The City’s local sewers discharge into the City’s wastewater treatment facility for
treatment and disposal. The Development Services Department will deliver a copy of the
Housing Element to the PWD following its adoption by the City Council.
         3.      Disadvantaged Communities
The City also recognizes that recent changes to State law (SB 244), upon update of the
Housing Element, to update to the Land Use Element to address the provision of public
services and infrastructure to disadvantaged unincorporated communities within the
City of Placerville Sphere of Influence.
Senate Bill 244 (SB 244), which became law in October 7, 2011, requires that following an
update of the Housing Element, an update to the Land Use Element occur to address the
provision of public services and infrastructure to disadvantaged unincorporated
communities (DUCs) within the City of Placerville’s Sphere of Influence. SB 244 defines a
DUC as a place that meets the following criteria:
         Contains 10 or more dwelling units in close proximity to one another;
         Is either within a city Sphere of Influence (SOI), is an island within a city
         boundary, or is geographically isolated and has existed for more than 50 years;
         and
         Has a median household income that is 80 percent or less than the statewide
         median household income. In California, this equates to $46,166 annually.
The Local Agency Formation Commission (LAFCO) is responsible for identifying DUCs
within the City’s SOI. LAFCO provided the City with a map showing areas within the
City’s SOI that may contain DUCs using the State Department of Water Resources
             City of Placerville 2013-2021 Housing Element—FINAL—February 2014
                                              I - 28

(DWR) Disadvantaged Communities (DAC) Mapping Tool (Appendix F). None of the
housing clusters shown on the DAC map within the City’s SOI were determined to have
substandard services including water, wastewater, stormwater drainage, or fire
protection services. These parcels typically are more rural in nature and are one acre or
more in size. Potable water service is provided by the El Dorado Irrigation District,
supplying water to the City and to those lands located within the City’s SOI. The City-
operated Waste Water Treatment Plant services city residents and a number of customers
outside the City limits. Fire protection services are proved by the El Dorado County Fire
Protection District.
The City of Placerville does not have a formal annexation policy, and annexations
proposals have been considered on a case-by-case basis upon application by the land
owner. The primary incentive for annexation has been to obtain City-provided sewer
service in anticipation of a development application. The City itself has historically not
pursued annexations aggressively and past City-sponsored annexations have been
protested by property owners. Policy A.8 of the General Plan Land Use Element states
that the City shall aggressively pursue the annexation of the Sphere of influence of the City of
Placerville and areas beyond the Sphere of Influence in areas that are designated for urbanization.
Urbanized areas in close proximity to the City shall be annexed to the City of Placerville.
Pursuant to California Government Code 56375.3, beginning in June 28, 2011, the City
formally sought to annex “island” properties that are located within the City’s SOI and
are substantially surrounded by the City boundary. All of the residential areas, with the
exception of the Smith Flat area, were included in the proposed annexation. On February
12, 2013, the City Council directed staff to cease the island annexation process primarily
due to questionable benefits of annexation and public opposition, with the potential for
future consideration. With respect to the Smith Flat area, Policy A.9 of the Land Use
Element states that the City shall prepare and adopt specific plans for areas with special
planning concern, including the Smith Flat area.
The City will continue to ensure consistency between the Housing Element and other
General Plan Elements so that policies introduced in one element are consistent with
other elements.
              City of Placerville 2013-2021 Housing Element—FINAL—February 2014
                                               I - 29

II.                        COMMUNITY PROFILE
A. Introduction
The purpose of this section is to identify significant trends, changes in conditions since
the adoption of the 2008 Housing Element, and to determine current and future unmet
housing needs in Placerville. This Section of the Housing Element provides specific
background information on Placerville, including:
         Population trends;
         Population and household characteristics;
         Household income and poverty status;
         Housing characteristics and cost trends;
         Housing conditions;
         Indicators of housing needs, such as overpayment and overcrowding;
         Special housing needs among certain segments of the population;
         Employment characteristics and trends;
         Subsidized rental housing at risk of converting to market-rate housing, and
         Placerville’s share of the region’s future housing needs.
Population and other demographic variables provide insight into the type and amount of
housing needed in a community. Factors such as age, cultural background, household
size, occupation, and income influence housing preferences, the type of housing needed,
and the ability of individuals to afford housing. Some of the characteristics of Placerville
residents that have significance for housing need are:
                                 1. Age
                                 Age is an important factor in projecting future housing
                                 need; incomes, lifestyles, mobility and housing preferences
                                 change as people age. For example, young adults typically
                                 have lower incomes and smaller families than older adults,
                                 and often rent housing. As households age, incomes and
                                 ability to afford larger homes often increases. As
                                 individuals reach retirement, their lifestyles, housing
                                 preferences and future earning potential change again.
                                 Many retired adults look for housing and communities
                                 designed to meet their preferences and physical abilities.
             City of Placerville 2013-2021 Housing Element—FINAL—February 2014
                                             CP - 30

         2. Cultural Factors
Cultural characteristics of the population may affect housing need due to differences in
lifestyle and household composition associated with different population groups. For
example, some cultural groups may have a higher proportion of large households with
extended family members.
         3. Income
Household income is the most important factor affecting housing opportunity, because it
determines a household’s ability to purchase or rent housing and balance housing costs
with other necessities. Income levels affect housing choices such as location, housing type
and the ability to own versus rent a home. While higher-income households have more
discretionary income to spend on housing, low- and moderate-income households face
greater limits in the range of housing that they can afford.
         4. Special Needs
Some population groups have special housing needs by virtue of their physical or
developmental capabilities, childcare needs, occupations, and other factors. Examples of
special needs groups are seniors, persons with disabilities, large families, single-parent
households, farmworkers and their families, and homeless individuals and families.
B. Population Characteristics
         1. Population Trends
Placerville’s population increased by 779 people, or 8.1 percent, between 2000 and 2010,
according to the California Department of Finance. The rate of population growth has
increased slightly between 2006 and 2009, from 1.5 percent annually to 2.1 percent
annually. Population projections for the City of Placerville suggest that the increasing
rate of population growth will continue. The Sacramento Area Council of Governments
projects the City’s population at 14,930 people in the year 2020 given growth trends and
the City’s General Plan population projections. This population, if achieved, will
represent a 55 percent increase (annual growth rate of 2.75 percent) over the City’s 2000
population.
Table 2 compares the 2000 and 2010 populations in El Dorado County, including the City
of Placerville. Table 3 shows population projections for Placerville and El Dorado
County.
             City of Placerville 2013-2021 Housing Element—FINAL—February 2014
                                             CP - 31

                                     Table 2: Population Trends
                                                                      Numeric   Percent
       Jurisdiction                  2000                2010
                                                                      Change    Change
  El Dorado County                     158,621         181,058         22,437    14.1%
  Placerville                            9,610          10,389          779       8.1%
  South Lake Tahoe                      23,609          21,403         -2,206    -9.3%
                                       Source: U.S. Census 2000; 2010
                                 Table 3: Population Projections
                                                                      Numeric   Percent
       Jurisdiction                  2010                2035
                                                                      Change    Change
 El Dorado County                  181,058             248,623         67,565    37.3%
 Placerville                        10,389              23,609         13,220   127.2%
                                     Source: CA Department of Finance
        2. Age Characteristics
Population growth that occurred in Placerville between 2000 and 2010 can be attributed
to increases in the number of children and persons ages 45 to74. Other age groups that
experienced moderate increases in numbers were persons age 25 to 34, and persons 60 to
64. Persons age 35 to 44 represented the age group with the largest reduction in numbers.
These changes in the age composition of the City’s population suggests adults between
45 and 74 who have "aged in place" in Placerville and other adults who have moved to
the City since 2000. Table 4 shows Placerville’s population by age group in 2000 and
2010.
              City of Placerville 2013-2021 Housing Element—FINAL—February 2014
                                                  CP - 32

                                     Table 4: Age Distribution
                                            2000                         2010
           Age
                                  Number              Percent    Number         Percent
 Under 5                             628                6.5%       662            6.4%
 5 to 9                              671                7.0%       605            5.8%
 10 to 14                            708                7.4%       601            5.8%
 15 to 19                            717                7.5%       690            6.6%
 20 to 24                            583                6.1%       691            6.7%
 25 to 34                           1,102              11.5%      1,346          13.0%
 35 to 44                           1,420              14.8%      1,122          10.8%
 45 to 54                           1,320              13.7%      1,501          14.4%
 55 to 59                            446                4.6%       722            6.9%
 60 to 64                            345                3.6%       608            5.9%
 65 to 74                            729                7.6%       807            7.8%
 75 to 84                            663                6.9%       623            6.0%
 85 and Over                         278                2.9%       411            4.0%
 Total                              9,610             100.0%      10,389        100.0%
                                          Source: SACOG 2012
          3. Race/Ethnic Characteristics
The most significant change in the cultural background of Placerville’s residents between
2000 and 2010 has been a doubling of population self-identified as being of Latino or
Hispanic origin. Over the ten-year period, the number of such residents increased from
six to 13 percent of the population. Conversely, the non-Hispanic White population
decreased from 91 to 83 percent of the population, although the numbers of such
residents increased by nearly 400. Other race and ethnic population groups experienced
moderate changes during the ten-year period.
Table 5 compares the population numbers and percentages, by race and ethnicity,
between 2000 and 2010.
              City of Placerville 2013-2021 Housing Element—FINAL—February 2014
                                                CP - 33

                                     Table 5: Race/Ethnicity
                                                         2000                 2010
            Race/Ethnicity
                                               Number         Percent Number       Percent
 White                                           7,988          83%    7,938        76.4%
 Asian                                             90           0.9%     88          .85%
 American Indian, Eskimo, or Aleut                 96            1%     122           1%
 African American                                  22           0.2%     78          .75%
 Other                                            202            2%     300           3%
 Latino/Hispanic Origin                           1212          13%    1,863         18%
 Total                                           9,610         100%    10,389       100%
                                 Source: U.S. Census 2000; SACOG 2012
         4. Household Characteristics
In 2003, Placerville was home to 4,252 households, according to the California
Department of Finance, and in 2009, the number of households increased to
approximately 4,508. Over 60 percent of households were family households, two or
more persons who are related in some way sharing a dwelling unit. Placerville’s
percentage of family households is lower than that countywide (73 percent), possibly due
to a larger number of residents who are single adults and seniors. Between 2000 and
2010, the number of family households decreased slightly (-25), as did the percentage of
family households. The proportion of non-family households increased by two percent.
Minimal change in household size occurred between 1990 and 2000. In 2010, the average
household size was 2.37, about the same as in 2000 when it was 2.34. This trend is
expected to continue. The trends in household characteristics suggest that single adults
and other non-family households are moving to Placerville at a greater rate. During the
same period, the number of families with children and the number of large families also
increased, as suggested by a rise in average family size to balance the increase in smaller
non-family households.
As defined in the U.S. Census, "Group Quarters" are a place where people live or stay, in
a group living arrangement, that is owned or managed by an entity or organization
providing housing and/or services for the residents. This is not a typical household-type
living arrangement. These services may include custodial or medical care as well as other
types of assistance, and residency is commonly restricted to those receiving these
services. People living in group quarters are usually not related to each other. Examples
of group quarters include Correctional facilities; Juvenile facilities; Nursing homes;
Hospitals with long-term care facilities; College or university dormitories, fraternities,
             City of Placerville 2013-2021 Housing Element—FINAL—February 2014
                                                CP - 34

sororities; Dormitories for workers; Religious group quarters; Shelters; and, Group
homes. The 2010 census count of the number of Placerville residents living in group
quarters was approximately 300 higher than in 2000.
Table 6 shows the changes in household characteristics in Placerville between 2000 and
2010.
             Table 6: Changes in Household Type (Occupied Housing Units)
                                                          2000                   2010
          Household by Type
                                               Number            Percent  Number      Percent
 Household Population
 Total Households                                    4,001           100%  4,129       100%
 Average Household Size                               2.34                  2.37
 Family Households                                   2,486            62%  2,461        60%
  Married Couple Families                            1,667            42%  1,607        16%
  With children                                        687            17%   603         15%
  Female Householder, no Spouse                        637            16%   604         15%
  With children                                        440            11%   375         9%
 Non-Family Households                               1,515            38%  1,668        40%
 Group Quarters (Non-Household Population)
 Persons in Group Quarters                             262             3%   601         6%
                                      Source: U.S. Census 2000; 2010
          5. Household Income
According to the US Census, American Community Survey Data, the median income in
Placerville was approximately $52,000, over $17,000 less than the median income for El
Dorado County, but approximately $8,000 more than the median income for South Lake
Tahoe. Lower incomes in Placerville are generally related to the types of jobs available in
the City, the large number of renter households, and the concentration of social services
that attract special needs populations.
The estimated median family income for El Dorado County in 2012 was $70,000,
according to US Census. Table 7 compares median incomes for El Dorado County and its
cities in 2012.
              City of Placerville 2013-2021 Housing Element—FINAL—February 2014
                                                 CP - 35

                              Table 7: Median Income by Jurisdiction
                                            Median Household            % of El Dorado County
             Jurisdiction
                                                  Income                    Median Income
Placerville                                        $52,216                       75.0%
South Lake Tahoe                                   $44,217                       63.2%
El Dorado County                                   $70,000                        0.0%
                 Source: U.S. Census 2006—2012 American Community Survey; SACOG 2012
 Federal guidelines define five levels of income based on the family median income:
          extremely low (0 – 30 percent of median income);
          very low (31 – 50 percent of median income);
          low (51 – 80 percent of median income);
          moderate (81 – 120 percent of median income), and
          above moderate (over 120 percent of median income).
          6. Poverty & Extremely Low Income Households
 The poverty rate within an area can be used as another indicator of housing need. The
 poverty rate measures the proportion of the population with subsistence-level incomes.
 Subsistence income is the minimum income required to obtain a nutritious diet, clothing,
 shelter, and other basic life necessities. The poverty threshold is a dollar amount, which
 varies by household size, established annually by the Census Bureau. The 2012 poverty
 threshold for a single person under 65 years of age was $11,995. The poverty threshold
 for a family of two adults and two children was $23,283.
 Placerville residents have a significantly higher rate of poverty than residents
 countywide due to lower incomes discussed previously. In 2010, 14 percent of
 Placerville’s population lived in poverty, while countywide approximately 8.4 percent of
 residents lived in poverty. Female-headed households were most likely to live in
 poverty, particularly those with children under eighteen years old (approximately a 29
 percent poverty rate).
 Table 8 shows poverty status by population and family type in 2010 in Placerville and El
 Dorado County.
               City of Placerville 2013-2021 Housing Element—FINAL—February 2014
                                                CP - 36

                                 Table 8: Poverty Status in 2010
                                                   Placerville           El Dorado
                                                    Percent               Percent
           Total Population                            14%                  8.4%
               Under 18                               20.3%                10.8%
                18 to 64                               12 %                 8.5%
                  65 +                                12.9%                  4%
              Households
         Family Households                             8.3%                 5.5%
        With children under 18                        14.3%                  9%
         With children under 5                        19.8%                 6.5%
    Female householder, no spouse                     22.1%                20.5%
        With children under 18                        28.6%                28.6%
         With children under 5                         26%                 36.7%
                            Source: American Community Survey 2007-2011
HUD income limits for assistance for households of various sizes is not available at city
level, but according to 2007-2011 ACS estimates of median income, extremely low income
in Placerville equates to a household earning $16,015 or less annually. According to 2006-
2010 CHAS data, this equates to 530 extremely-low-income households—those earning
up to 30 percent of the area median household income—which is approximately 12.8%
percent of the households in Placerville.
Extremely-low-income households can represent a wide array of demographics, from a
single person working full-time at minimum wage, to a family of five living on the salary
of a householder who makes less than $25,000 a year, to seniors and disabled veterans
living on very limited benefits. The overpayment for housing which is a commonly
synonymous with extremely-low-income households may lead to inability to afford
routine maintenance, which in turn can lead to deteriorated housing conditions. Thus,
the provision of affordable, suitable housing for these demographics can require more
aggressive and specially-targeted housing programs.
             City of Placerville 2013-2021 Housing Element—FINAL—February 2014
                                              CP - 37

C. Housing Stock Characteristics
         1. Housing Type
In 2010, Placerville’s housing stock consisted of 4,667 housing units, including vacant
units. The housing unit count is higher than the number of households shown in Table 6.
Single-family dwelling units comprise approximately 68 percent of the City’s housing
stock, multi-family housing 29 percent, and mobile homes 3.5 percent. Placerville’s
housing stock increased by 10 percent over the last ten years. Between 2000 and 2010, the
housing stock increased at an annual rate of 1 percent. Placerville gained approximately
460 housing units between 2000 and 2010. Approximately 60 percent of the increase, or
285 housing units, consisted of attached and detached single-family dwellings.
Table 9 shows changes in housing stock from 2000 to 2010. The number of housing units
by type is greater than shown in Table 10 because it includes vacant housing units.
                                   Table 9: Housing by Type
                                       2000                                    2010
  Housing Type
                          Number                Percent             Number          Percent
Detached Single-
                                   2,617                62%            2,894          62%
Family
Attached Single-
                                     254                 6%             262           5.6%
Family
2-4 Units                            535                13%             628          13.5%
5+ Units                             642                15%             720          15.4%
Mobile Homes                         158                 4%             163           3.5%
Total                              4,206               100%            4,667         100%
                   Source: U.S. Census 2000, CA Department of Finance, SACOG 2012
         2. Tenure
One indicator of the housing market is housing tenure. Tenure refers to whether a unit is
owner-occupied or renter-occupied. Communities need an adequate supply of units
available both for rent and for sale in order to accommodate a range of households with
varying income, family size and composition, and lifestyle.
Table 10 provides a comparison of the number of owner-occupied and renter-occupied
units in the City in 2010 as compared to the county as a whole. It reveals that the level of
             City of Placerville 2013-2021 Housing Element—FINAL—February 2014
                                               CP - 38

homeownership for the City (52 percent) is substantially lower than the level for the
county (80 percent).
Table 10 compares tenure by jurisdiction in El Dorado County.
                           Table 10: Tenure by Jurisdiction (2010)
                                          Renter-Occupied             Owner-Occupied
           Jurisdiction
                                       Number           Percent     Number         Percent
 Placerville                             1,969           47.7        2,160           52.3
 El Dorado County                       11,418           20.0        45,758          80.0
                                       Source: U.S. Census 2010
Elderly households can have special needs resulting from limited and often fixed income;
poor health and associated high health care costs; mobility limitation and transit
dependency; and high costs of housing.
In 2010, about 28 percent of the City’s households were headed by seniors (persons ages
65 or older). Of these senior headed households, approximately 19 percent owned their
homes, while 9 percent rented their homes. Table 11 compares tenure by elderly
householder in 2010.
Many elderly persons are dependent on fixed incomes or have disabilities. Elderly
homeowners may be physically unable to maintain their homes or cope with living alone.
The housing needs of this group can be addressed through smaller units, second units on
lots with existing homes, shared living arrangements, congregate housing and
housing assistance programs.
                       Table 11: Elderly Households by Tenure (2010)
                                                Owners                       Renters
        Householder Age
                                      Households           Percent  Households       Percent
 Under 65 years                            1387             64.2%       1601           81.3
 65 to 74                                   342             15.8%        145            7.4
 75 to 84                                   293             13.6%        122            6.2
 85 and over                                138              6.4%        101            5.1
 Total Households                          2,160            100%        1,969         100%
                                  Source: 2010 Census; SACOG (2012)
             City of Placerville 2013-2021 Housing Element—FINAL—February 2014
                                                CP - 39

          3. Vacancy
The 2007-2011 ACS reported housing vacancy rates in the City. Table 12 compares the
vacancy rates between the City and El Dorado County in 2012. Placerville’s rental
vacancy rate is approximately 4 percent. The rental vacancy rate for the county is 2.5
percent. The City’s and the County’s vacancy rate for ownership housing was
approximately 1.5 percent.
                Table 12: Housing Vacancy: Placerville vs. El Dorado County
                                                                  Placerville            El Dorado County
                                                                          Percent                     Percent
                                                           Number                        Number
                                                                          of Total                    of Total
  Total Housing Units                                         4,541         100%          88,159       100%
      Occupied Units                                          4,129          90.9         70,223        31.4
       -   Owner occupied                                     2,160          47.6         51,391        58.3
       -   Renter Occupied                                    1,969          43.3         18,832        21.4
      Total Vacant Units                                       412            9.1         17,936        20.3
       -   For Rent                                            166            3.7          2,139         2.4
       -   For Sale Only                                        78            1.7          1,278         1.4
       -   Rented/Sold, Not Occupied                            25            0.6           336          0.4
       -   For Seasonal or Occasional Use                       40            0.9         12,677        14.4
       -   For Migrant Workers                                   1            .02             6          .01
       -   Other Vacant                                        102            2.2          1,500         1.7
Note: ACS data is based on a fairly small sample of the population. ACS housing questionnaire responses are
then extrapolated for the City at large. This may result in a larger margin of error. Source: ACS; SACOG (2012)
          4. Overcrowding
The U.S. Census Bureau considers a household to be overcrowded when there is more
than one person per room, excluding bathrooms and kitchens, and severely overcrowded
when there are more than 1.5 occupants per room. Accelerated deterioration of a home
may occur from over-use associated with more people living in the dwelling than the
number for which it is designed. Table 13 summarizes housing overcrowding n the City
between 2007 and 2011.
               City of Placerville 2013-2021 Housing Element—FINAL—February 2014
                                                     CP - 40

                                    Table 13: Overcrowding
           Household Type                          Placerville       El Dorado County
  Owner - Occupied                                      95                   995
      Overcrowded                                       80                   810
      Severely Overcrowded                              15                   185
  Renter - Occupied                                    105                  1,050
      Overcrowded                                       80                   795
      Severely Overcrowded                              25                   255
                                 Source: 2005-2009 CHAS; SACOG 2012
         5. Housing Costs
Housing costs in Placerville have increased faster than local incomes, leading to an
increasing gap in affordability, particularly for residents with extremely low or very low
incomes. Many individuals who live and work in the Placerville area have also been
negatively affected by the rise in housing costs, as most of the jobs available locally pay
low-to-moderate wages (see Section D, Employment Trends). Placerville, along with
many other Sierra foothill communities, has experienced growing interest among higher-
paid workers who commute to jobs in the Sacramento region and among older
individuals and retirees who have "cashed out" the equity in their homes to move to the
foothills.
At the same time as demand for housing has increased, the number of easy-to-develop
parcels has diminished. Most of the remaining vacant or underused properties in the City
and surrounding area, while buildable, contain slopes, protected natural resources, are
odd-shaped infill parcels, or exhibit other factors that increase the cost of building
housing.
                 a. Housing Prices
In 2012, the median price for a single-family home sold in Placerville was $185,000,
according to DataQuick. Home sales over the 2012 calendar year indicate that the median
price decreased approximately twenty percent since 2003 (median sales price in 2003 was
$230,000). This median sales price was over 3.5 times the $52,216 median income of
Placerville residents. Most households can afford to spend between three and four times
their annual incomes on housing without paying more than 30 percent of their incomes
for shelter expenses.
             City of Placerville 2013-2021 Housing Element—FINAL—February 2014
                                                CP - 41

                 b. Rents
Between 2003 and 2009, the median contract rent in Placerville increased by
approximately 37 percent, from $727 (August) to $998 (August). Contract rent is the
dollar amount a renter pays under a rental or lease agreement, excluding utility costs
(unless these costs are included in the rental agreement). There is a significant amount of
government subsidized rental housing in Placerville that is rent- and income-restricted,
which means that Census reports do not reflect current market rents.
Table 14 provides rental rates, as provided by property managers of market-rate housing
units in Placerville.
                              Table 14: Market-Rate Rents (2009)
                                                  Average Rent            Average Rent
             Apartments
                                                        2003                   2009
            One Bedroom                                 $615                   $822
            Two Bedrooms                                $710                   $910
           Three Bedrooms                               $855                  $1262
               Average                                  $727                   $998
                                  Source: Phone survey, 2003 and 2009
Federal government estimates fair market rents for each county as part of the Housing
Choice Voucher (Section 8) Program. The fair market rent is the dollar amount a property
owner is entitled to receive, less utility costs, for a rental unit occupied by a low-income
tenant with a federal housing voucher. The difference between contract rents (the
amount tenants pay) and fair market rents is the amount that the federal government
pays. The fair market rent can provide a general indicator of market rents and trends.
The 2012 fair market rents in the Sacramento Primary Metropolitan Statistical Area
(PMSA), which is comprised of El Dorado, Placer, and Sacramento Counties, ranged
from $736 for a studio apartment to $1,689 for a four-bedroom rental unit.
                 c. Housing Affordability
An accepted measure of housing affordability is that housing payments (rent, mortgage,
insurance, utilities, property taxes, etc.) do not exceed 30% of a household’s gross
income. Households paying more than 30 percent are deemed to "overpay" for housing.
Table 16 below demonstrates that 1,870 households, or approximately 45% of Placerville's
households, are overpaying for their housing.
Housing affordability data specific to the City of Placerville is not available. However,
affordability data for El Dorado County, which assumes a family of four, revealed that
for a family at Very Low income level thirty percent of monthly gross income equates to
             City of Placerville 2013-2021 Housing Element—FINAL—February 2014
                                               CP - 42

maximum monthly gross rent of approximately $950. The maximum home purchase
price for a similar family at Very Low income level would by approximately $116,500.
                      Table 15: Housing Affordability by Income Level
                                               Very Low                             Moderate
                                                                 Low Income
                                                 Income                              Income
            Annual Income                         38,050             60,900           91,300
   Maximum Monthly Gross Rent                       951               1,523            2,283
   Maximum Home Purchase Price                   116,503            206,200          324,765
                   Source: HCD Income Limits; El Dorado County 2013 Housing Element
                               Table 16: Overpayment by Tenure
                                                  Units              Units
           Income Category                  Overpaying—         Overpaying—         TOTAL
                                                 Owners             Renters
       Extremely & Very Low                         350                525              875
                  Low                               230                180              410
               Moderate                             315                 45              360
           Above Moderate                           210                 15              225
                TOTAL                              1,105               765            1,870
                                          Source: SACOG 2012
         6. Housing Age and Condition
Age of housing is an important characteristic of supply because it often indicates housing
condition. Some federal and state programs use the age of housing as one factor to
determine housing rehabilitation needs. In 2010, approximately 2,900 City housing units,
or 62 percent of the total housing stock, was at least 30 years old or more, shown in Table
17. Homes that are at least 30 years old have a greater risk of deterioration associated
with improper maintenance and repair.
A housing conditions survey has not been conducted within Placerville since 1998. The
1998 survey was not conducted Citywide but targeted 862 housing units (approximately
21 percent of the City’s housing stock) in a part of the City with a concentration of older
housing units and lower-income households. The survey found that 35 percent of the
housing stock needed rehabilitation, and three percent needed replacement. Because the
target area represented a part of the City with a concentration of older housing units and
lower-income households, the City considers the target area result as a maximum
              City of Placerville 2013-2021 Housing Element—FINAL—February 2014
                                                CP - 43

probable estimate of housing rehabilitation need. These percentages, applied Citywide,
yielded a housing rehabilitation need of approximately 1,580 housing units, and a
replacement need of approximately 135 housing units.
City permit records are not detailed enough to determine the number of home
improvements that involved upgrading or rehabilitation of substandard housing units to
sound condition. An updated housing condition survey could confirm the extent of
housing disrepair within the City. To address the need for an updated housing condition
survey, Housing Program 21 will target the acquisition of funds such as CDBG in fiscal
year 2015/2015 to assist with this effort.
                                   Table 17: Year Housing Built
                Year Built                            Number                      Percent
 2000 or Later                                           461                        9.9%
 1990 to 1999                                            630                       13.4%
 1980 to 1989                                            678                       14.5%
 1970 to 1979                                            794                        17%
 1960 to 1969                                            536                       11.5%
 1950 to 1959                                            540                       11.6%
 1940 to 1949                                            342                        7.3%
 1939 or Earlier                                         686                       14.7%
 Total                                                  4,667                      100%
                        Source: SACOG (2012); American Community Survey (ACS)
D. Employment
Employment in Placerville is dominated by retail, education, and technical services.
According to the State Employment Development Department, approximately 5,400
individuals were employed in Placerville. Of these workers, 13.7 percent were employed
by retail establishments, 24.9 percent were employed in educational services, and 12.5
percent by scientific and other technical agencies.
                   Table 18: County and City Unemployment Rates, 2013
         Jurisdiction               Labor Force       Employment            Unemployment
     El Dorado County                  90,700             82,900            7,800         8.6%
          Placerville                   5,400             4,700               700         13%
              City of Placerville 2013-2021 Housing Element—FINAL—February 2014
                                               CP - 44

According to the State Employment Development Department (2009), major employers
in El Dorado County are retail businesses, health care and health service firms, public
agencies (federal government, county, and educational), and lodging establishments.
                              Table 19: Employment by Industry
                              Industry                                  Number        Percent
              Farming, Natural Resources, Mining                           91           2.1%
                           Construction                                   348           7.9%
                          Manufacturing                                   285           6.4%
                         Wholesale Trade                                   58           1.3%
                           Retail Trade                                   606          13.7%
           Transportation, Warehousing, and Utilities                     184           4.2%
                           Information                                    103           2.3%
                        Financial Activities                              242           5.5%
        Professional, Scientific, and Technical Services                  552          12.5%
                       Educational Services                              1,105         24.9%
              Arts, Entertainment, and Recreation                         222           5.0%
                           Government                                     344           7.8%
                                Other                                     290           6.5%
                                  Source: 2006-2012 ACS; SACOG 2012
                          Table 20: Major Employers in Placerville
               Employer Name                                          Industry
 Child Development Programs                                      Child Care Services
 El Dorado County                                               Government Services
 El Dorado Union High School District                                Education
 El Dorado Irrigation District                              Water & Sewage Co.- Utilities
 Marshall Hospital                                                    Hospitals
 MORE Recycling Centers                                       Recycling Centers (Whls)
 Placerville Union School District                                   Education
             City of Placerville 2013-2021 Housing Element—FINAL—February 2014
                                                CP - 45

                                            Source: EDD 2009
Approximately 700 people, or 13 percent of the work force, are unemployed in Placerville
in 2013. This marks an approximate 3 percent decrease in unemployment since 2009.
Table 21 provides a comparison of Placerville’s unemployment rates with those of El
Dorado County, whose ratio of unemployed residents is nearly half that of the City.
                   Table 21: County and City Unemployment Rates, 2013
         Jurisdiction               Labor Force        Employment             Unemployment
      El Dorado County                 90,700              82,900             7,800    8.6%
          Placerville                   5,400              4,700               700     13%
                       Source: EDD Labor Force Data—April 2013 Preliminary Data
E. Special Housing Needs
This section of the Housing Element provides a discussion of "special" housing needs
populations in Placerville. State law (California Government Code Section 65583)
identifies the following "special needs" groups: seniors, persons with disabilities, female-
headed households (primarily elderly women living alone and single-parent
households), large families, farmworkers, and persons and families in need of emergency
shelter. These groups encounter greater difficulty finding decent, affordable housing due
to circumstances related to occupation, income, family characteristics, medical condition,
or disability.
This section details the housing and supportive services needed by these special groups
and identifies the programs and services available to these populations within
Placerville. A focus of the Housing Element is to ensure that all people residing in
Placerville have access to suitable housing.
         1. Seniors
Seniors (typically defined as persons 65 years of age or more) have special housing needs
due to three primary concerns:
         Low incomes with limited potential for income growth to keep pace with rising
         costs of living;
         High health care costs, and
         Self-care or independent living limitations (such as physical disabilities and other
         health-related disabilities).
              City of Placerville 2013-2021 Housing Element—FINAL—February 2014
                                                CP - 46

Approximately 1,141 households (28 percent of all households) in Placerville were
headed by persons 65 years and older in 2010. Of these, In 773 senior households were
homeowners (68 percent) and 368 were renters (32 percent). Senior homeowners may
have difficulty in performing regular home maintenance or repair activities because of
physical or other limitations. In addition, because many seniors have limited incomes,
they may have difficulty absorbing increases in housing-related expenses. Elderly
women are especially in need of financial assistance because so many of them live alone
and have lower incomes than seniors as a group (Table 11).
Various programs can help meet the needs of seniors, including congregate care,
supportive services, rental subsidies, shared housing, and housing rehabilitation
assistance. For the frail elderly or those with disabilities, housing with features that
accommodate disabilities can help ensure continued independent living. Elderly people
with mobility/self care limitations also benefit from transportation alternatives. The El
Dorado County Senior and Family Service program provides information and referrals to
seniors. The County also administers a nutrition program for seniors that include Meals
on Wheels. The El Dorado County Department of Mental Health administers a senior
peer counseling program in Placerville.
There are several senior care facilities, including nursing, residential, and assisted-living
facilities in Placerville that are licensed by the California Department of Social Services.
These include adult residential care facilities that provide care to seniors as well as
developmentally disabled and/or mentally disabled adults. Adult day care facilities also
provide programs for frail elderly and developmentally disabled and/or mentally
disabled adults in a day care setting. There is one such facility in Placerville, the El
Dorado County Senior Day Care Center, with a capacity to serve 60 people. Senior Day
Care Services is a private facility that provides non-medical services and supervision to
seniors with physical, mental, and/or emotional disorders. When considered together,
larger facilities located within Placerville that are licensed by the State have the capacity
to serve approximately 107 people. There are also numerous facilities throughout the
City that provide care to six or fewer seniors. Table 22 lists facilities licensed by the
California Department of Social Services that are available to residents of the City of
Placerville.
              City of Placerville 2013-2021 Housing Element—FINAL—February 2014
                                              CP - 47

                                    Table 22: Senior Care Facilities 1
                                     Facility                                                 Capacity
 County Gardens                                                                                             6
 Eskaton Village Placerville                                                                               74
 Gables LLC Retirement Home                                                                                 6
 Sierra Manor                                                                                              15
 Sunshine Manor                                                                                            14
 Valley View Guest Home                                                                                     6
 Total                                                                                                    121
                               Source: EDD Labor Force Data for Sub-county Areas
Given the growing desire of older adults to retire in the foothills, an increasing
percentage of such individuals may need self-care assistance at some point in their lives.
The City can expect to experience an increasing demand for housing and supportive
services geared to seniors.
          2. Persons with Disabilities
Persons with disabilities have special housing needs because of their low incomes, the
lack of accessible and affordable housing, higher health care and other living costs
associated with their conditions, and their capacity to live independently (many persons
with disabilities need a supervised group living environment). The State of California
broadly defines a disability as a physical, mental, or emotional condition that lasts over a
long period of time, makes it difficult to live independently, and affects one or more
major life activities. The 2000 Census defines six types of disabilities:
          Employment disability;
          Physical disability;
          Mental disability;
          Sensory disability;
          Self-care limitation, and
          "Go-outside-home" limitation.
1 Licensed by the State of California in Placerville City Limits, per State Department of Social Services
               City of Placerville 2013-2021 Housing Element—FINAL—February 2014
                                                       CP - 48

Approximately 2,077 people with disabilities resided in Placerville in 2000, or 22 percent
of the population. Of these individuals, 620 were age 65 or more. An individual that
reports having a disability may not necessarily require special services to facilitate
independent living. Living arrangements generally depend on the severity of the
disability. Many individuals are able to live independently with family members. To
sustain independent living, people with disabilities may need special housing design
features, income support, and in-home supportive services for medical conditions.
In addition, State law requires that the Housing Element discuss the housing needs of
persons with developmental disabilities. Under Section 4512 of the State Welfare and
Institutions Code, "developmental disability" means a disability that originates before an
individual attains age 18 years, continues, or can be expected to continue, indefinitely,
and constitutes a substantial disability for that individual. The term shall include mental
retardation, cerebral palsy, epilepsy, and autism disabilities.
The Alta California Regional Center operates one of their 21 offices in Placerville that
provides assistance to persons with developmental disabilities and their families. The
Center assists its clients in coordinating health care and other services to provide clients
with an avenue to efficiently utilize and maximize resources that are available.
Per data from the Sacramento Area Council of Governments (2012), as of November
2012, a total of 257 residents with developmental disabilities were identified in the
Placerville ZIP Code and were being assisted at the Regional Center in Placerville. Of this
total, 63 residents are between 0 to 14 years of age; there are 51 resident are between 15 to
22 years of age; with 128 residents between 23 to 54 years of age; there are 12 residents
between 55 to 64 years of age, and 3 residents 65 years of age and older.
People with severe mental disabilities, psychiatric disabilities that impair one’s ability to
function in the community, are in need of different assistance than a person with a
physical disability. A 2008 estimate by the Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services
Administration indicates that approximately 4.5 percent of the adult population (18+) in
the country suffers from mental illness. This would indicate that approximately 468
residents of Placerville may suffer from some form of mental illness. The El Dorado
County Department of Mental Health offers 24-hour psychiatric counseling and
administers programs at four facilities within Placerville. One of the facilities provides
peer counseling specifically for seniors.
Some individuals with disabilities may require a group living environment in which
partial or constant supervision is provided by trained personnel. As discussed above, the
adult residential facilities identified in Table 22 and the adult day care programs provide
assistance to persons with disabilities, including seniors. These facilities are able to
provide assistance to over 100 individuals. Mother Lode Rehabilitation administers
programs in Placerville that include vocational training, job placement, independent
living training, semi-independent residential training, and practical skills such as
banking, shopping, and money handling. This facility has the capacity to provide
              City of Placerville 2013-2021 Housing Element—FINAL—February 2014
                                              CP - 49

services to approximately 150 people.
The needs of persons with disabilities are varied and many, and resources available to
assist such individuals are rarely sufficient to meet the demand for services. Of the
service providers contacted for this Housing Element update, the highest priority needs
that were suggested included:
         Additional residential care facilities for persons with severe developmental,
         physical, or health-related disabilities that prevent independent living;
         Additional financial assistance to increase the accessibility of housing for those
         who can live independently;
         Additional resources for life skills training, including education and job training;
         Additional health care assistance for individuals with severe and chronic
         illnesses, and
         More counseling and health care services for persons with mental illness and
         substance abuse problems.
         3. Farmworkers
Farmworkers are individuals whose primary incomes come from permanent or seasonal
agricultural labor. Permanent farmworkers, who typically reside year-round in a
community, work in the fields, processing plants, or support activities on a year-round
basis. When workloads increase during harvest periods, the labor force is supplemented
by seasonal or migrant labor.
There is no agricultural activity within Placerville that would generate a need for migrant
farmworker housing. However, Placerville is located within a region of El Dorado
County that includes significant agricultural activities, such as vineyards and orchards
that create a need for seasonal farm labor. It is possible, therefore, that some seasonal
laborers migrate to the Placerville area in search of temporary shelter. This is most likely
to occur during harvest periods in the fall.
The best available data to the City regarding farmworkers residing in Placerville is the
U.S. Census Bureau’s 2007-2011 American Community Survey (ACS) data. This survey
data however is just an estimate of workers of not only farm labor but also fishing and
forestry occupations. The ACS estimates there were nine (9) farmworkers who resided in
Placerville during the survey period. Unfortunately this ACS data has a margin of error
of 96 workers that limits its usefulness.
The City does not administer housing programs specific to employee housing
(farmworkers) who are permanent residents of the City, due to the small size of the
workforce employed in the agricultural industry. The state’s Department of Housing and
Community Development, Employee Housing Program adopts and enforces statewide
regulations for the construction, maintenance, use, and occupancy of privately owned
and operated employee housing facilities providing housing for five or more employees
              City of Placerville 2013-2021 Housing Element—FINAL—February 2014
                                              CP - 50

to assure their health, safety, and general welfare. The Department of Housing and
Community Development acts as the enforcement agency for this program.
The State’s Employee Housing Act (Health and Safety Code 17000) requires that each city
and county encourage and permit the development of employee housing as a means of
addressing the housing for seasonal farmworkers. The Act provides opportunities for
housing that is owned by an employer and available for occupancy only by its
employees. Two types of employee housing are described in the Act:
         Health and Safety Code Section 17021.5:
         (b) Any employee housing providing accommodations for six or fewer employees shall be
         deemed a single-family structure with a residential land use designation for the purposes
         of this section. For the purpose of all local ordinances, employee housing shall not be
         included within the definition of a boarding house, rooming house, hotel, dormitory, or
         other similar term that implies that the employee housing is a business run for profit or
         differs in any other way from a family dwelling. No conditional use permit, zoning
         variance, or other zoning clearance shall be required of employee housing that serves six
         or fewer employees that is not required of a family dwelling of the same type in the same
         zone. Use of a family dwelling for purposes of employee housing serving six or fewer
         persons shall not constitute a change of occupancy for purposes of Part 1.5 (commencing
         with Section 17910) or local building codes.
         Health and Safety Code Section 17021.6:
         (b) Any employee housing consisting of no more than 36 beds in a group quarters or 12
         units or spaces designed for use by a single family or household shall be deemed an
         agricultural land use for the purposes of this section. For the purpose of all local
         ordinances, employee housing shall not be deemed a use that implies that the employee
         housing is an activity that differs in any other way from an agricultural use. No
         conditional use permit, zoning variance, or other zoning clearance shall be required of
         this employee housing that is not required of any other agricultural activity in the same
         zone. The permitted occupancy in employee housing in a zone allowing agricultural uses
         shall include agricultural employees who do not work on the property where the employee
         housing is located.
To address the affordable housing needs of an estimated nine (9) farmworkers that reside
within Placerville, and to meet the local government land use and zoning requirements
under the State’s Employee Housing Act, Housing Program 6 was added. Program 6
directs the City to amend the zoning ordinance within one year of the Housing Element’s
adoption to allow a residential structure providing accommodation for six or fewer
agricultural employees to be considered a single-family residential use and to be allowed
by right in any zone that allows single-family residential uses (Health and Safety Code
Section 17021.5).
Program 6 also includes amending the RE, Estate Residential (Section 10-5-4) to permit
employee housing consisting of no more than 36 beds in a group quarters or 12 units or
spaces designed for use by a single family or household as an agricultural use (Health
              City of Placerville 2013-2021 Housing Element—FINAL—February 2014
                                              CP - 51

and Safety Code Section 17021.6). The RE zone is the City’s only zone which permits by
right agricultural uses such as raising livestock and poultry, the growing and harvesting
of trees, fruits, vegetables, grains, and the storage or processing of agricultural products
produced on the property.
          4. Female-Headed Households
Female headed households with children often require special consideration and
assistance as a result of their greater need for affordable housing, accessible day care,
health care, and a variety of other supportive services. These households also often
receive unequal treatment in the rental housing market due to their family status, and
they often face challenges in finding affordable, sound housing that is accessible to
employment and services due to their child care needs and relatively lower household
incomes.
According to the 2010 Census, there are 604 female headed households within the City.
Of these, 409 contain children less than 18 years of age, with 195 containing no children
less than 18 years of age. In addition, according to the U.S. Census Bureau’s 2006-2010
American Community Survey 33 percentage of female headed households with children
live in poverty.2
One resource that may benefit female headed and single-parent households is a childcare
program administered by the El Dorado County Office of Education. The El Dorado
County Children’s Center Program serves children of parents who qualify for subsidized
childcare by the State Department of Education, Child Development Division. The
program includes childcare at various facilities throughout the County. There are three
facilities within Placerville that provide care for toddlers, preschoolers, and school-age
children. There are a total of 14 child care facilities in Placerville that are licensed by the
State, with a combined capacity to provide care for 608 children.
A sub-group of single-parent households especially in need of assistance are women with
children escaping domestic violence. Assistance for this group in Placerville is provided
by the Center for Violence-Free Relationships, formerly known as the El Dorado
Women’s Center. The Center provides 24-hour crisis line, up to 30 days of shelter, legal
assistance, counseling, employment assistance, transportation, and peer groups to
battered women and their children. It also administers a batterer’s treatment program.
2 Sources: 2010 Census, 2006-2010 American Community Survey, SACOG 2012
                City of Placerville 2013-2021 Housing Element—FINAL—February 2014
                                                CP - 52

         5. Large Households
Large households consist of households with five or more members. These households,
most of whom are families, constitute a special needs group because the supply of
adequately sized, affordable housing units in a community is often limited. In order to
save money for other basic necessities such as food, clothing, and medical care, it is
common for lower-income large households to reside in smaller units, which frequently
results in overcrowding. There were 471 large households in Placerville in 2010, of which
46 percent were renter households. Large households represent 11.4 percent of the City’s
households.
The housing needs of low-income large families could be met by low-cost housing units
with more bedrooms. The City has sought to ensure that affordable housing
development include some units with three and four bedrooms for large families.
The El Dorado County Habitat for Humanity affiliate is a program that could be a
resource to assist large families. The affiliate is a non-profit volunteer organization that
assists in the funding, scheduling, and overseeing of production of housing for low-
income families on a house-by-house basis. Families are expected to provide a certain
amount of labor in order to become homeowners.
Since its inception, the affiliate has built five houses in the area and is extensively
involved in the community through partnerships with churches and schools. Another
resource for large families is Mercy Housing of California. Mercy Housing, another non-
profit organization, has developed single-family homes in Placerville under its self-help
program; many of these homes contain three or more bedrooms for large families.
             City of Placerville 2013-2021 Housing Element—FINAL—February 2014
                                             CP - 53

                       Table 23: Placerville Household Size by Tenure
                                        Owners                              Renters
   Household Size
                            Households            Percent         Households        Percent
        1 person                  607              28.1%               699           35.5%
       2 persons                  885              41.0%               541           27.5%
       3 persons                  311              14.4%               295           15.0%
       4 persons                  191               8.8%               216           11.0%
       5 persons                  191               8.8%               136            6.9%
       6 persons                   34               1.6%                48            2.4%
      7+ persons                   28               1.3%                34            1.7%
  Total Households               2,160             100%               1,969          100%
                                  Source: US Census 2010; SACOG (2012)
         6. Homeless Individuals and Families
Most individuals and families become homeless because they are unable to afford
housing in a particular community, cannot care for themselves, or have recently left an
institutional environment without adequate resources to find housing. Nationwide,
about half of those experiencing homelessness over the course of a year are single adults.
Most enter and exit the system fairly quickly. The remainder essentially live in the
homeless assistance system, or in a combination of shelters, hospitals, the streets, jails,
and prisons. There are also single homeless people who are not adults, including
runaway and "throwaway" youth (children whose parents will not allow them to live at
home or are unable to care for them). The homeless population in Placerville typically
consists of local single women with and without children, single men, and parolees who
have been prohibited from leaving the area.
Three types of facilities provide shelter for homeless individuals and families:
Emergency shelter: a facility that provides overnight shelter and fulfills a client’s basic
needs (i.e. food, clothing, and medical care) either on-site or through off-site services. The
permitted length of stay can vary from one day to six months, depending upon whether
the shelter is short-term or long-term. An emergency housing resource operating in the
community during 2013-2014 that provides for emergency housing in Placerville is the
Interfaith Rotating Winter Nomadic Shelter (“Nomadic Shelter”). The Nomadic Shelter
consists of several local churches providing overnight accommodations for the homeless
during the winter months from November through March on a rotating basis. In
conjunction with the Community Resource Center and Mercy Way Rescue Church, a
shuttle bus provides transportation to the various church sites. The City is working
diligently with community groups and El Dorado County to identify permanent facilities
for these emergency housing needs.
              City of Placerville 2013-2021 Housing Element—FINAL—February 2014
                                                CP - 54

Transitional housing: a residence that provides housing for up to two years. Residents of
transitional housing are usually connected to rehabilitative services, including substance
abuse and mental health care intervention, employment services, individual and group
counseling, and life skills training. Progress House Transitional Living Program is a local
community program designed to offer individuals new in recovery a safe, supportive,
sober living environment.
Progress House has six transitional living homes, two for men and four for women. The
women may be accompanied by their minor children in transitional living. These are
fully furnished residential homes that are shared by individuals practicing their new
recovery skills. Residents attend outpatient services, participate in 12-step meetings and
share in household chores while working or attending school.
Residents may stay in the transitional living program for up to one year. All of the homes
are registered through California Association of Addiction Recovery Resources.
Permanent housing: permanent housing that is affordable in the community or service-
enriched housing that is linked with on-going supportive services (on-site or off-site) and
is designed to allow formerly homeless clients to live at the facility on an indefinite basis.
Beyond the need for housing, homeless individuals are likely to have other needs, such
as support services, life skills training, medical care, and education or job skills training.
The main resource that is currently available to provide housing for the homeless in
Placerville is the HELP program. The program is administered by the Federated Church,
comprised of several participating churches, and is active throughout the City. The
program offers people in need one or two nights’ stay in a local motel and information
regarding clothing programs and food bank programs available in the area. According to
the HELP service providers, approximately 95 percent of the clientele that has received
assistance through the program consists of persons already receiving disability and/or
Social Security assistance that are not able to make ends meet. The Salvation Army also
administers the same type of program throughout the greater El Dorado County area.
As discussed above, as a subgroup of the single-parent household population, women
may also find themselves without homes. The Center for Violence-Free Relationships
provides 30 days of shelter and 24-hour crisis management for victims of domestic
violence.
New Morning Youth and Family Services operate an Emergency Youth Shelter within
the City. It is a 12-bed, 3,500 square foot facility that provides 24-hour shelter for youths
up to 18 years old, every day of the year. The facility also provides individual and family
counseling, crisis management, alcohol and drug use education, and assistance with
mental health issues. The facility is located near Ray Lawyer Drive, proximal to County
offices and other important resources.
              City of Placerville 2013-2021 Housing Element—FINAL—February 2014
                                              CP - 55

F. Homeless and Other Groups in Need of Temporary and
Transitional Affordable Housing
There are several definitions of homelessness. The U.S. Government Code (Title 42,
Chapter 119, Subchapter 1, Section 11302) defines a homeless person as:
            "an individual who has a primary residence that is in: (1) a publicly or
           privately operated shelter designed to provide temporary living
           accommodations; (2) an institution that provides a temporary residence
           for individuals intended to be institutionalized; or (3) a public or private
           place not designed for, or ordinarily used as, a regular sleeping
           accommodation for human beings."
Homeless individuals and homeless families rely on emergency shelters and transitional
housing. An emergency shelter is a facility that provides shelter to the homeless on a
limited, short-term basis. Although there are some organizations providing services to
the homeless, El Dorado County has no permanent emergency homeless shelters.
Transitional housing is typically defined as temporary housing (often six months to two
years) for a homeless individual or family who is transitioning to permanent housing (or
permanent supportive housing) or for youths that are moving out of the foster care
system. The County does provide some transitional and permanent supportive housing
on the form of group housing.
The State Department of Housing and Community Development estimates that the
homeless population has topped 360,000 in California. About a third of the homeless
consists of homeless families. According to a count and survey of homeless persons
conducted by the County in January 2008, preliminary data provided by HomeBase
suggests that each year an estimated 418 people experience homelessness in El Dorado
County. Of this figure, it is estimated that Placerville realizes 15 transient persons per
month on average.3
In most cases, homelessness is a temporary circumstance, not a permanent condition. A
more appropriate measure of the magnitude of homelessness is the number of homeless
people at a specific point in time. The County proposes to work with the community and
local organizations in order to understand and acknowledge that homelessness may be
an issue to the community. The outcome of this partnership is increased support for
homeless programs, community education, and a better understanding of the unmet
need.
3 Placerville Chief of Police, 2010.
                City of Placerville 2013-2021 Housing Element—FINAL—February 2014
                                                CP - 56

Many other groups are also in need of temporary and transitional affordable housing.
The El Dorado County Community Action Agency believes that victims of domestic
violence and at-risk or runaway youth should be priority populations in efforts to
provide adequate affordable housing opportunities. The El Dorado County Community
Action Agency has pointed out that the lack of affordable and/or subsidized housing
prevents victims of domestic violence and their children from leaving violent situations.
Lack of housing options and fear of escalating violence are recognized as the two
primary reasons that victims of domestic abuse do not leave. Providing housing
opportunities for these groups will reduce homelessness while ensuring that families
move from crisis to safety within the community. These groups have been addressed in
Chapter V, Program 7.
Residential shelters, transitional housing, and permanent supportive housing can be
permitted as Health or Community Care Facilities pursuant to the City Zoning
Ordinance. Community Care Facilities are defined as:
         "Any facility, place or building which is maintained and operated to
        provide nonmedical residential care, day care or house finding agency
        services for children, adults, or children and adults, including, but not
        limited to, the developmentally disabled, physically handicapped,
        mentally disordered, or incompetent persons.
        A Community Care Facility may provide incidental medical services.
        Community Care Facilities are broken down into four (4) subcategories
        as follows:
             Day Care Center: Any facility which provides nonmedical care to
             persons in need of personal services, supervision or assistance
             essential for sustaining the activities of daily living or for the
             protection of the individual on less than a twenty four (24) hour
             basis.
             House-Finding Agency: Any individual or organization engaged in
             finding homes or other places for placement of persons of any age
             for temporary or permanent care or adoption.
             Residential Care Facility: A facility licensed by the State of California
             where care, services or treatment is provided to persons living in a
             community residential setting.
             Residential Service Facility: A residential facility other than a
             residential care facility where the operator receives compensation for
             the provision of personal services, in addition to housing, including,
             but not limited to, protection, supervision, assistance, guidance,
             training, therapy or other nonmedical care."
             City of Placerville 2013-2021 Housing Element—FINAL—February 2014
                                             CP - 57

Presently, Health and Community Care Facilities are allowed subject to a conditional use
permit in all zoning districts.
Conditional use permits are discretionary, so environmental review pursuant to the
California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) and approval by the appropriate body
(i.e., Zoning Administrator or Planning Commission) are necessary. Conditions of
approval vary based on the specific nature of the proposal.
However, recently-enacted Senate Bill 2 (Chapter 63, 2007 Statutes) amended housing
element law to ensure that local zoning regulations facilitate emergency shelters and
limits the denial of emergency shelters and transitional housing under the Housing
Accountability Act. Generally SB2 amends housing element law regarding land
use/zoning approvals as follows:
         At least one zone shall be identified to permit emergency shelters without a
         conditional use permit or other discretionary action.
         Sufficient capacity must be identified to accommodate the need for emergency
         shelters and at least one year-round emergency shelter.
         Existing or proposed permit procedures, development and management
         standards must be objective and encourage and facilitate the development of or
         conversion to emergency shelters.
         Emergency shelters shall only be subject to development and management
         standards that apply to residential or commercial development within the same
         zone.
         Written and objective standards may be applied as specified in statute, including
         maximum number of beds, provision of onsite management, length of stay and
         security.
         Includes flexibility for jurisdictions to meet zoning requirements with existing
         ordinances or demonstrate the need for emergency shelters can be
         accommodated in existing shelters or through a multi-jurisdictional agreement.
         Transitional and supportive housing shall be considered a residential use and
         only subject to those restrictions that apply to other residential uses of the same
         type in the same zone.
The City revised its Zoning Ordinance to identify a zone district within which emergency
shelters and transitional or supportive housing may be established by right.
Placerville’s HWC (Highway Commercial) Zone code section was amended to include
emergency shelters as a permitted use subject to appropriate development standards as
permitted under SB 2. The HWC Zone was identified as the appropriate zone to allow for
emergency shelters because of proximity to services and a sufficient amount of vacant
land within the zone. Placerville’s HWC Zoned lands encompasses approximately 290
acres, of which 90 acres are vacant, providing sufficient lands to construct an emergency
shelter with capacity to accommodate an estimated 60 persons. The HWC Zone allows a
wide variety of uses including retail uses, and highway-oriented uses such as hotels,
restaurants and a variety of governmental support uses. Emergency shelters are
             City of Placerville 2013-2021 Housing Element—FINAL—February 2014
                                             CP - 58

considered compatible with these uses. In addition, there are no known environmental
constraints or other conditions within the HWC Zoned lands that could render it
unsuitable for emergency shelter uses.
During June 2013 the City adopted changes to the Zoning Ordinance that added
transitional and supportive housing as a residential use, subject only to those restrictions
that apply to other residential uses of the same type in the same zone within residential
zones. However, residential uses are permitted within the City’s mixed-use zones (e.g.
Business Professional (BP), Central Business District (CBD), Commercial (C),
Convenience Commercial (CC), Highway Commercial (HWC). To fully comply with SB2
the City has added Housing Program 8 that will amend each of these zoning districts to
permit transitional and supportive housing subject only to those restrictions that apply to
other residential uses in the same zone.
G. Assisted Housing Projects At-Risk of Conversion
Affordable housing is usually provided through government assistance in the form of
rental housing, although Habitat for Humanity and Mercy Housing have constructed
single-family homes for lower-income households. Because occupancy and affordability
restrictions associated with government assistance for rental housing have the potential
to expire, there is also a potential "risk" for assisted rental housing to convert to market-
rate rents. The loss of such rental housing reduces the availability of affordable housing
to lower-income households. Therefore, affordable rental housing should be preserved to
the fullest extent possible. Unless housing has reached a substantial level of deterioration,
it is much more cost-effective to preserve existing affordable housing rather than replace
it with newly constructed units.
The "at-risk" status of government-assisted rental housing is determined through the
identification of funding programs that support the affordable units and the potential
likelihood that the funding will be discontinued, allowing the units to convert to market-
rate rents. At-risk units are those which may be converted to market rates by 2023. All of
the assisted units in Placerville, except the Sunrise Garden Apartments, participate in the
United States Department of Agriculture (USDA) Rural Housing Section 515 Program.
The 515 Program is a direct mortgage loan program for the development of low-income
multi-family housing, housing for persons with disabilities, and/or seniors. The typical
loan term under this program is 30 to 40 years, with a minimum 20-year restricted rent
period, although loan terms may be up to 50 years. Following the completion of the 20-
year period, the property owner may, under limited circumstances, pre-pay the
assistance and will no longer be subject to program occupancy and rent restrictions.
Following the completion of the loan period, USDA encourages properties to be
transferred either by a tax credit to limited partnerships or, by theoretically endless
subsidy, made available to non-profit organizations or local housing authorities. New
regulations require that properties receiving assistance from the Section 515 Program be
transferred to private or government entities that will continue the affordable use. The
              City of Placerville 2013-2021 Housing Element—FINAL—February 2014
                                              CP - 59

USDA also offers incentives to continue the uses that, if accepted, ensure the continued
availability of the affordable units in perpetuity.
The Sunrise Garden Apartments property is funded through HUD’s Housing Choice
Voucher (Section 8) Program, by the California Housing Finance Agency. The minimum
period of restricted occupancy and rents is 30 years. The current Housing Choice
Voucher loan providing funding for operation and maintenance of the Sunrise Garden
Apartments will expire in 2018, and the property is therefore considered to be at risk of
conversion to market rates.
Publicly-assisted rental housing is identified in Table 24. This table identifies the year on
which the Section 515 Program subsidy will be extended. To that end, it has been
determined that all of these affordable units are considered to be low risk or no risk of
conversion over the next ten years because of the transfer requirement and incentives
offered by USDA and the remaining restriction periods on the HUD-funded projects.
The City will continue to monitor these projects each year to assure that, if a change in
status occurs, the City will work with property owners and interested non-profit
organizations to preserve the affordability of these rental units for low-income occupants.
Table 24 shows that for this planning period only the Sunrise Garden Apartments
property and their 67 units are at risk of converting to market-rate units within 10 years.
While it is difficult to assess the risk at this juncture, the potential risk of conversion of
units may be costly to replace; it is estimated that replacement of 67 units in current
dollars would be $125,550 per unit 4, or approximately $8.4.million total.
4 Assumes a 900-square-foot apartment and all development fees. Excludes site improvements and
acquisitions.
              City of Placerville 2013-2021 Housing Element—FINAL—February 2014
                                              CP - 60

            Table 24: Inventory of Publicly Assisted Multi-Family Housing
                                                                                     Expiration of
                     Assisted                    Funding           Earliest Date Affordability
  Project Name                     Type
                       Units                     Sources          of Conversion (At-Risk Status)
                                                                                           *
Carson Ridge II
2848 Schnell             17      Family     Section 515                  2021          Low Risk
School Road
Carson Ridge
Apts 2838
                         8       Family     Section 515                  2033          Low Risk
Schnell School
Road
Deer View Apts
                                            Section 515 &
2880 Schnell             47      Family                                  2028          Low Risk
                                            Section 8
School Road
Placerville Apts
2684 Coloma              83      Family     Section 515                  2036           At Risk
Court
Sunrise Gardens
1400 Woodman             67      Family     Section 8                    2018          Low Risk
Circle
Tunnel Street
Senior Apts. 2880        39      Senior     Section 515                  2031          Low Risk
Tunnel Street
Cottonwood                                  Other: Low
Park                                        Income
                         77      Family                           Unknown              Low Risk
3030 New Jersey                             Housing Tax
Way                                         Credit (LIHTC)
Cottonwood
                                            Other:
Senior                   80      Senior                           Unknown              Low Risk
                                            LIHTC
2801 Clay Street
Placer Village                              Other:
                         75      Family                           Unknown              Low Risk
2789 Ray Lawyer                             LIHTC
                            At Risk = Conversion Potential within 0-10 Years
                 Source: Area Council of Governments Subsidized Unit Database (2012)
Program 25 addresses the issue of preservation of at-risk apartments. The City will work
with property owners, other public agencies, and non-profit housing organizations to
preserve existing subsidized rental housing. To encourage existing owners to maintain
             City of Placerville 2013-2021 Housing Element—FINAL—February 2014
                                               CP - 61

the affordability of such rental housing, the City would assist owners in applying for
state or federal assistance for refinancing, acquisition, and/or rehabilitation, including
federal Community Development Block Grant Program funds, Low Income Housing Tax
Credit Program, and the USDA’s Rural Rental Housing Loans Program.
Local entities which are considered qualified to own and or manage affordable units in
the City of Placerville include the following5:
          Affordable Community Housing Trust, 7901 La Riviera Drive, Sacramento
          California Coalition for Rural Housing, 717 K Street, Suite 400, Sacramento
          California Housing Finance Agency, 500 Capitol Mall, Suite 400, Sacramento
          Hendricks & Partners, 3100 Zinfandel Drive, Suite 100, Rancho Cordova
          USA Properties Fund, 2440 Professional Drive Roseville
          Christian Church Homes of Northern California, Inc., 303 Hegenberger Road,
                Ste. 201, Oakland
          Eskaton Properties Inc., 5105 Manzanita Ave, Carmichael
          Project Go, Inc., 3740 Rocklin Road, Rocklin
          ROEM Development Corporation, 1650 Lafayette Circle, Santa Clara
          Rural California Housing Corp, 3120 Freeboard Drive, Suite 201, West
          Sacramento
          Sacramento-Yolo Mutual Housing Association, 8001 Fruitridge Road, Suite A,
                Sacramento
H. Opportunities for Energy Conservation
The affordability of housing in Northern California can be directly impacted by utility-
related costs. However, Title 24 of the California Code of Regulations sets forth
mandatory energy standards for new development and requires adoption of an "energy
budget." The home building industry is required to comply with these standards, while
localities are responsible for enforcing the regulations. Since January 2011, the City
enforces the 2008 California Green Building Standards Code (Title 24, Part 11). Some of
the alternative ways to meet state energy standards are:
          The use of passive solar construction techniques that require proper solar
          orientation, appropriate levels of thermal mass, south-facing windows, and
          moderate insulation levels;
          The use of higher insulation levels in place of thermal mass or energy conserving
          window orientation, and
5 Source: California HCD 2012: http://www.hcd.ca.gov/hpd/hrc/tech/presrv/hpd00-01.xls
                City of Placerville 2013-2021 Housing Element—FINAL—February 2014
                                                 CP - 62

          The use of active solar water heating in exchange for less insulation and/or
          energy conserving window treatments.
Other energy-saving construction techniques include:
          Locating homes on the northern portion of the sunniest location of building sites;
          Designing structures to admit the maximum amount of sunlight into the
          building and to reduce exposure to extreme weather conditions;
          Locating indoor areas of maximum usage along the south face of the building
          and placing corridors, laundry rooms, power core, and garages along the north
          face;
          Making the main entrance a small enclosed space that creates an air lock between
          the building and its exterior, and
          Orienting the entrance away from winds or using a windbreak to reduce the
          wind velocity against the entrance.
Energy consumption associated with residential land uses, such as for heating and
cooling needs, can also be reduced through site planning techniques, the use of
landscaping, and the layout of new development. Developments designed to reduce the
reliance upon motorized vehicles for transportation can also reduce the use of energy.
Pacific Gas and Electric, the supplier of electricity in the Placerville area, provides a
variety of energy conservation services for residents. PG&E also participates in other
energy assistance programs for lower-income households, which help qualified
homeowners and renters conserve energy and control electricity costs. These programs
include the California Alternate Rates for Energy (CARE) Program and the Relief for
Energy Assistance through Community Help (REACH) Program.
The CARE Program provides a 15 percent monthly discount on gas and electric rates to
income-qualified households, certain non-profits, facilities housing agricultural
employees, homeless shelters, hospices, and other qualified non-profit group living
facilities. The REACH Program provides one-time energy assistance to customers who
have no other way to pay their energy bill. The intent of REACH is to assist low-income
customers, particularly the elderly, disabled, sick, working poor, and the unemployed,
who experience severe hardships and are unable to pay for their necessary energy needs.
Further, Program 27, Weatherization, promotes energy efficiency and weatherization
assistance for qualifying households under the City’s CDBG program.
Program 20, Housing Rehabilitation, provides for energy conservation enhancements to
existing homes in stock, particularly very-low- and low-income households.
Lastly, the Placerville General Plan promotes energy conservation through land use and
residential development policies and regulations that seek to encourage design
principles, solar access, the use of landscaping, location of housing in relation to jobs and
services, and other techniques to reduce residential energy consumption.
              City of Placerville 2013-2021 Housing Element—FINAL—February 2014
                                              CP - 63

I. Regional Housing Needs
An important requirement of State Housing Element Law (Government Code Sections
65583 and 65584) is that each city and county plan for its share of the region’s future
housing needs. In the six-county greater Sacramento area, the Sacramento Area Council
of Governments (SACOG) prepared a Regional Housing Needs Plan (November 2012)
that determines the regional housing needs for El Dorado County and the cities within
the County. SACOG determines the amount of affordable housing El Dorado County
will need for the planning period and then distributes that number among its
participating jurisdictions. Placerville is a member of SACOG, and the Regional Housing
Needs Allocation (RHNA) is determined by SACOG for the City. Under the SACOG
plan, El Dorado County and its cities are responsible for accommodating an additional
5136 housing units between 2013 -2021, of which Placerville is responsible for 372. Of the
372 units, 39 of them are expected to be affordable to extremely-low-income households,
39 to very-low-income households, 55 to low-income households, 69 to moderate-income
households and 170 to above moderate-income households. Although Placerville is not
directly responsible for the actual construction of these units, the City is responsible for
creating a regulatory environment in which these housing units can be built. The
development of affordable units can be encouraged through adoption and
implementation of General Plan policies, zoning policies, and the provisions of financial
and regulatory incentives. Table 25 shows the number and percentage of housing units
identified in the SACOG Regional Housing Needs Plan Allocation for Placerville, by
income category, for the 2013 – 2021 planning period.
      Table 25: Regional Housing Needs Plan Allocation for Placerville 2013-2021)
                                                                   RHNA Allocation
                 Income Category
                                                             Number                  Percent
 Extremely Low                                                           39                  10.5 %
 Very Low                                                                39                 10.5 %
 Low                                                                     55                 14.8 %
 Moderate                                                                69                 18.5 %
 Above Moderate                                                         170                 45.7 %
 Total                                                                  372                   100%
     Source:  Sacramento Area Council Governments, Regional Housing Needs Plan. (November 2012)
Table 26 shows the number housing units that have been approved, permitted and/or
built since January 2013 in Placerville that contributes to meeting the RHNP allocation.
The RHNA uses January 1, 2013 as the baseline for project period for the 2013-2021
planning period. Jurisdictions may count toward their RHNA, housing units that are
             City of Placerville 2013-2021 Housing Element—FINAL—February 2014
                                             CP - 64

approved, permitted or built since January 1, 2013. Table 27 shows the remaining RHNA
allocation need based on units built/under construction.
   Table 26: Progress in Meeting RHNA Allocation January 1, 2013 Through June 2013
                                Units Approved, Permitted, and/or Built
                                                                          Units by Income Level
    Project Name or
                                  Status        Total Units                                              Above
         Address                                                 Very Low       Low       Moderate
                                                                                                       Moderate
 Eskaton Cottages                  Built             39                                                   39
 118 Main Street                   Built              1                                                    1
 3097 Cedar Ravine6                Built              1                                       1
 2517 Aggregate Ct                 Built              1                                                    1
 1186 Aggregate Way                Built              1                                                    1
 2816 Winesap Cir                  Built              1                                                    1
 2821 Winesap Cir                  Built              1                                                    1
 3045 Meridian Ct                  Built              1                                                    1
 611 Placerville Dr                Built              1                                                    1
 973 Estey Way                  Permitted             1                                                    1
 2986 Coloma Street7               Built              1                                       1
 1720 Broadway                     Built              1                                       1
 439 Main Street                Permitted             1                                       1
                    Totals                           51                                       4           47
                                            Source: City of Placerville
6 This project involved the conversion of an existing professional office to a single-family residential housing
unit. Per El Dorado County Assessor’s records, the purchase price for this unit was $125,000 in December of
2012, or one-third (1/3) less than the $185,000 median home price within Placerville during 2012. The purchase
price was affordable to a family of moderate income.
7 This project involved the conversion of a two story professional office building into a single-family residence.
Rents were targeted between $700-1,000., affordable to a moderate or below income level.
                City of Placerville 2013-2021 Housing Element—FINAL—February 2014
                                                     CP - 65

      Table 27: Remaining RHNA Need Based on Units Built/Under Construction
                                A                       B                   C
Income Category                                    Units Built,
                     New Construction
                                              Under Construction     Remaining Need
                        Need (RHNA)
                                                  or Approved
 Extremely Low                  39                      -                   39
    Very Low                    39                      -                   39
       Low                      55                      -                   55
     Moderate                   69                      4                   65
 Above Moderate                170                     47                  123
    Total Units                372                     51                  321
J. Unmet 2008-2013 Regional Housing Needs
Placerville did not meet the objective to address the shortfall of available land to
accommodate 106 low, very low and extremely low income units before the October 31,
2013 end of the 2008-2013 planning period. Per Government Code Section 65584.09, if
during the prior planning period the City did not make available sites to accommodate
the unmet portion of the Regional Housing Needs Allocation (RHNA) then the City must
rezone or zone adequate sites within the first year of the new 2013-2021 Housing Element
planning period. This requirement is in addition to sites needed to accommodate the
RHNA for low, very low and extremely low income categories for the 2013-2021
planning period that must be accomplished no more than three years after Housing
Element adoption. A Housing Program for the 2013-2021 planning period will cause the
required rezoning of sites at the R-5 density necessary to meet statutory requirements
and our RHNA for both planning periods, totaling 239 units for the low, very low and
extremely low income households.
            City of Placerville 2013-2021 Housing Element—FINAL—February 2014
                                            CP - 66

C
III.                                           CONSTRAINTS
A. Government Constraints
Local policies and regulations can affect the price and availability of housing, both
positively and negatively, particularly for low- and moderate-income residents. Land use
controls, site improvement requirements, permit and development impact fees, permit
processing procedures, and other factors may constrain the maintenance, development,
and improvement of housing. This section discusses potential governmental constraints
as well as policies that encourage housing development in Placerville.
State and federal regulations also affect the availability of land for housing and the cost
of producing housing. Regulations related to environmental protection, prevailing wages
for publicly-assisted construction projects, construction defect liability, building codes,
and other factors have significant and often adverse impacts on housing cost and
availability. Perhaps one of the greatest constraints to the production of housing
affordable to lower-income households is the chronic shortage of state and federal
financial assistance for such housing.
While Placerville recognizes that constraints exist at other levels of government, the City
has little or no control over these regulations and no ability to mitigate these constraints
directly. For these reasons, this section of the Housing Element focuses only on policies
and regulations within the City’s control to influence directly.
          1. Land Use Policies
                                        The Land Use Element of Placerville's General Plan
                                        contains the primary policies that guide residential
                                        development. These policies are implemented
                                        through several types of ordinances, including the
                                        Zoning Ordinance, and the Subdivision Regulation
                                        ordinance found therein. Zoning regulations establish
                                        the amount and distribution of land uses within the
                                        City, while subdivision regulations establish
                                        requirements for the division and improvement of
                                        land. The Land Use Element identifies five residential
                                        land use categories: Rural Residential, Low-Density
                                        Residential, Medium-Density Residential, High-
                                        Density Residential, and Planned Residential
                                        Development/Historic.
              City of Placerville 2013-2021 Housing Element—FINAL—February 2014
                                               C - 67

The City has adopted nine residential zoning districts that correspond to General Plan
land use categories, as well as five non-residential zoning districts, a residential overlay
zone, and four mixed-use (commercial and residential) zones. Table 28 summarizes the
General Plan land use categories and corresponding zoning districts.
                   Table 28: Land Use Categories Permitting Residences
                                                          Minimum
                                                Density                  Typical Residential
  General Plan      Zoning Designation(s)                  Site/Unit
                                                (du/ac)                        Type(s)
                                                             Area
                   RE (Estate Residential);                             Detached Single-
 Rural                                         0.20 to   5 acres
                   R1-A (Single-Family—                                 Family Homes;
 Residential (RR)                              1.00      1 acre
                   Acre)                                                Second Units
 Low-Density                                                            Detached Single-
                   R1-10 (Single-Family);      1.01 to   10,000 sq. ft.
 Residential                                                            Family Homes;
                   R1-20 (Single-Family)       4.00      20,000 sq. ft.
 (LD)                                                                   Second Units
 Medium-                                                                Detached Single-
 Density                                       4.01 to   6,000 sq. ft. Family Homes;
                   R1-6 (Single-Family)
 Residential                                   6.00      2,700 sq. ft. Second Units; Mobile
 (MD)                                                                   Homes and Parks
                                                                        Detached Single-
                   R-2 (Multi-Family);                                  Family Homes;
 High-Density
                   R-3 (Multi-Family);         4.01 to                  Attached Single-
 Residential                                             2,000 sq. ft.
                   R-4 (Multi-Family);         20.00                    Family Homes;
 (HD)
                   R-5 (Multi-Family)                                   Condominiums;
                                                                        Apartments
 Business and                                                           Residential uses when
                   BP (Business-               None
 Professional                                            6,000 sq. ft. above or below the
                   Professional Zone)          specified
 (BP)                                                                   ground floor.
 Central                                                                Residential uses when
                   CBD (Central Business       None
 Business                                                None           above or below the
                   District)                   specified
 District (CBD)                                                         ground floor.
                                                                        Residential uses when
                                               None
 Commercial (C) C (Commercial)                           6,000 sq. ft. above or below the
                                               specified
                                                                        ground floor.
 Convenience                                                            Residential uses
                   CC (Convenience             None
 Commercial                                              5,000 sq. ft. above or below
                   Commercial)                 specified
 (CC)                                                                   ground floor.
 Highway                                                                Residential uses when
                   HWC (Highway                None
 Commercial                                              6,000 sq. ft. above or below
                   Commercial Zone)            specified
 (HWC)                                                                  ground floor.
             City of Placerville 2013-2021 Housing Element—FINAL—February 2014
                                              C - 68

        2. Zoning Standards
The type, location, density, and scale of residential development are primarily regulated
by the City's Zoning Ordinance, which is written to implement the policies of the General
Plan. Zoning regulations are designed to protect and promote the health, safety, and
general welfare of residents, as well as ensure the orderly development of the City.
Placerville’s Zoning Ordinance establishes nine residential zones:
        RE (Estate Residential)
        R-1A (Single-Family Acre Residential, minimum lot size of one acre)
        R-1, 20,000 (Single-Family Residential, minimum lot size of 20,000 square feet)
        R-1, 10,000 (Single-Family Residential, minimum lot size of 10,000 square feet)
        R-1, 6,000 (Single-Family Residential, minimum lot size of 6,000 square feet)
        R-2 (Multi-Family Residential, attached single-family, two- and three-family
        units)
        R-3 (Multi-Family Residential)
        R-4 (Multi-Family Residential)
        R-5 (Multi-Family Residential)
The City also permits residential uses by right in the following commercial zones, above
or below the ground floor of non-residential uses:
        BP (Business Professional)
        CBD (Central Business District)
        C (Commercial)
        CC (Convenience Commercial)
        HWC (Highway Commercial (HWC)
Tables 29 and 30 summarize the relevant residential standards under the criteria of
Placerville's Zoning Ordinance (Municipal Code, Title 10). Table 31 lists the types of
permitted housing and permit process. The City offers no additional incentives for
residential development in these zones other than the increased densities and planned
development opportunities specified in the Zoning Code. The City could provide
additional incentives for the development of housing in commercial zones. See Chapter V
(Housing Strategy), Program 9, 15 and 18 for further details.
              City of Placerville 2013-2021 Housing Element—FINAL—February 2014
                                               C - 69

                                   Tables 29 and 30: Residential Development Standards: Residential and Commercial Districts
                                                                                  Residential Zoning Districts
             Zoning Standards
                                          RE            R1-A        R1-20         R1-10          R1- 6             R-2       R-3              R-4            R-5
         Max. Density (du/ac)            0.20            1           2.18          4.36           7.26              8         12               16            20
         Min. Lot Size (sq. ft.)        5 acres        1 acre       20,000        10,000         6,000         6,000         6,000            6,000         6,000
         Minimum Lot Area/DU
                                        5 acres        1 acre       20,000        10,000         6,000         2,000         2,000            2,000         2,000
         (sq. ft.)
         Min. Lot Width (ft.)             150           100          100            75             60          60/20        60/20            60/20          60/20
         Front Yard (ft.)                 50             30           20            20             20               20        20               20            20
         Side Yard (ft.)                  20          10%/10 ft    10%/10 ft    10%/10 ft      10%/10 ft     10%/10 ft     10%/10 ft        10%/10 ft   10%/10 ft
         Rear Yard (ft.)                  30             30           30            20             20              15/0      15/0             15/0          15/0
         Building Coverage (%)            20             35           35            35             35               60        60               60            60
         Max. Bldg. Height (ft.)          35             35           35            35             35               40        40               40            40
C - 70
         Parking (spaces/unit)             2             2            2             2              2               1.5        1.5              1.5           1.5
                                                                                  Commercial Zoning Districts
             Zoning Standards
                                                CBD                    CC                         BP                      HWC                           C
         Max. Density (du/ac)                           None                   None                        None                     None                      None
         Min. Lot Size (sq. ft.)                        None                   10,000                      6,000                    6,000                      6,000
         Min. Lot Width (ft.)                           None                     100                         60                        60                           60
         Front Yard (ft.)                               None                       1                         10                     None                             4
         Side Yard (ft.)                                None                                                 10                     None                             5
         Rear Yard (ft.)                                None                               5/25 (if next to res)                    None                             5
         Building Coverage (%)                          100%                    25%                        60%                       60%                           60%
         Max. Bldg. Height (ft.)                              40                  30                         40                        40                           40
         Parking (spaces/unit)                               1.5                  1.5                        1.5                      1.5                           1.5
                                                  City of Placerville 2013-2021 Housing Element—FINAL—February 2014
                                                                                   C - 70

                                                           Table 31: Housing Types Permitted by Zone
                                                                      Residential Zones                                      Commercial Zones
                                               RE    R1-A R1-20 R1-10         R1-6     R-2     R-3     R-4      R-5    CBD   CC    BP   HWC     C
         Detached Single-Family                P       P        P      P        P       P       P        P       X      X    X      X     X     X
         Attached Single-Family                X       X        X      X        X       P       P        P       P      X    X      X     X     X
         Multi-Family/Apt.                     X       X        X      X        X       P       P        P       P      P    P      P     P     P
         Condominiums                          X       X        X      X        X       P       P        P       P      P    P      P     P     P
         Second Units                          P       P        P      P        P       P       P        P       P      X    X      X     X     X
         Mobile Home within a Mobile
         Home Park, or as a Hardship per       U      U         U      U       U        U       U       U        U      X    X      X     X     X
         Section 10-4-6(E)
         Manufactured Home on Permanent
C - 71
                                               P       P        P      P        P       P       P        P       P      X    X      X     X     X
         Foundation
         Rooming/Boarding House                X       X        X      X        X       P       P        P       P      X    X      X     X     X
         Small Fam. Day Care (6 or fewer )     P       P        P      P        P       P       P        P       P     U     U      U     U     U
         Medium Fam. Day Care (7 - 12)         U      U         U      U       U        U       U       U        U     U     U      U     U     U
         Large Fam. Day Care (12 or more)      U      U         U      U       U        U       U       U        P     U     U      U     U     U
         Community Care (6-), including
                                               P       P        P      P        P       P       P        P       P     U     U      U     U     U
         transitional and supportive housing
         Community Care (7+) , including
                                               U      U         U      U       U        U       U       U        U     U     U      U     U     U
         transitional and supportive housing
         Domestic Violence Shelter             P       P        P      U       U        U       U       U        U     U     U      U     U     U
         Single-Room Occupancy Units           X       X        X      X        X       X       X        X       X      X    X      X     X     X
                                               Note: P = Permitted U = Permitted with a use permit X = Not permitted
                                               Source: Placerville Zoning Ordinance (Municipal Code, Title 10)
                                               City of Placerville 2013-2021 Housing Element—FINAL—February 2014
                                                                                C - 71

                  a. Residential Development Standards
                  i.       Residential Density
Permitted residential densities range from one dwelling unit per five acres in the RE
Zone to 20 dwelling units per acre (du/ac) in the R-5 Zone. There is no upper limit on
residential densities in mixed-use projects in commercial zones.
The RE through R1-10 zoning districts allow for the development of areas that are served
with limited municipal utilities. Because of the geographical challenges throughout
Placerville, these zoning districts are focused on residential development in outlying
areas of the City and areas having topographic limitations. These zones are also intended
to maintain the natural appearance of outlying areas and sloped sites by avoiding a
concentration of population that would result in an increased demand for urban services.
The R1-6 Zone allows for the development of medium-density, single-family land uses in
areas that are, or can be feasibly served by utilities, schools, and other urban services and
that have fewer slope constraints.
The City’s multi-family residential zoning districts establish guidelines for the
development of multi-family housing in areas with the appropriate level of urban
services available. These zoning districts alleviate encroachment of unrelated land uses
developed on neighboring vacant land upon higher-density residential uses.
Housing Element law requires jurisdictions to identify zones which accommodate the
housing needs of lower-income households. The law allows jurisdictions to rely upon
default densities to demonstrate zoning that encourages lower-income housing
development. The maximum density allowed for residential uses currently is 20 dwelling
units per acre, within the R-5 zone. This density is consistent with the default density
under Housing Element law which will allow up to 20 units per acre.
                  ii.      Consistency of Permitted Residential Densities with Affordability
In order to demonstrate that available sites within residential zoning districts can
accommodate affordable housing for lower-income households, the City has analyzed
market demand, financial feasibility, and development experience in the identified zones.
                  Market Demand
The current condition of the housing market makes it difficult to determine market
demand for affordable housing because home prices have declined, coming closer to
affordable rates. However, as the market recovers, the City anticipates a demand for
affordable housing.
             City of Placerville 2013-2021 Housing Element—FINAL—February 2014
                                              C - 72

                  Financial Feasibility
In the past, single-family housing affordable to above-moderate-income households has
been constructed primarily in single-family zones, although occasionally in the R-2 and
R-3 Zones as well. Land costs and permitted densities in the R1-6 and R-2 Zones have
made it possible to construct affordable single-family housing for lower-income
households through federally and state-funded housing programs operated by non-
profit homebuilders such as Mercy Housing and Habitat for Humanity. Market-rate
housing for moderate-income households has also been constructed in these two
residential zones.
Subsidies were mentioned by non-profit and other homebuilders as a needed tool to
maintain housing affordability. The amount of subsidy needed would vary based on
several factors, including the cost of real estate in this fluctuating economic climate and
the ability to obtain construction financing. Builders and non-profits concurred that a
density of 12 to 20 dwelling units per acre is sufficient to develop affordable housing
through higher densities that would reduce individual cost per unit.
                  Development Experience
Affordable housing providers seeking to build homes for those who cannot afford to
purchase housing have been able to produce such housing in the R-3 and R-4 Zones, and
in the R1-6 and R-2 Zones as planned developments. Permitted densities in these zones,
with density bonuses and/or other regulatory and financial incentives, have proved
sufficient to facilitate the production of affordable housing. The densities of six multi-
family projects approved or constructed in Placerville since 1995 have ranged from 6.5 to
22 dwelling units per acre. The following list summarizes these projects:
The residential developments described below provide examples of the City’s experience
with efforts to facilitate the development of affordable housing.
         Placer Village Apartments: (12 units/acre—constructed): 76 units of affordable
         family housing on 6.3 acres zoned R-3. The developer did not request a density
         bonus for this project.
         Cottonwood Park Apartments: (6.5 units/acre—constructed): 78 units of
         affordable family housing on 12.05 acres zoned R1-6/PD. The City reduced
         required parking from 156 to 145 at the developer’s request. The property was
         originally approved for townhomes at the same density. The developer did not
         request a density bonus.
         Cottonwood Senior Apartments: (22 units/acre—constructed): 81 units on 3.7
         acres zoned R1-6/PD. The City granted a density bonus and reduced the
         required parking to 0.5 spaces per unit.
         Briw Road Apartments: (eight units/acre—constructed): eight units on one acre
         zoned R-3, a small site with physical constraints.
         Cardinal Apartments: (eight units/acre—constructed): eight units on 1.03 acres
         zoned R-3, a small site with physical constraints.
             City of Placerville 2013-2021 Housing Element—FINAL—February 2014
                                              C - 73

Residential developers have an opportunity to construct housing at higher densities in
commercial zones as part of mixed-use projects, consistent with the City’s Density Bonus
provisions and state law. Housing in such projects could be any combination of market-
rate and affordable housing.
The above provide examples of housing developments with affordable units on parcels
with a variety of General Plan designations. No requests for affordable housing or
density bonuses were requested during the 2008-2013 period.
                 iii.      Yards and Setbacks
Yard and setback requirements vary by zoning district and proposed project density.
Front yard setbacks in residential zones must be 20 feet, except in the RE Zone, which
requires a 50-foot setback, and the R1-20 Zone, which requires a 30-foot setback. Side
yard setbacks are 20 feet in the RE Zone and the lesser of 10 feet or 10 percent of the
parcel width in all other residential zones. Backyard setbacks range from 30 feet in the RE
Zone to no required setback in the multi-family zones, which allows for the development
of attached units. Residential land uses developed above or below the ground floor of
other land uses in the BP, CBD, C, CC, and HWC Zones are not constrained by setback
requirements (Table 30).
The Zoning Ordinance allows for parking within setback areas (see parking regulations
below). Various accessory uses are also allowed within setback areas, including terraces,
swimming pools, stairways and unenclosed, uncovered patios. The Zoning Ordinance
identifies height and area limitations on accessory uses but allows for a wide variety of
accessory structures. Placerville’s yard setback requirements do not appear to be a
constraint to the development of housing.
                 iv.       Lot Size
The five single-family residential zones have various requirements for minimum lot size.
Lot sizes range from five acres to 6,000 square feet. The City has established large
minimum lot sizes for three of the single-family zones due to topographic constraints and
the lack of urban facilities and services in some parts of the City. Smaller lots of record
that do not meet minimum lot area or width requirements may be developed if created
before the present zoning standards for lot size were adopted by the City.
The City has also approved smaller lot sizes through its planned development overlay
process (see subsection "d," Flexibility in Development Standards). An example of a
development with smaller lots is the Orchard Hills single-family development by Mercy
Homes, which contains 102 homes affordable to lower-income families. The City also
approved narrower street sections in this subdivision.
             City of Placerville 2013-2021 Housing Element—FINAL—February 2014
                                              C - 74

                  v.        Building Coverage
The Zoning Ordinance defines building coverage as "total of ground floor areas of all
buildings, including accessory buildings occupying a parcel, expressed as a percentage of
the area of such parcel." The maximum permitted building coverage in single-family
zones is 35 percent, except in the RE Zone, which has a 20 percent limit. In the R-2, R-3,
R-4, and R-5 Zones, up to 60 percent of the lot may be occupied by buildings, accessory
building area, parking area, driveway and covered patio area. Due to the general, multi-
acre parcel sizes of the available multi-family zoned parcels, achievable maximum
permitted densities in the City’s residential zones for affordable housing is anticipated.
                  vi.       Building Height
The City’s height limits do not constrain a property owner’s ability to achieve maximum
densities allowed under the City’s General Plan and zoning because the zoning
standards allow up 35 feet, or two stories, in building height in the single-family zones
and up to 40 feet in the multi-family zones. Two stories of building height are sufficient,
in most cases, to achieve densities permitted under the various residential zoning
districts. For constrained sites in which only a portion of a property is developable, the
City’s allowance for up to 40 feet in height in multi-family zones permits the construction
of three-story buildings to achieve project densities that are financially feasible.
                  vii.      Occupancy Standards
The occupancy of residential units is not regulated by the City. Section 10-1-4 of the
Zoning Ordinance, Definitions, defines "family" as:
          "…one or more persons occupying the premises and living as a single
          housekeeping unit as distinguished from a group occupying a hotel,
          club, fraternity, sorority house, lodging house, rooming house, or
          boarding house. A family shall be deemed to include necessary
          servants."
Permitted uses in residential zones include detached and attached single-family homes
and various multi-family structures. The City’s definition of family does not explicitly
limit the amount of persons who can live in a dwelling unit. Occupancy standards do not
constrain the development of housing in Placerville, therefore.
                  viii.     Community Care Facilities
The Zoning Ordinance identifies three types of Community Care Facilities (CCFs) that
are allowed within various zoning districts throughout the City. Clientele of these
facilities may be children, adults, or children and adults, and include persons with
developmental, physical, or mental disabilities. Incidental medical care may also be
provided at these facilities. These Community Care Facilities CCFs are allowed by right
              City of Placerville 2013-2021 Housing Element—FINAL—February 2014
                                               C - 75

in all residential zones, when providing service for six or less individuals. Community
Care Facilities CCFs serving seven or more people are also allowed as a conditional use
within all residential zoning districts. Community Care Facilities CCFs include:
         Residential Facilities: Any family or group home, or social rehabilitation facility
         providing service for 24 hours or more;
         Day Care Center: Facilities providing non-medical care to persons in need of
         services, supervision, and assistance for less than 24 hours, and
         Homefinding Agency: Individuals or organizations that provide persons of any
         age placement into temporary, permanent, or adoptive care.
The Zoning Ordinance specifies that CCFs serving six or fewer individuals, that are
located within 1,000 feet or less of an existing CCF, are allowed as a conditional use. In
2008 the City’s zoning standards for Community Care Facilities were amended to comply
with state law requirements and to facilitate the location of these housing alternatives
within all City residential zones.
During the 2008-2013 planning period the City received two requests for CCFs serving
seven or more people. Both were issued conditional use permits. No requests and no
inquiries were made to the City for CCFs containing six or fewer people located within
1,000 feet from an existing CCF were filed during the planning period. The 1,000 feet
distancing between CCFs with six or fewer people is therefore not constraining to the
development of CCFs within the City.
                 ix.       Parking Standards
                 Parking Ratios
Single-family homes must have two off-street parking spaces per dwelling unit. Required
off-street parking for multi-family housing is one-and-one-half spaces per dwelling unit.
In the past, the actual amount of project parking required by the City has been
determined at staff level based on suggested parking requirements from the Institute of
Transportation Engineers (ITE) Parking Generation manuals. This manual generally
provides a much lower amount of parking for residential projects, and is the reason that
so many reductions have been made in the recent past for residential developments. The
City requires one off-street parking space per unit or room in rooming or boarding
houses. Institutional uses, such as nursing homes and rest homes, are subject to different
parking requirements than residential uses. These facilities must provide one off-street
parking space for every three beds, plus one space for every three employees.
The City’s process for requesting reasonable accommodations and the planned
development process have alleviated potential constraints in meeting parking
requirements in the past, as related to the development of special-needs housing for
seniors, persons with disabilities, and other special housing types in which one space or
fewer per dwelling unit was appropriate. The City has approved reduced parking for
             City of Placerville 2013-2021 Housing Element—FINAL—February 2014
                                              C - 76

senior and affordable multi-family housing (see above examples of affordable housing
developments) in the past.
                  Location of Parking
Parking must be provided within the same parcel, or on a parcel contiguous to the parcel,
that the residential dwelling unit it is meant to serve. The Zoning Ordinance allows
parking to be located within side and rear yard setbacks, and within required front yard
setbacks, up to three feet away from the street right-of-way.
The City also allows for the payment of an in-lieu fee for parking requirements on a
project-by-project basis for the construction of new facilities, expansion of existing
facilities, or annexation of an existing facility into a parking district. The Planning
Commission determines whether a proposal must comply with the City’s parking
standards or the applicant may pay an in-lieu fee because sufficient parking exists within
a 600-foot radius of the proposed use. Such fees are deposited in the City’s Parking Fund
for future use in acquiring, improving, or developing parking within the special district.
The Zoning Code establishes both credits and exemptions to the fee to allow for potential
alterations in land use on a given site. The parking fee is determined by multiplying the
cost of a parking space by a factor of one-half (1/2).
                  Parking Improvement Standards
The City does not require covered parking. Plans for carports and/or garages associated
with residential land uses are reviewed by the Planning Commission. Parking areas must
be treated with decorative elements, such as a variety of paving materials, plantings, or
other design features to alleviate large expanses of pavement. Given the wide variety of
pre-cast materials and techniques that are available (paving blocks, stamped concrete
patterns, colored concrete mixes, etc.), the City does not anticipate that this requirement
will add significantly to the cost of housing.
Buildings used for parking are required to be compatible with adjacent structures and
conform to all applicable building codes. Because the City does not require that parking
be covered, the improvement standards do not add significant cost to the development of
housing. The allowance for uncovered parking also provides greater flexibility for the
location of parking, further reducing potential constraints and cost.
                  b. Allowance for Housing and Shelter Alternatives
Housing Element law requires jurisdictions to identify adequate sites through
appropriate zoning and development standards to encourage the development of various
types of housing for all economic segments of the population. The City implements this
state law requirement through zoning standards for various types of housing, as
discussed below.
                  i.        Secondary Dwelling Units
              City of Placerville 2013-2021 Housing Element—FINAL—February 2014
                                               C - 77

The Zoning Ordinance defines a secondary (second) dwelling unit as "One additional
living unit on any one lot or parcel within a residential zoning district." Second units are
required to be equipped with separate cooking facilities. Second units may be created by
a revision of a single-family unit whereby cooking facilities are not shared in common,
converting an attic, basement, or garage of a single-family unit, adding a separate unit
onto an existing single-family dwelling, or constructing a separate dwelling on the same
parcel as a single-family home. The City permits second units in the RE, R1-A, R1-20, R1-
10, R1-6, R-2, R-3, R-4 and R-5 Zones, subject to compliance with zoning (excluding
density) and parking standards.
Second units may only be located on parcels of at least 5,000 square feet. The parcel on
which a secondary unit is proposed must have a permitted single-family use. The
primary dwelling unit must be occupied by the property owner and the second units
must be architecturally compatible with the primary dwelling unit. The Zoning
Ordinance allows a maximum floor area of 1,200 square feet and requires that the second
unit have one parking space, in addition to the parking required for the primary
dwelling unit. The second unit must have a separate outside entrance or an entrance onto
a hallway leading to the outside. A second unit can only be approved if it will not result
in significant impacts to public services and resources. Second units will not be allowed if
the primary dwelling unit is in a non-residential zone.
                 ii.       Mobile Home Parks and Developments
State law (Government Code section 65852.7) requires that mobile home parks and
developments, as defined in section 18200 et. seq. of the Health and Safety Code, which
include mobile home co-ops, condominiums, and planned unit developments, be
permitted on all land planned and zoned for residential use. State law allows the City to
require a use permit (conditional use permit) for a mobile home park.
Under Section 18300 of the Health and Safety Code, otherwise known as the Mobilehome
Parks Act, local ordinances which impose inspection, lot standards, or infrastructure
requirements within a mobilehome park are preempted by the Mobilehome Parks Act.
The valid authority for imposing and enforcing these requirements is the California
Department of Housing and Community Development, or a local government agency
that has assumed jurisdiction to enforce the Mobilehome Parks Act. The City has not
assumed jurisdiction to enforce the Mobilehome Parks Act.
However, under the Mobilehome Parks Act certain authority is granted to local
governments to regulate physical components of a mobilehome park. This authority
includes the power to adopt zoning ordinances to allow or prohibit parks and certain
park uses; for park perimeter walls or enclosures on public street frontage, signs, access,
and vehicle parking.
             City of Placerville 2013-2021 Housing Element—FINAL—February 2014
                                              C - 78

In 2012, implementing a 2008-2012 Housing Element Program, the City amended the
Zoning Ordinance adding mobilehome parks as a conditional use to land planned and
zoned for residential use, to be consistent with state law.
                 iii.      Manufactured Housing on Permanent Foundations
Individual mobile homes or manufactured homes are permitted on individual lots on
permanent foundations. A Conditional Use Permit may be granted by the City for the use
of a mobile home or manufactured home on an existing single-family lot in the event of a
hardship defined by Section 10-4-6 (E) of the Zoning Ordinance. This allows for a mobile
home or manufactured home to be used as a residence by a property owner’s family
member due to health limitations as long as neighboring properties are not significantly
impacted. In this instance, the mobile home must have access to one parking space, have
an area between 300 square feet and 1,000 square feet, and have all utility connections in
compliance with City Code. The City inspects mobile homes approved for hardship cases
on an annual basis. The permit for such a mobile home is subject to termination if the
hardship no longer exists.
According to state law (California Government Code Section 65852.3), manufactured
homes (including mobile homes) must be allowed on lots zoned for site-built single-
family homes under the same development standards as single-family homes. To comply
with state law, the Zoning Ordinance was amended in 2008 to allow individual mobile
homes on permanent foundations in all residential districts.
                 iv.       Single-Room Occupancy (SRO) Units
The Housing Element Law requires cities to facilitate and encourage SRO housing. SRO
housing is described by the Department of Housing and Community Development as
units that have a small floor area of between 200 to 350 square feet that provide an
affordable housing opportunity for individuals, including as an entry point for those
formerly homeless.
The City’s Zoning Ordinance does not define SRO housing, nor does not identify SROs as
a permitted use. The City’s Housing Program includes an action to amend the Zoning
Ordinance to facilitate and encourage the development of SRO housing units. The City
shall revise the Zoning Ordinance to define SROs, identify the zones in which they are
permitted and establish regulatory standards that encourage and facilitate single-room
occupancy units.
                 v.        Other Housing Types
The Placerville Zoning Ordinance identifies two other land uses that could provide
housing to people on a temporary basis. Rooming or Boarding Houses, containing not
more than five rental units providing lodging for three or more people, with or without
meals, are allowed by right in the R-2, R-3, and R-4 zoning districts.
             City of Placerville 2013-2021 Housing Element—FINAL—February 2014
                                              C - 79

Other housing types that are expressly defined by the
Zoning Ordinance but that are important to meeting
housing needs are transitional housing, supportive
housing, and emergency shelters. Transitional
housing provides shelter for people who are trying to
establish residence in a permanent home. Supportive
housing contains onsite or offsite services that assist
the supportive housing resident in retaining housing,
improving his or her health status, and maximizing
his or her ability to live and, when possible, work in
the community. An emergency shelter is a facility that
provides shelter to families and/or individuals on a
short-term basis of six months or less by a homeless person. In 2012 the City Zoning
Ordinance was amended, pursuant to Senate Bill 2 (2007), designating an emergency
shelter as a permitted use within the HWC (Highway Commercial Zone). Also, domestic
abuse shelters, a type of emergency housing, are recognized as an allowable use in RE,
R1-A, R1-20 and C zoning districts.
In addition to the allowance of domestic abuse shelters, Section 10-3-4 of the Zoning
Ordinance establishes a list of land uses that are allowed within any zoning district
following the acquisition of a conditional use permit. The list includes "institutions of a
philanthropic nature or non-profit charitable organizations." In general, residential uses
such as emergency shelters are provided through such organizations.
The City has used the flexibility allowed under the philanthropic and charitable
provisions made to approve emergency shelters. The City’s use permits are approved by
the Development Services Director, who has the discretion to interpret the Zoning
Ordinance. Two examples of shelters permitted by the City are a domestic violence
shelter for women and children, for which the City approved a zoning and General Plan
change and waived fees, and a youth shelter operated by New Morning Youth and
Family Services, for which the City also waived fees.
                  v.       Historical Buildings
Placerville’s heritage as a California "gold rush" town has resulted in the construction
and preservation of many historically significant buildings. Placerville’s history and the
architecture reflecting that history is a fundamental aspect of the City’s character and an
important factor in the City’s economy.
Section 10-4-10 of the City’s Zoning Ordinance establishes a review procedure for
buildings within designated residential historical districts in the City. The demolition of
buildings of special historic or aesthetic value or of historic-type architecture within
historical districts is expressly prohibited. The City will issue a permit for the removal of
any historic structure only in the event that it has been severely damaged or becomes
unsafe (as defined by the Building Code), dilapidated, or in a state of disrepair beyond
             City of Placerville 2013-2021 Housing Element—FINAL—February 2014
                                              C - 80

economically feasible salvage. Issuance of the permit is subject to approval by the
Planning Commission. Exterior improvements to buildings constructed or altered within
any historical district are required to conform to the Secretary of Interior Standards for
Rehabilitation and Guidelines for Rehabilitating Historic Buildings. Construction plans
are subject to approval by the City’s Planning Commission. The City’s Historical
Advisory Committee is also made aware of any applications for the above activities
within the City’s historical districts.
It is unlikely that the City’s historic preservation requirements will impose a constraint to
meeting its housing needs. The City encourages the preservation and re-use of historic
structures and allows modifications to historic buildings to meet health and safety
requirements for residential use or re-use, including accessibility improvements.
Through its preservation policies, the City believes it has increased the potential for
creating housing through the re-use of historic structures.
                  c. Allowances for Persons with Disabilities
The Zoning Ordinance allows various accessory uses within setback areas such as
unenclosed, uncovered patios, terraces, swimming pools, and stairways, among others.
Height restrictions for these types of accessory uses indicate that the structure cannot be
higher than three feet from ground level (California Building Code restricts heights to 30
inches or less). The use can extend into the setback for no more than two feet. While the
Zoning Ordinance does not specifically list accessory improvements, such as ramps or
lifts, for handicapped accessibility, the City’s practice has been to consider such
improvements as permitted under zoning standards. The City also applies the same level
of discretion and flexibility in building code interpretation to permit modifications to
existing residential structures to allow for greater accessibility for persons with
disabilities (see subsection 6 for more information on building code interpretation and
enforcement).
Included in the City’s Zoning Ordinance is the process by which persons with disabilities
or their representatives can request deviations from the strict application of zoning
standards to allow accessory structures, building modifications, or other features that
improve accessibility to housing and supportive services for persons with disabilities.
The Development Services Director has the authority to approve requests for reasonable
accommodations by weighing various factors such as potential benefit of requested
modification, potential impacts to surrounding uses, and/or physical attributes of the
structure. As part of the process, owners of immediately adjacent properties are made
aware of the proposal and are notified prior to the Development Services Director’s
decision. An approval or denial of an exception or code interpretation may be appealed
to the Planning Commission.
As described above, Placerville provides a wide range of options for the location of
alternative housing types, such as Community Care Facilities, that provide residential
opportunities for persons with physical, mental, or developmental disabilities.
              City of Placerville 2013-2021 Housing Element—FINAL—February 2014
                                               C - 81

Community Care Facilities are allowable land uses within all residential zoning districts,
subject to compliance with the City’s use permit process.
As a part of the Housing Element Update, the City reviewed the Zoning Ordinance to
identify potential constraints to persons with disabilities. The review revealed no specific
constraints to persons with disabilities. In order to ensure that zoning requirements and
City policies continue to accommodate persons with disabilities, Placerville will continue
to implement state building standards for accessibility and continue to provide
reasonable accommodations for persons with disabilities.
                  d. Flexibility in Development Standards
Placerville’s Zoning Ordinance includes a zoning district, Planned Development Overlay,
which allows for development of all land use types and flexibility in development
standards permitted in the zone used in conjunction with the Planned Development
Overlay.
                  i.        Planned Development Overlay
Planned Development Overlay (PD or PDO) zoning allows for flexible approaches to
new development, the application of creative design principles to site characteristics, and
the mixing of land uses. Placerville utilizes PD developments to achieve various
principles such as energy efficiency, architectural creativity, use of natural features, and
reduction of environmental impacts. PD projects are subject to approval by the City’s
Planning Commission.
For example, in the R1-10 Zone, the minimum lot size is 10,000 square feet and the
maximum density is 4.28 dwelling units per acre. A project within that zoning district
can be designed to maintain 4.28 dwelling units per acre by clustering of the same
number of dwelling units on smaller lots to preserve open space or to avoid constraints
such as steep slopes. The City uses the PD process to encourage affordable housing by
allowing the clustering of the same number of dwelling units on unconstrained portions
of a site, which not only avoids sensitive areas but also reduces infrastructure costs.
                  ii.       Density Bonus
In compliance with state law, a housing project that contains at least five units is eligible
for a density bonus. A density bonus is an increase in density over the otherwise
maximum allowable residential density under the applicable General Plan designation.
The amount of density bonus units an applicant may request can vary. It is determined
by the amount of units set aside as affordable and the applicable income category used
(low, very low, moderate, or senior). A maximum density bonus of 35 percent, either
individual or combined for any single project, is permissible under state law.
              City of Placerville 2013-2021 Housing Element—FINAL—February 2014
                                               C - 82

According to California Government Code Section 65915-65918, all projects that are
eligible for a density bonus shall receive between one and three incentives if requested.
As with the density bonus, the intent of the incentives is to further encourage the
construction of affordable housing. The number of incentives increases proportionally
with the amount of affordable housing provided. The breakdown is as follows:
         One incentive for projects that provide at least the minimum percentage of
         affordability required to receive a density bonus as described above as well as
         development of a project intended for senior citizens;
         Two incentives for projects that provide at least two times the minimum
         percentage of affordability required to receive a density bonus as described
         above, or
         Three incentives for projects that provide at least three times the minimum
         percentage of affordability required to receive a density bonus as described
         above.
Incentives may include but are not limited to:
         A reduction in development standards (reduction in lot sizes, setbacks, lot
         coverage, building height, etc.,
         A reduction in architectural design requirements,
         A density bonus greater than the amount required by state law, and/or
         Other regulatory incentives proposed by the developer that would result in
         identifiable, financially sufficient, and actual cost reductions.
To comply with state law and to implement a 2008-2013 Housing Element program, the
City adopted in 2013 density bonus provisions in the Zoning Ordinance that implement
state law provisions. This City action helps to promote a density bonus program as an
affordable housing incentive.
                  iii.      Nonconforming Uses
The Placerville Zoning Ordinance permits the rehabilitation and modification of
nonconforming residential buildings so that such structures can continue to provide safe
housing. Nonconforming residential structures that may be maintained for housing
purposes include buildings that were conforming at the time of their construction,
existing residences located within non-residential zones, and nonconforming structures
that have been designated historically significant by the City Council.
The following modifications to nonconforming uses are allowed:
         Remodeling or rehabilitation of residential structures, if the use is not enlarged;
         Enlargement of residential structures in residential zones if nonconformance is
         related to noncompliance with the required height, yard, and parking standards
              City of Placerville 2013-2021 Housing Element—FINAL—February 2014
                                               C - 83

         provided that new additions comply with all requirements for new structures
         and off-street parking;
         Addition to or enlargement of multi-family residences within non-residential
         zones, pursuant to the acquisition of a conditional use permit;
         Addition to or remodel or enlargement of single-family residential structures in
         non-residential zones pursuant to full compliance with the remainder of the
         Zoning Ordinance, and
         Re-establishment of a residential structure in nonconformance because of density
         through the acquisition of a conditional use permit.
                  iv.       Variances
The Planning Commission may approve variances from the strict application of zoning
regulations. The purpose of a variance is to enable owners to achieve reasonable use of
their properties, despite their inability to comply with zoning standards due to unique
property conditions such as size, shape, topography, location, or surroundings. Variances
are only issued for projects that would normally be allowable within the zoning district
and are subject to conditions assuring that the variance does not create special privileges
for the subject property.
                  e. Other Zoning Issues
                  Uses Permitted In Any Zone
Section 10-3-4 of the Zoning Ordinance lists 17 categories of land uses that are allowed
within any zoning district, subject to the requirements of a conditional use permit.
Housing/shelter types of uses included in this list of permitted uses are Community
Care Facilities, institutions of a philanthropic nature (under which emergency shelters,
and transitional and supportive housing have been permitted by the City), large family
day care homes, and residential care facilities. The remaining land uses are non-
residential.
The allowance of a wide range of single-family and non-residential uses within all
residential zoning districts could constrain the City’s ability to accommodate its low- and
moderate-income housing needs, particularly within multi-family zones, by allowing the
limited supply of higher-density residential land to be developed for such uses.
However, this constraint was eliminated via implementation of Program 12 in 2012 by
restricting the types of non-residential uses allowed within residential zones to public
uses, institutional uses, and uses that support residential uses.
                  Placerville Airport Land Use Compatibility Plan
The El Dorado County Airport Land Use Commission (ALUC) is responsible for
maintaining Airport Land Use Compatibility Plans (ALUCPs) for airport facilities located
              City of Placerville 2013-2021 Housing Element—FINAL—February 2014
                                               C - 84

within the County. The ALUCP for the Placerville Airport was adopted by the ALUC in
June 2012.
The ALUCP for Placerville Airport is a long-term planning document that by State law
must anticipate a time horizon of at least 20 years. The ALUCP projects long-range
airport configurations and activity levels, and addresses compatibility concerns related to
noise, overflight, safety, and airspace protection. The goal of the ALUC is to protect the
health and safety of County residents and visitors while supporting the continual success
and safety in the operation of local airports.
The Placerville ALUCP has the potential to constrain residential development when such
development is within the airport’s designated safety zone. In such instances, the
development of residential land use could be limited in density and intensity to some
degree.
Sites identified in the residential sites inventory are not constrained by land use
compatibility requirements of the ALUCP. As such, the ALUCP is not considered a
significant constraint within the City.
         3. Site Improvement Standards
Site improvements, an important component of new development, include roads, water,
sewer, and other infrastructure necessary to serve residential development. Site
improvement requirements are regulated by the City’s Subdivision Ordinance. The City
can mitigate the cost of these improvement requirements by assisting affordable housing
developers in obtaining state and federal financing for their projects, providing density
bonuses (to spread improvement costs over a larger number of housing units), deferring
or reducing fees, or permitting cost-saving alternatives to meeting improvement
standards.
Street improvement standards are among the most significant in their effect on housing
costs. The cost of providing streets for new residential developments, in turn, is primarily
influenced by the required right-of-way width, pavement width, pavement
improvement, and landscaping standards. Placerville’s street standards identify four
types of streets, of varying widths and levels of service:
         Minor arterial streets (80-foot right-of-way): Minor arterials provide service to
         large traffic volumes and connect neighborhoods within a large development
         through four-lane configurations.
         Collector streets (56-foot right-of-way): Collector streets have two-lane
         configurations and provide access through a neighborhood.
         Local roads (50-foot right-of-way with 32-foot paved roadway): Local roads
         provide direct access to lots that are adjacent to the paved section of road. The
         pavement width required by the City is the generally accepted minimum
             City of Placerville 2013-2021 Housing Element—FINAL—February 2014
                                              C - 85

         necessary to provide for one lane of vehicular traffic in each direction and on-
         street parking on each side.
         Hillside streets: Because of Placerville’s location in the foothills of the Sierra
         Nevada, the City’s street improvement standards also include hillside streets,
         which have a variable right-of-way and width of pavement depending on the
         specific location.
Table 32 summarizes the City’s street improvements standards.
                             Table 32: Placerville Street Standards
                                                Required                      Required
           Street Type
                                             Right-of-Way                  Pavement Width
 Minor Arterial                                                 Variable                 80 feet
 Collector Streets                                                 56 feet               36 feet
 Local Streets                                                     50 feet               32 feet
 Hillside Streets                                     29.5 to 37.5 feet            20 to 28 feet
                                     Source: City of Placerville, 2003
Required street improvements include curbs, gutters, and sidewalks of between four and
five feet in width, depending on the zoning district. The minimum sidewalk
improvement standard is consistent with accessibility requirements for persons with
disabilities and is not excessive in light of the need for ensuring minimum pedestrian
access in residential areas. Given the limited area in which hillside streets are typically
constructed, sidewalk improvements are not required on hillside streets. When full
improvements are not deemed necessary because of site-specific conditions, a developer
or applicant can enter into a Street Frontage Improvement Agreement with the City to
defer the improvements until a future date when such improvements become necessary.
         4. Development Permit Procedures
                  a. Overview
Development review and permit processing are necessary steps to ensure that residential
construction proceeds in an orderly manner. However, the time and cost of permit
processing and review can be a constraint to housing development if they place an undue
burden on the developer. Most minor land use and permit decisions are made
administratively. Larger projects, and some types of special needs housing, require use
permits that involve review and approval by the Planning Commission.
              City of Placerville 2013-2021 Housing Element—FINAL—February 2014
                                                  C - 86

The Development Services Department processes, investigates, and reviews development
applications. Applications for minor deviations, or slight modifications to Zoning
Ordinance requirements, are approved by the Development Services Director. Minor
deviations listed in Section 10-3-11 of the Zoning Ordinance include, but are not limited
to, the reduction of lot area by not more than 10 percent, modification of height
requirement for uncovered patios, and modification of rear or side yard setbacks by not
more than 10 percent. Adjacent properties must be notified of the proposed minor
deviation prior to approval and the decision can be appealed to the City’s Planning
Commission.
Placerville’s Planning Commission is charged with the responsibility of approving use
permits, variances, and site plans. The Planning Commission functions as the Design
Review Committee for projects subject to Site Plan Review (Zoning Ordinance Section 10-
4-9), which includes the construction of multi-family and duplex developments, mixed
use developments involving multi-family residential over commercial, exterior additions
exceeding 1,000 square feet on multi-family structures, the demolition or alteration of
buildings within the City’s historical districts, and the construction of attached single-
family dwelling units.
Site Plan Review includes a review of a project’s application materials, site plans, design
plans, landscaping plans, and any other information pertinent to the project. Projects are
reviewed for consistency and compliance with Placerville’s zoning standards and design
review guidelines. Recommendations made by the Planning Commission on General
Plan amendments, zoning district changes, and subdivision maps are referred to the City
Council, which has the final decision-making authority.
 The City conducts a historical district review as part of the Site Plan Review process for
development proposals (including exterior alterations to existing buildings) within any
of the City’s historical districts. The historical district review does not add significant
time to the site plan review process. Activities subject to historical district review include
building demolition, the construction of new buildings, and the alteration of building
exteriors. City historic design guidelines for proposed alterations of existing building
exteriors within the City designated Residential Historic Districts are the Secretary of
Interior Standards for Rehabilitation & Guidelines for Rehabilitating Historic Structures.
Because the historic district review focuses on building exteriors, it is not likely to
significantly affect the re-use of existing building interiors for housing.
In addition, all projects that are subject to Site Plan Review are also required to sign the
City’s Covenant and Agreement for Landscaping, which establishes guidelines for
installation and maintenance for landscaping and the pertinent parties responsible for
these activities. The purpose of the Agreement is to ensure that landscaping is installed
and properly maintained according to the approved site plan.
In general, these procedures, standards and design criteria are not considered to be
excessive. The Zoning Ordinance includes development criteria regarding building mass,
building scale, building materials, parking, landscaping, lighting and other standards
             City of Placerville 2013-2021 Housing Element—FINAL—February 2014
                                              C - 87

that were adopted to implement the goals and policies within the City’s Land Use and
Community Design Elements. The development criteria and standards are applied to all
projects, including multi-family, mixed-use and commercial. While these standards may
affect development costs, they are considered necessary to assure certain quality
standards for meeting the City’s General Plan design goals and policies.
                   b. Project Approval Timeframes
The following discussion highlights the processing times for various permits in the City:
         Single-family homes on individual lots can be processed administratively in as
         little as 3 weeks.
         Parcel maps also require administrative approval; City review and approval can
         be completed in six to eight weeks.
         Multi-family development within multi-family residential zones requires design
         review from the Planning Commission; permits are processed in six to eight
         weeks.
         Mixed-use projects involving ground floor commercial use and second level-and-
         above multi-family residential use require design review from the Planning
         Commission; permits are processed in eight to ten weeks.
         Subdivision maps must be reviewed by both the Planning Commission and City
         Council, and require eight to 16 weeks for approval.
         Development requests within a historic district are submitted to the Historical
         Advisory Committee for its recommendation, then require approval by the
         Planning Commission. This process requires three to five weeks for approval.
         Conditional Use Permits and Variances require Planning Commission review
         and are generally processed in four weeks.
These processing times are reasonable in that they allow adequate time to research the
projects and ensure compliance with applicable regulations. Extensive public hearings,
which can delay processing times and constrain development, are not required by the
City in most cases. The Planning Commission meets twice per month, which assists in
avoiding potential delays in scheduling a hearing.
The timeframes cited above do not include additional time for environmental review if
projects are not exempt from CEQA requirements. Small residential projects in
Placerville can be approved with a Negative Declaration or Mitigated Negative
Declaration, which can add 30 to 60 days to the permit process. Large projects may
require an Environmental Impact Report, which can add 90 days to one year to the
process, depending on project size and the scope of the environmental issues to be
addressed.
               City of Placerville 2013-2021 Housing Element—FINAL—February 2014
                                                C - 88

                 c. Design Guidelines
The Residential Site Design Guidelines are intended to provide general guidance for
residential development to implement the community design policies of the General
Plan. The City’s review for compliance with the Guidelines is part of site plan review and
does not add significant time to the permit process. The Guidelines do not contain strict
requirements that will add significantly to the cost of housing production. The
requirements are general in nature and designed to ensure compatibility with
surrounding structures and the safety of the residents. Therefore, the Design Guidelines
do not present a constraint to the development of housing in the City.
General Plan policies seek to preserve the quality of existing residential neighborhoods,
ensure the provision of adequate services, and prevent injury and loss resulting from
wildland fires. Following is a summary of the Placerville Design Guidelines:
        Landscaping/Street Trees: Residential parcels must be landscaped in all areas
        that are visible from any pedestrian or vehicular corridor. Street trees should be
        incorporated into the residential landscapes.
        Architectural Elements: Architectural elements should demonstrate continuity
        with existing structures. New buildings should be of generally the same
        proportions as neighboring structures and should not vary by more than one
        story in height from the surrounding buildings.
        Visual Effects: Projects should carefully consider the neighboring parcels with
        attention to maintaining visibility and vistas, and minimize any negative visual
        effects. The City shall remove obstructions that obscure street signs or prevent
        house numbers from being clearly visible from the street.
        Fire Hazards: All development in areas of high and extreme fire hazards shall be
        constructed with fire retardant roof coverings, provide for clearance around the
        structures, and use fire resistant groundcover. The City will continue to enforce
        the fire code and weed abatement regulations.
                 d. Use Permits and Variances
Use permits and variances are subject to the same review process in Placerville. An
application, site plan, and required fee are filed with the Development Services
Department for initial review. A public hearing with the Planning Commission is
required within 40 days of the application materials being deemed complete. The City is
required to notify all property owners within a 300-foot radius of the subject property of
the upcoming public hearing by mail. Approval of a use permit or variance can be subject
to terms and conditions, noncompliance with which can result in revocation of the permit
or variance. Planning Commission’s decisions regarding a use permit or variance may be
appealed to the City Council.
             City of Placerville 2013-2021 Housing Element—FINAL—February 2014
                                              C - 89

                  e. Process for Requesting Reasonable Accommodations
As discussed above, the City administers a process by which persons with disabilities or
their designees can request reasonable accommodations in the application of the zoning
law in order to achieve fair access to housing. Requests are approved by the
Development Services Director in relation to various factors such as potential benefit of
requested modification, potential impacts to surrounding uses, and/or physical
attributes of the structure. As part of the process, owners of adjacent properties are
notified of the proposal and of the Development Services Director’s decision. A decision
by the Development Services Director regarding a request for reasonable accommodation
can be appealed to the City’s Planning Commission.
The overwhelming majority of requests for reasonable accommodations can be approved
administratively through the Development Services Director’s discretion to interpret the
Zoning Ordinance. Few such requests would require variances that trigger review and
public hearings before the Planning Commission.
         6. Building Code and Enforcement
The City of Placerville implements Title 24 of the California Code of Regulations, through
which California has adopted the California Building Code (CBC) and other model codes
(electrical, plumbing, mechanical, etc.), as revised by the California Building Standards
Commission. The City has adopted local amendments to the various model codes
establishing higher standards with regard to snowloads. The Placerville Building
Division is responsible for enforcing both state and City regulations governing
maintenance of all buildings and property. Due to the City’s minimal staffing levels, code
enforcement is primarily complaint-based.
Building Code standards and the time required for inspections increase housing
production costs and may impact the viability of rehabilitation of older properties that
are required to be brought up to current code standards. To mitigate the potential cost
impact, the City only requires property owners to comply with current code standards
for those portions of a structure that are being modified, for additions and new
structures, and for any portion of an existing structure affected by a modification or
addition. The City also permits historic structures to comply with standards of the
California Historical Building Code.
B. Programs that Reduce Government Constraints
The constraints on housing in terms of federal, state and local government influences are
well-recognized and discussed above. In an effort to assist the development of all
housing types including low- and very low- income, the City relies on a number of
current programs listed in Title V, Section C herein. The current programs used by the
City to assist in the creation of housing by reducing constraints include those listed
              City of Placerville 2013-2021 Housing Element—FINAL—February 2014
                                               C - 90

below. While noting that many City programs indirectly address housing constraint
issues, the following are most notable:
         PROGRAM 1: Available Land Inventory. The City maintains an updated
         inventory of vacant residential parcels in the City, and provides an annual report
         to the City Council and Planning Commission regarding the same.
         PROGRAM 2: Infill Development and Sites with Re-Use Potential. Identifies infill
         sites and encourages their re-use including mixed use and Smart Growth
         Principles.
         PROGRAM 3: High-Density Development. Increase land inventory through
         rezoning which is necessary to accommodate lower-income housing at 20
         dwelling units per acre minimum, permit owner-occupied or multifamily
         residential uses by right, with compliance with local design standards, but
         without discretionary action.
         PROGRAM 4: Single-Room Occupancy (SRO) Units. Identify zones where this
         type of housing shall be permitted, and establish standards that encourage and
         facilitate their development.
         PROGRAM 6: Employee Housing. The City will revise the Zoning Ordinance to
         meet the requirements of the State’s Employee Housing Act, allowing employee
         housing containing six or fewer employees as a single-family residential use
         permitted by right in any zone that allows single-family residential uses. Revise
         the RE, Estate Residential zone to permit employee housing consisting of no
         more than 36 beds in a group quarters or 12 units or spaces designed for use by a
         single family or household as an agricultural use.
         PROGRAM 13: Density Bonus. The City continues to encourage the use of
         density bonuses and other incentives which can provide high-density and
         flexible design incentives.
         PROGRAM 14: Pursue State and Federal Funding. The City will continue to
         pursue a variety of state and federal funding courses to assist in the creation of
         housing across the income spectrum.
         PROGRAM 15: Permit and Development Impact Fees. The City annually reviews
         its development fees to evaluate whether the fees are constraining applications
         for housing development. The City also routinely defers fees, and reduces fees
         where appropriate.
         PROGRAM 16: Self-Help Housing. The City will continue to work with non-
         profit organizations in the area to develop self-help housing and seek financial
              City of Placerville 2013-2021 Housing Element—FINAL—February 2014
                                               C - 91

         assistance in the form of grants, low-interest loans and other incentives for the
         same.
         PROGRAM 17: First-Time Homebuyer Assistance. The City intends to design
         and implement a first-time homebuyer program, perhaps in a coordinated effort
         with El Dorado County.
         PROGRAM 18. Statewide Community Infrastructure Program (SCIP). The City
         recently completed the necessary regulatory steps to join the SCIP, which allows
         developers to finance development fees (traffic impact, water and sewer system
         impacts, etc.) which are normally an up-front cost collected when construction
         permits are issued. The City intends to implement this program for all projects,
         particularly housing projects, to provide housing developers this program to
         finance impact fees.
         PROGRAM 20: Housing Rehabilitation. The City continues to promote the
         program for low-interest and deferred payment loans for housing rehabilitation.
C. Environmental and Public Service Constraints
Environmental factors and a lack of necessary infrastructure or public services can
constrain residential development in a community by increasing costs and reducing the
amount of land suitable for housing. This section summarizes and analyzes the most
pertinent constraints to housing in Placerville. Future residential development will be
faced with challenges regarding supportive public infrastructure extensions and
expansions.
         1. Water Service
                  a. Water Supply
The Placerville Public Works Department provides domestic water to an area of
approximately four square miles, including most of the City of Placerville. The Public
Works Department receives treated and chlorinated water from El Dorado Irrigation
District (EID). This water is obtained from surface sources, the largest of which is
Jenkinson Lake (Sly Park Reservoir), located approximately five miles southeast of
Pollock Pines. In addition, water can be drawn from the PG&E El Dorado Forebay, also
located near Pollock Pines. Water from both of these sources is treated and chlorinated
before flowing by gravity to several communities on the Western Slope, including
Placerville. A third water source, Folsom Lake, can serve water needs in the western
portion of the EID system.
The City of Placerville has rights to divert as much water as is needed from the EID
system. The City water system serves 2,248 residential customers and 508 commercial
              City of Placerville 2013-2021 Housing Element—FINAL—February 2014
                                               C - 92

customers in the Placerville's service area. Per the 2005 Water Master Plan, average daily,
maximum and peak hour water demands were calculated for 2005 and estimated for
years 2009 and 2015. Table 33 lists these water demand figures.
               Table 33: Water Demand within the City Water Service Area
              Average Day Demand            Maximum Day Demand         Peak Hour Demand
   Year
                        (gpm)                         (gpm)                   (gpm)
 2005                                1,118                     2,090                   3,448
 2009                                1,281                     2,409                   3,975
 2015                                1,488                     2,805                   4,628
All lands in the water service area below 2,000 feet can potentially be served, although
some areas have not been developed, and therefore do not yet have water mains. In 1985,
the City identified 25,000 feet of water main in need of upgrading, out of 37 miles of total
system line length. About 16,000 feet have so far been replaced. Capacity is not seen as a
limiting factor in the near future, and the remaining improvements in water mains can be
accomplished with moderate cost.
In residential areas with municipal water service, minimum fire flow requirements call
for the ability to deliver 1,000 gallons per minute for one hour, with a residual pressure of
20 psi. This is currently provided in the City of Placerville with reservoir capacity and
with a system of pressure-reducing valves (PRVs) on EID mains, which can open to
provide a surge of water on demand. In some portions of the water service area, old and
undersized water mains limit the ability of the system to provide adequate fire flow.
Although assessments have not been completed of fire flow adequacy, it is expected that
recent improvements to water mains will be found to have increased fire flow
capabilities to many portions of the service area.
Both residential and commercial customers must pay a              monthly charge. With the
exception of large commercial users, commercial rates are        generally 50 to 100 percent
higher than residential rates. Water hookup charges are          divided into two parts: an
application fee, and Capital Improvement Charges (CICs),         otherwise known as impact
fees.
         2. Sewer Service
                  a. System Treatment Capacity
The City wastewater system consists of one sewage treatment plant and a collection
system including three pumping stations. It serves all areas within the City limits and
minor selected areas outside of the City boundary. The Hangtown Creek Water
Reclamation Facility (HCWRF) has a permitted capacity at average day dry weather flow
              City of Placerville 2013-2021 Housing Element—FINAL—February 2014
                                               C - 93

of 2.3 million gallons per day (mgd) and up to 5.7 mgd during wet weather conditions.
Flows as of 2013 were estimated at 1.0 mgd average day dry weather flow. The City
expects wastewater flows will increase to more than 1.6 mgd during dry weather in 25
years.
Based upon average 2002 dry weather per capita usage of 118 gallons per capita per day,
and the remaining dry weather flow capacity of approximately 1.0 mgd, the WRF can
accommodate an additional population of approximately 8,400 persons. Using the
current figure of 2.3 persons per dwelling unit, 3,650 equivalent dwelling units of
capacity remain. The City’s recent average growth rate of 2% (1996-2002) indicates that
current capacity should be sufficient through 2025.
The commercial/industrial component of wastewater flow is estimated at approximately
35%. Since no proportionate increase is expected in the future, commercial/industrial
flows will be combined with residential flows during capacity analysis.
Recently, the WRF was upgraded to comply with state permit conditions for treatment
quality. No plant expansion was required.
                  b. Collection System
The collection system consists of approximately 53 miles of pipe, which range in size
from 22 inches to 4 inches. There are three small sewage pumping stations. Much of the
system is older and in need of rehabilitation. The City conducts ongoing sewer pipe
replacement and repair operations as well as pump station rehabilitation as needed.
Infiltration/inflow studies and repairs are conducted to reduce illicit flows into the
collection system.
The City conducted a pipeline assessment in 2003. The data provides information that
could be used for annual wastewater collection system pipeline replacement needs. The
data contained in the table listing the pipeline segments by age of construction for the
active and public pipeline is summarized in Table 34 below. This table lists the pipe
segments by their age in 10-year increments. A review of this data will show that 15.4%
of the wastewater system was constructed over 60 years ago (1940s or earlier). If the
pipeline constructed in the 1950s is included, then the data in this table would suggest
that about a quarter of the system (23.6%) has reached its useful life or is just about near
the end of its useful life. Additionally, this table shows that about 50% of the system was
built in the 1960s and 1970s. By the end of the year 2030, over 75% of the system will be
over 50 years old and a full quarter of it will be older than 75 years.
             City of Placerville 2013-2021 Housing Element—FINAL—February 2014
                                              C - 94

   Table 34: Wastewater Collection System Pipeline Length by Age of Construction
                                                                             Cumulative
       Decade                 Pipe Length              Percentage
                                                                             Percentage
1920’s                                      4,531                 1.8%                  1.8%
1930’s                                     15,728                 6.1%                  7.9%
1940’s                                     19,174                 7.5%                 15.4%
1950’s                                     21,177                 8.3%                 23.6%
1960’s                                     73,177                28.5%                 52.2%
1970’s                                     58,739                22.9%                 75.1%
1980’s                                     35,800                14.0%                 89.0%
1990’s                                     16,109                 6.3%                 95.3%
2000+                                      12,039                 4.7%                100.0%
Total                                    256,474                100.0%
The City is also concerned with some of the pipeline materials used to construct the
wastewater collection system. Specific areas of concern are the appropriate useful life of
Transite (AC) pipe, which has been used extensively to construct the City’s sewer system
and Orangeburg (ORG) pipe, which has failed in some sites within the City and which is
known to be a poor product based on the experience of other agencies in the area. Based
on the brittle nature of Transite pipe, the useful life of this material should be reduced to
about 30 years. Over 50% of the wastewater system is constructed using Transite pipe.
The City may consider focusing some of the first replacement work to replace the
existing Orangeburg pipe before more failures occur.
             City of Placerville 2013-2021 Housing Element—FINAL—February 2014
                                               C - 95

       Table 35: Wastewater Collection System Pipeline Material of Construction
                                                                          Cumulative
       Material               Pipe Length              Percentage
                                                                           Percentage
 AC                                      138,582                54.0%                 54.0%
 CIP                                      41,649                16.2%                 70.3%
 Clay                                       3,062                 1.2%                71.5%
 DIP                                        5,107                 2.0%                73.5%
 ORG                                        2,231                 0.9%                74.3%
 PVC                                      60,028                23.4%                 97.7%
 Steel                                      2,325                 0.9%                98.6%
 Truss                                      2,926                 1.1%                99.8%
 Unknown                                      564                 0.2%               100.0%
 Total                                   256,474               100.0%
For new development, City Engineering policies now require developers to provide
capacity analysis of existing downstream pipelines to determine available capacity. If
capacity is unavailable, the developer is required to upsize off-site pipe to accommodate
increased flows. Reimbursement to the developer may be considered by the City if the
City requires increased pipe sizing for future needs over and above current City needs
and developer needs. The City typically negotiates a feasible financial arrangement for
increasing the size of undersize sewer lines.
        3. Drainage
The City of Placerville contains approximately 5.8 square miles of land, and is situated in
the Hangtown Creek Drainage Basin. This creek connects to Weber Creek and eventually
into the South Fork of the American River. Three larger tributaries contribute flow into
Hangtown Creek. Randolph Canyon Drainage runs along Mosquito Road and flows into
Hangtown Creek from the north, Cedar Ravine Drainage flows in from the south; and an
unnamed tributary along Airport Road from the southeast. Significant residential
development along all drainages increases runoff quantity into Hangtown Creek.
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) maps show areas of flooding at 100-
year and 500-year storm flows along the above-mentioned drainages. Since the City is
situated on higher sloped terrain, flood plain area is generally narrow, being restricted by
canyon topography, however localized area including downtown Main Street, the
Broadway commercial area and portions of Highway 50 are in flood zones. It should be
noted that, with the exception of several vacant "infill" parcels, no residentially
developed parcels are located within a 100-year flood zone.
             City of Placerville 2013-2021 Housing Element—FINAL—February 2014
                                               C - 96

The City has not adopted a Master Drainage Plan or a Drainage Facilities Map. These
deficiencies should be rectified by the year 2012 through the City’s participation in the
NPDES (National Pollution Discharge Elimination System) Phase II Statewide Program,
which requires facility assessment, master planning, and quality and quantity controls.
The City’s existing drainage system of natural channels and street drain systems is
known to be aging and in need of repair and upsizing. The City will develop a Capital
Improvement Plan, which will identify and fund drainage system improvements.
For new development projects, City Engineering policies include:
         Generally, for sites over one acre, the quantity of post-development drainage
         runoff must be reduced to pre-development flows, or in the alternative, a study
         must be performed to show that there are no adverse impacts to downstream
         facilities or properties through hydrologic and hydraulic analysis.
         The developer may be required to analyze existing downstream facilities for
         deficiencies, and mitigate any deficiencies that may affect public health, safety
         and welfare.
         Drainage facilities and analysis thereof shall be held generally in accordance with
         the El Dorado County Drainage Manual, or, for small sites, the Rational Drainage
         Formula.
         4. Hillside Development Standards
The City regulates the density of development on sites with slopes greater than 10
percent in single-family zones through a formula that requires larger minimum lot sizes
as slopes increase. The City’s slope density requirements do not apply in multi-family
zones. The result of the slope standards is the reduction of achievable density on single-
family sites by as much as 30 percent, depending on site characteristics. The City believes
these standards are necessary, however, to ensure the health and safety of residents
living on sloped sites and those living downhill from developed properties with
significant slopes.
The slope standards regulate minimum parcel size based on the average slope of a
property. Average slope is determined by calculating the highest and lowest points on a
property in at least two locations, dividing the vertical distance by the horizontal
distance of the property, and averaging the results. Properties, or portions of properties,
with slopes in excess of 40 percent may not be included in the calculation of minimum lot
size, as development is generally prohibited on such slopes (unless special engineering
standards are met and a design waiver is approved by City).
The slope standards will have the greatest impact on housing development potential in
the R1-6 and R1-10 Zones. A property in the R1-6 Zone with an average slope greater
than 10 percent will require a minimum lot size over 6,000 square feet. Properties with
slopes between 15 and 20 percent will require minimum lot sizes of more than 10,000
              City of Placerville 2013-2021 Housing Element—FINAL—February 2014
                                               C - 97

square feet under the City’s formula. If the average slope is 20 percent, the minimum lot
size is 20,000 square feet. Much of the developable vacant land zoned for single-family
use in Placerville contains average slopes in excess of ten percent. One implication of the
City’s standards is that some areas zoned R1-6 cannot be developed with 6,000-square-
foot lots, reducing the potential for moderately-priced ownership housing.
The City does allow for exceptions to the slope standards for existing lots created prior to
May 1963 if the applicant can show that grading, tree removal, and site disturbance can
be confined to a portion of the property within an average slope of 10 percent or less. The
City also allows property owners to use the planned development process to cluster
homes on less-restricted portions of a development site to mitigate the potential loss of
dwelling units from the application of the slope standards.
The City could further mitigate the loss of residential development potential on
moderately sloped properties by changing its formula. The City could reduce the ratio of
additional required lot area to average slope with the objective of increasing the number
of permitted lots between 6,000 and 10,000 square feet.
Even though the City’s slope density requirements do not apply to multi-family zones
(R-2, R-3, R-4 and R-5), dwelling units are typically clustered on less-sloped portions of
multi-family properties so that feasible densities can still be achieved. The City’s ability
to accommodate its share of regional housing needs under the SACOG Regional Housing
Needs Plan will not be affected by the presence of sloped multi-family properties because
the City’s available land inventory (Tables 38 and 39) shows that Placerville has adequate
multi-acre, non-sloped sites.
         5. Fire Hazards
The City of Placerville is predominantly designated a Very High Fire Hazard Severity
Zone; several areas in the City are at risk for wildland fires. The City complies with CBC
Chapter 7A. In order to mitigate the risk of wildland fires, the Placerville General Plan’s
Health and Safety Element contain the following policies:
         Section VI. Health and Safety
         Goal D, Policy 1: Areas of high and extreme fire hazards shall be the subject of
         special review, and building activities and higher intensity uses shall be limited
         unless the hazards are mitigated to a point acceptable to the Fire Department.
         Goal D, Policy 2: All new development in areas of high and extreme fire hazards
         shall be constructed with fire-retardant roof coverings.
          Goal D, Policy 4: All new development in areas of high and extreme fire hazards
         shall provide for clearance around the structures and the use of fire-resistant
         groundcover.
              City of Placerville 2013-2021 Housing Element—FINAL—February 2014
                                               C - 98

D. Market Constraints
          1. Availability of Financing
The availability of financing affects a person’s ability to purchase or improve a home.
Although financing support programs may be available through local governmental
sources, generally, these sources are limited and would not meet local demand. Private
lending practices appear consistent throughout the greater Sacramento metropolitan
region and surrounding counties. The more recent (2007-2012) collapse of the "housing
bubble" and subsequent credit crisis in the mortgage industry affected the availability of
credit and cost of real estate loans. Although mortgage interest rates are at record lows,
the ability to obtain a loan is much more difficult due to an overall reduction in the
supply of loanable funds from lenders. In addition, with the rise in foreclosure rates came
changes in mortgage underwriting standards which are likely to have an impact on the
ability of lower income borrowers than other segments of the community.
Under the Home Mortgage Disclosure Act (HMDA), lending institutions are required to
disclose information on the disposition of loan applications by the income, gender, and
race/ethnicity of the applicants. This applies to all loan applications for home purchases
and improvements, whether financed at market rate or with government assistance.
          2. Price and Availability of Land
A key factor determining housing cost is the price of necessary raw land improvements.
A review of property listings for land in Placerville and nearby communities indicates
that the cost of residential land varies by location and degree of improvement. Based on
sales listings for June 2009, the cost of land ranges from just over $10,000 per acre for raw
land without services or direct road access to over $650,000 per acre for land near
Highway 50 with services. Commercially zoned properties tend to have the highest land
values, at $300,000 to over $540,000 per acre. Single-family properties have values
ranging from $23,000 to $250,000 per acre. The cost per lot for single-family land ranges
from approximately $39,000 to $70,000 for parcels of 20,000 square feet or less to as much
as $250,000 per buildable lot for parcels of one acre or more, depending on location,
zoning, and access to roads and utilities. Sites zoned for multi-family residential use have
land values in the range of $100,000 to $160,000 per acre. Based on the densities permitted
in the City’s R-3, R-4 and R-5 zones, the land cost per dwelling unit would range from
approximately $6,500 to $13,000 per dwelling unit, excluding site improvements and
utility connections.
          3. Construction Cost
Many factors can affect the cost of residential construction, including the type of
construction, custom versus tract development, materials, site conditions that may
require special engineering or construction techniques, whether union or "open shop"
              City of Placerville 2013-2021 Housing Element—FINAL—February 2014
                                               C - 99

labor is used, finishing details, optional amenities, square footage, and structural
configuration. These factors create a wide variation in construction costs from as little as
$70 per square foot for basic construction to as much as $150 or more for high-quality
custom construction.
The construction cost for a basic, 1,500-square-foot starter home of average quality in
Placerville would range from $186,000 to $200,000, assuming no special engineering
requirements for the foundation or other structural components.8
For multi-family construction in the Placerville area, the cost per unit for an 80-unit
development, with an average unit size of 800 square feet plus common areas, can range
from as low as $64,000 per unit (for basic construction using open shop labor) to $145,000
per unit (for premium construction using union labor). 9 These costs exclude permit and
impact fees, administrative and financing costs, land costs, and developer profit.
Additional costs will be incurred if site conditions require special engineering or
environmental remediation/mitigation.
The minimum cost of producing a 1,500-square-foot single-family home with a 420-
square-foot garage in Placerville is estimated to be $230,000, excluding the costs of
grading and other site preparation activities, financing costs, engineering, builder profit,
architectural and other administrative costs, and roads, utilities, and other infrastructure.
This estimate assumes a land cost of $40,000 for a lot of 6,000 square feet and permit and
development impact fees of approximately $50,000 (including school, fire, park and
traffic impact fees).
          4. Permit and Impact Fees
The City of Placerville levies two types of development fees: permit fees, to cover the cost
of plan review and inspection, and impact fees, to cover the cost of providing public
infrastructure such as water and sewer systems and public roads. In addition to City fees,
developers must pay fees to local school districts to cover the cost of providing school
facilities, and to the El Dorado County Fire Protection District to cover the cost of
providing fire protection services. Table 36 shows the construction costs, by development
type, for single-family and multi-family dwellings.
8 Building-Cost.net
9 RS Means cost calculator at www.rsmeans.com
               City of Placerville 2013-2021 Housing Element—FINAL—February 2014
                                                C - 100

                             Table 36: Construction Costs—Placerville
                                          Single-Family Dwelling             Multi-Family Dwelling
       Development Type                         1,500 sq. ft. w/                   800 sq. ft. w/
                                               420 sq. ft. garage                200 sq. ft. carport
 Sewer                                                             $6,280                          $4,710
 Water                                                            $16,065                         $12,013
 Fire                                                              $2,112                          $1,100
 Traffic                                                          $14,256                         $10,586
 Park                                                              $1,320                          $1,320
 School                                                            $4,455                          $2,376
 SMIP (Seismic)                                                         $18                        $14.92
 Green Fee                                                               $8                             $6
 Subtotal—Impact Fees                                             $44,514                      $32,125.92
 Building Plan Check                                              $839.91                         $747.71
 Building Permit Fee                                            $1,759.80                       $1,544.66
 Engineering Plan Check                                              $3007                         $30010
 Engineering Permit Fee                                             $15011                           $1507
 Sewer Application                                                      $75                            $75
 Water Application                                                      $75                            $75
 Document Duplication                                                   $10                            $25
 Subtotal—Permit Fees                                           $3,209.71                       $2,917.37
 Grand Total                                                  $47,723.71                       $35,043.29
                         Source: City of Placerville Development Services Department
Table 37 shows that permit and impact fees for apartments and detached single-family
homes are comparable to those of nearby jurisdictions.
10 Fees based on site improvement costs for the entire housing project.
11 Other site-specific development fees such as encroachment and retaining wall fees may be applicable in
addition to those shown.
                City of Placerville 2013-2021 Housing Element—FINAL—February 2014
                                                     C - 101

                           Table 37: Comparison of Fees by Jurisdiction
                                                              El Dorado County         City of Auburn
   Development Type                   Placerville                   (greater                 (Placer
                                                                  Placerville)             County)12
  Apartment                                      $35,043                    $33,599                $29,922
  Detached Single-
                                                 $47,723                    $52,863                $34,434
  Family Home
                          Source: City of Placerville Development Services Department
12 Unlike Placerville and El Dorado County, the City of Auburn employs a partially volunteer Fire Department
and does not impose Fire Development/Impact fees.
               City of Placerville 2013-2021 Housing Element—FINAL—February 2014
                                                      C - 102

R
R
IV.                                                    RESOURCES
The resources section of the Housing Element considers the tools and assets available to
assist the City in providing housing during the housing cycle. These tools and assets
include land that is undeveloped and appropriately zoned, government policies and
procedures supportive of housing production, financial tools and programs to assist in
housing development and maintenance, and persons and agencies who can construct,
operate, and maintain housing.
A. Land Resources to Accommodate Housing
As a part of the Housing Element update process, Staff inventoried all lands within the
City limits suitable for future residential development. Section 65583(a)(3) of the
Government Code requires Housing Elements to contain an "inventory of land suitable
for residential development, including vacant sites and sites having potential for
redevelopment, and an analysis of the relationship of zoning and public facilities and
services to these sites." Tables 38, 39 and 40 provide an inventory of existing available
land and land suitable for development; of tentatively approved residential development
subdivision projects targeted for specific income-level households; of vacant parcels
within the City; and of potential parcels proposed to be rezoned to a residential density
of twenty (20) dwelling units per acre. As discussed in Chapter II, Section I. Regional
Housing Needs, Placerville is responsible for accommodating the City’s RHNA allocation
of 372 additional housing units between 2013 and 2021. Of the 372 units, 39 of them are
expected to be affordable to extremely-low-income households, 39 to very-low-income
households, 55 to low-income households, 69 to moderate households, and 170 to above
moderate households. Of these 372 units, 49 have been approved or constructed (2 to
moderate-income and 47 to above-moderate-income) between January 1, 2013 and April
30, 2013). The available land within the City exceeds the City’s RHNA allocation for all
income level categories (Table 41). As discussed in Chapter II, Section J. Unmet 2008-2013
Regional Housing Needs, Placerville is responsible for accommodating the City’s RHNA
allocation of 106 additional housing units within the first year of adoption of the Housing
Element for the low, very low and extremely low income categories.
The locality’s sites are adequate if the land inventory demonstrates sufficient realistic
capacity at appropriate densities and development standards to permit development of a
range of housing types and prices to accommodate the community's share of the regional
housing need by income level. A two-part analysis is necessary to make this
determination:
         Can the realistic development capacity of suitable land, which is or will be
         served by facilities and infrastructure, accommodate the locality’s total new
         construction need by income group over the next five years?
             City of Placerville 2013-2021 Housing Element—FINAL—February 2014
                                              R - 103

         Are these available sites appropriately zoned (considering local development
         standards and land costs) for a variety of housing types (single-family, multi-
         family, mobile homes, etc.) and at appropriate densities to facilitate the
         development of housing to meet the locality’s regional housing need by income
         level category, including the need for very-low- and low-income households?
Residential sites identified in this section meet the criteria listed above, and are within
the definition of "adequate sites" as provided under state law. The sites identified in
Tables 38, 39 and 40 would have access to public facilities over the next eight years.
The City’s assumption of realistic unit capacity of average development density equaling
75 percent of maximum permitted density, except where indicated, is based on specific
environmental, governmental, or other constraints identified by the City that would
prevent achievement of maximum densities. The assumption also reflects a realization
that, due to market factors, decisions by individual developers, and site-specific
conditions that cannot be known without detailed environmental investigations, some
properties will not develop at the maximum permitted density. As part of the City’s
Housing Strategy (see Chapter V), Placerville will encourage developers in the R-2, R-3,
and R-4 Zones to achieve as close to the maximum density as feasible to facilitate the
development of housing affordable to moderate-income households.
Table 38 indicates that there are more than 71 acres of residentially zoned, suitable and
available land within the City that could accommodate 137 moderate- and above-
moderate-income dwelling units.
Table 39 indicates there were are ten tentatively approved subdivisions approved during
the 2003-2009 and 2008-2013 Housing Element planning periods that have the potential
to provide housing for households across the RHNP income level groupings. A total of
32 acres of land area within four subdivisions have a combined potential to create 95
units of moderate-income-level housing. In addition, there are 66 units of above-
moderate-income level housing on 81 acres of land within six subdivisions.
Table 40 indicates potential sites for rezoning to R-5 zone at twenty (20) dwelling units
per acre minimum density (Housing Program 3) to accommodate the City’s unmet
RHNA for the low, very low and extremely low income categories for the 2008-2013 and
2013-2021 planning periods. The sites to be rezoned may include, but are not limited to,
these sites that total approximately 27 acres. Combined, these sites have the potential to
provide land area to accommodate 485 units for low, very low and extremely low income
households.
         1. Relationship of Zoning Standards to Adequate Sites
The extent to which the City has "suitable sites" for housing affordable to very-low- or
low-income households will depend, in part, on zoning standards, particularly the
maximum allowed density, parking, building coverage, height, and setback standards.
             City of Placerville 2013-2021 Housing Element—FINAL—February 2014
                                              R - 104

The adequacy of sites will also depend on whether the City grants exceptions or
variances to these requirements to reflect the challenges of building on small, irregularly-
shaped, or otherwise constrained parcels, thereby reducing development costs and
increasing development capacity.
The combination of the City’s flexible zoning standards, allowances for housing on
commercial properties and a history of approving varied housing projects suggests that
Placerville can accommodate its remaining share of regional housing needs on sites
available within the existing City limits.
         2. Affordability by Income Group
Based on the cost of land and improvements and the density at which housing projects
have been developed in Placerville, the City has assumed the following relationship
between zoning and housing affordability:
         R-E and R-1 sites are adequate to accommodate either above-moderate-income or
         moderate-income households;
         R-2, R-3 and R-4 sites are adequate to accommodate either above-moderate-
         income or moderate-income households, with low-income households
         accommodated in this zone with financial subsidies; and
         R-5 sites are adequate to accommodate either low or very-low income
         households.
State law was amended in 2004 (AB 2348) to clarify the process by which cities determine
the capacity of vacant sites for new housing developments. The law established
minimum densities that are presumed to be necessary to facilitate the development of
housing that is affordable to lower income households. This minimum density is 20 units
per acre.
As mentioned, during the 2008-2013 Housing Element planning period the City
developed Program 3 to address a shortfall of available land to accommodate 106 units
for lower income households (Regional Housing Needs Allocation (RHNA) and to
establish a new zoning designation, R-5, with a density of 20 dwelling units per acre. The
City inventoried and analyzed two sites for possible rezoning at a 20 dwelling unit per
acre minimum with sufficient acreage to construct housing for the low, very low and
extremely low income categories: a 20.70 acre three-parcel site, and a 2.80 acre site.
Potential realistic zoning unit capacity of 352 units is possible for these sites. However,
during the planning period the City did not meet its objective to address the shortfall of
available land to accommodate 106 lower income units before October 31, 2013, the end
of the planning period.
Per Government Code Section 65584.09, if during the prior planning period the City did
not make available sites to accommodate the unmet portion of the RHNA then the City
must rezone or zone adequate sites within the first year of the new 2013-2021 Housing
             City of Placerville 2013-2021 Housing Element—FINAL—February 2014
                                              R - 105

Element planning period. This requirement is in addition to sites needed to
accommodate the RHNA for low, very low and extremely low income categories for the
2013-2021 planning period. The City has devised a program for the 2013-2021 planning
period to include the required rezoning of sites at the R-5 density necessary to meet
statutory requirements and our 106 unit unmet need under the 2008-2013 planning
period and the 133 units of unmet lower income need for the 2013-2021 RHNA.
Developers will also be encouraged to achieve minimum density for low, very-low and
extremely-low-income households within the R-5 Zone (minimum density of 20 dwelling
units per acre) rezoning under Program 3.
Table 40 contains potential sites comprising 26.71 acres that would be appropriate for
higher density development for low income households with rezoning at the R-5 density.
It is estimated that a combination of these potential sites at the 20 units per acre
minimum density could be used to satisfy the 106 units of unmet lower income need
under the 2008-2013 planning period and the 133 units of unmet lower income need for
the 2013-2021 RHNA.
Sites 1, 2, 3, 4 and 5 have current General Plan land use and Zoning designations that
permit multi-family residential development at 12 8–16 dwelling units per acre. Higher
density development of these sites with apartments, townhomes and condominiums is
considered to be appropriate given all sites are served by existing utilities, slope
constraints are minimal and that current zoning on these sites anticipated multi-family
residential at City high densities.
Opportunities may also exist for larger senior/group home/residential care facilities.
Development of Sites 6 through 10 at high residential densities is considered appropriate
given their location near public transit stops, employment sources, commercial uses and
services.
Site analyses, including location map and site photos for these potential sites are
provided in Appendix E.
In addition to the residential lands inventoried, there are opportunities for additional
residential development on underutilized and undeveloped commercial sites. The City
allows residential uses by right in five commercial zones, with flexible standards aimed
to encourage housing production as part of mixed-use development in these zones. New
residences within commercial areas may be affordable to residents of all income ranges,
depending on subsidies and incentives offered.
The City has received proposals and inquiries for housing or mixed uses in commercial
zones. Two such projects have been completed during the planning period. One involves
the construction of new floor area within an existing building to establish a rental unit. A
second involves the conversion and adaptive reuse of the second story of existing
commercial building to a rental unit. Past development activity is not a future predictor
              City of Placerville 2013-2021 Housing Element—FINAL—February 2014
                                               R - 106

of the feasibility or likelihood of housing being developed in commercial zones, therefore
the City could also document residential development potential in commercial zones
through a site inventory of vacant or underutilized commercial properties, noting current
uses, property/building conditions, and the availability of infrastructure. The City could
also provide additional incentives for the development of housing in commercial zones.
See Chapter H (Housing Strategy), Program 2 for further details.
Based on results of the available land inventory, the City has sufficient land to
accommodate the RHNA for the current planning period. Approximately 27 acres of
potential land is available for rezoning during the planning period at the 20 units per
acre minimum density to satisfy the unmet need of 106 lower income units under the
2008-2013 planning period and the 133 units for housing targeting low and very low
incomes (Table 40). There are approximately 185 acres of land available, with a realistic
unit capacity of 298 units, for housing targeting moderate and above-moderate incomes
(Tables 38 and 39).
         3. Public Facilities, Services, and Environmental Conditions
All of the properties listed in Tables 38, 39 and 40 can be provided with water, sewer,
drainage, other City facilities and services between 2013 and 2018. City services exist on
or can be extended to lots within the current City limits. Public infrastructure
improvements required of new developments, impact fees, and planned City
improvements of facilities help ensure that services and facilities are available to both
current and future residents. Parks, schools, emergency services facilities, and other
public facilities are also extended in this manner.
As provided in Tables 38 and 39, there are approximately 185 acres of land that were
identified as being vacant or underdeveloped and residentially zoned. In addition,
approximately 27 acres of potential land was identified (Table 40) for potential rezoning
to R-5 residential density. City Staff made site visits to each of the vacant or
underdeveloped residentially zoned properties in the City, or used City topographic
maps to assess suitability of each for development. Consideration was given to parcel
sizes, access to public roads, slopes, drainage, and consistency with surrounding
development.
              City of Placerville 2013-2021 Housing Element—FINAL—February 2014
                                               R - 107

           Table 38: Inventory of Residentially Zoned Suitable and Available Land with Potential to Accommodate Moderate and Above Moderate
                                                                       Income Units
                                                                      Residential Estate (RE)
                                                                                                         Realistic Unit
            APN /        Cross Street /                  Allowable           GP            Unit        Capacity @ 75% of     Existing    Infrastructure
                                             Acreage
           Location        Address                        Density        Designation      Capacity     Max due to existing     Use         Capacity
                                                                                                         residence use.
                                                                                                                             1 Single-
          049-100- 32    Stonecrest Rd.       20.00      0.20 du/ac       Rural Res.            4                3                             Yes
                                                                                                                              Family
                             R1-A Total       20.00                                                              3
R - 108                                    R1-20 (Single-Family Residential, 20,000 Square Feet Minimum Parcel Area)
                                                                                                          Realistic Unit
            APN /        Cross Street /                  Allowable           GP            Unit                              Existing    Infrastructure
                                             Acreage                                                    Capacity @ 75% of
           Location        Address                        Density        Designation      Capacity                             Use         Capacity
                                                                                                              Max.
                        Quartz Mountain
          001-071-10                          10.00      2.18 du/ac     Low-Density         21.80              16.35         Vacant      Yes
                        Rd.
                        Quartz Mountain
          001-071-16                          10.00                                         21.80              16.35         Vacant      Yes
                        Rd.
          050-420-58    Aggregate Way          2.00                                         4.36               3.27          Vacant      Yes
          050-420-90    Morrene Dr.           14.90                                         32.48              24.36         Vacant      Yes
                             R1-20 Total      36.90                                                            60.33
                                                 City of Placerville 2013-2021 Housing Element—FINAL—February 2014
                                                                                  R - 108

                                           R1-10 (Single-Family Residential, 10,000 Square Feet Minimum Parcel Area)
                                                                                                          Realistic Unit
            APN /        Cross Street /                  Allowable           GP            Unit                             Existing   Infrastructure
                                             Acreage                                                    Capacity @ 75% of
           Location        Address                        Density        Designation      Capacity                            Use        Capacity
                                                                                                              Max.
          050-590-18   Golden Eagle Dr.        2.86      4.36 du/ac     Low-Density         12.47              9.35          Vacant         Yes
                             R1-10 Total       2.86                                                            9.35
                                            R1-6 (Single-Family Residential, 6,000 Square Feet Minimum Parcel Area)
R - 109                                                                                                   Realistic Unit
            APN /        Cross Street /                  Allowable          GP             Unit                             Existing   Infrastructure
                                             Acreage                                                    Capacity @ 75% of
           Location        Address                        Density       Designation       Capacity                            Use        Capacity
                                                                                                              Max.
                       Pleasant St. /                                     Medium-                                           Single-
          002-011-33                           6.70        7.26 du/ac                       48.64              36.48                   Not known
                       Bedford Ave.                                       Density                                           Family
                       Pleasant St. /
          002-021-08                           5.30                                         38.48              28.86        Vacant     Not known
                       Bedford Ave.
                              R1-6 Total      12.00                                                            65.00
                                                            Moderate and Above Moderate Income
                                              71.76                                                        137.65 or 137
                                                                            Housing Unit Totals
                                                 City of Placerville 2013-2021 Housing Element—FINAL—February 2014
                                                                                  R - 109

                                      Table 39: Approved Tentative Residential Housing Development Subdivisions
                                                                   Moderate-Income Level Target
             Land Division             APN                      Location               Acreage             GP Designation       Zoning     Units
                                                                                                                                R1-6,
          Cottonwood Park        002-071-33,34;         Constellation and
                                                                                         22.2         Low- & Medium- Density    R1-10,      39
          Phases 4 & 6           002-051-27             Clay St.
                                                                                                                                R1-A
                                                        Forni Rd. /
          Dover/Stancil          323-310-62                                               5.8               High-Density       R-2/PD       34
                                                        Placerville Dr.
          Placerville Heritage
                                 323-400-20             Ray Lawyer Dr.                    3.6               High-Density       R-3/PD       20
          Homes
                                                        Edythe Court /
          Piazza Parcel Map      004-011-58                                               0.4               High-Density         R-3        2
                                                        Thompson Way
R - 110
                                                        Moderate Income Totals            32                                                95
                                                               Above-Moderate-Income Level Target
             Land Division             APN                      Location               Acreage             GP Designation       Zoning     Units
          Mountain Lane Place    002-081-09             Mountain Lane                    2.75               Low-Density        R1-10, PD    8
          Morrene Place          002-380-18             Morrene Dr.                      2.40               Low-Density         R1-10       3
          Astonia Estates        048-380-09             Broadway / Texerna Rd.           37.3               Low-Density         R1-10       39
                                                        Elysian Way & Cedar
          Adamo                  051-441-47                                              21.26              Low-Density         R1-20       4
                                                        Ravine
          Country Club Court     051-520-11             Country Club Dr.                 7.70               Low-Density         R1-20       9
          Springlake             323-650-03             Colin Rd. & Andler Rd.           10.15              Low-Density          R1-A       3
                                              Above Moderate Income Totals               81.56                                              66
                                                  City of Placerville 2013-2021 Housing Element—FINAL—February 2014
                                                                                   R - 110

                  Table 40: Summary of Potential Rezoning Sites with Potential to Accommodate Low, Very Low and Extremely Low Housing Units
                                                                                                        Potential
                                                                                      Allowable
                                      General Plan        Zoning                                     Realistic Units                         Infrastructure
            Site    APN /Location                                       Acreage       Density or                         Existing Use
                                      Designation       Designation                                    at 20 DUA                               Capacity
                                                                                      Intensity
                                                                                                       Minimum
                                      High Density                                                                                       Sufficient to serve zone
             1         323-220-08                            R-3          4.04         12 DUA               81              Vacant
                                          Res                                                                                                    change
                                      High Density                                                                                       Sufficient to serve zone
             2         051-505-01                         R-4 - AO        1.12         16 DUA               22              Vacant
                                          Res                                                                                                    change
                                      High Density                                                                                       Sufficient to serve zone
             3         001-092-27                            R-2          3.76          8 DUA               75              Vacant
                                          Res                                                                                                    change
                                      High Density                                                                                       Sufficient to serve zone
             4         003-241-55                            R-4          6.02         16 DUA               90           Single-Family
                                          Res                                                                                                    change
                                      High Density                                                                                       Sufficient to serve zone
             5         323-450-11                            R-4          1.51         16 DUA               30           Single-Family
R - 111
                                          Res                                                                                                    change
                                                                                                                                         Sufficient to serve land
             6         325-120-30     Commercial              C           2.11         0.60 FAR             37              Vacant
                                                                                                                                          use and zone change
                                                                                                                                         Sufficient to serve land
             7         325-160-08     Commercial              C           1.16         0.60 FAR             23           Single-Family
                                                                                                                                          use and zone change
                                       Business-                                                                                         Sufficient to serve land
             8         323-400-16                            BP           2.28         0.60 FAR             45              Vacant
                                      Professional                                                                                        use and zone change
                                                                                                                                         Sufficient to serve land
             9         325-240-16     Commercial              C           2.36         0.60 FAR             47              Vacant
                                                                                                                                          use and zone change
                                                                                                                            Vacant
                                       Highway                                                                                           Sufficient to serve land
             10        049-190-06                        HWC- AO          2.35         0.60 FAR             35
                                      Commercial                                                                                          use and zone change
                                                                                                                         Multi-Family
                                     Total                                26.71                            485
          DUA – Dwelling units per gross acre.
          FAR – Floor Area Ratio, expressed as ratio of total square footage of floor area within a building to the net parcel area.
                                                     City of Placerville 2013-2021 Housing Element—FINAL—February 2014
                                                                                      R - 111

    Table 41: Comparison Summary of 2013-2021 RHNA Sites and Site Inventory
                                                                   Potential
                                                 Approved
                           Residentially                           Rezoning     Available
                                                  Tentative
                                Zoned,                           Sites To Meet Housing Unit
 Income        RHNA                               Housing
                             Suitable &                          Unmet RHNA Inventory to
Category    Allocation                         Development
                              Available                          Lower Income RHNA Deficit
                                               Subdivisions
                           Land Table 38                          Need (Table   or Surplus
                                                 (Table 39)
                                                                   40 Site 3)
Extremely
                  39
   Low
                                   -                    -              133           -
Very Low          39
   Low            55
Moderate          69                                   95                           +26
  Above                           137
                 170                                   66                           +33
Moderate
  Total          372              137                 161              133         +59
                                     Source: City of Placerville
           City of Placerville 2013-2021 Housing Element—FINAL—February 2014
                                              R - 112

         4. Sites for Special Needs Housing
The suitable land inventory also includes consideration of the amount of land available
for providing special needs housing within the City. As discussed earlier in the Housing
Element, special needs groups include the disabled, elderly, farmworkers, infirmed
adults and children, large families, and others in need of unique housing options. Table
42 provides a summary of the special needs housing permitted or conditionally
permitted within each of the zones. Based on the available land inventory, there is
sufficient land available in appropriate zoning districts to allow for construction of
necessary special needs housing within Placerville.
                    Table 42: Special Needs Housing Land Availability
  Zone     Acres                  Special Needs Housing (by right or with CUP)
                     Granny flats, second units, small family day care, medium family
 RE        20.0      day care, large family day care, community care, domestic violence
                     shelter
                     Granny flats, second units, small family day care, medium family
 R1-A      0.0       day care, large family day care, community care, domestic violence
                     shelter
                     Granny flats, second units, small family day care, medium family
 R1-20     44.0      day care, large family day care, community care, domestic violence
                     shelter
                     Granny flats, second units, small family day care, medium family
 R1-10     10.0      day care, large family day care, community care, domestic violence
                     shelter
                     Granny flats, second units, small family day care, medium family
 R1-6      12.0      day care, large family day care, community care, domestic violence
                     shelter
                     Small family day care, medium family day care, large family day
 R-2       9.9       care, community care, domestic violence shelter, multi-family
                     housing, rooming/boarding house
                     Small family day care, medium family day care, large family day
 R-3       23.9      care, community care, domestic violence shelter, multi-family
                     housing, rooming/boarding house
                     Small family day care, medium family day care, large family day
 R-4       2.8       care, community care, domestic violence shelter, multi-family
                     housing, rooming/boarding house
             City of Placerville 2013-2021 Housing Element—FINAL—February 2014
                                              R - 113

B. Administrative Resources for Housing
          1. Placerville Development Services Department
The Planning Division of the Development Services Department provides housing and
community development services to residents, developers, and those interested in
housing issues. The Planning Division is responsible for the ongoing implementation of
the entire General Plan, including the Housing Element, and coordinates review of all
proposed housing developments. For projects located within the City of Placerville, the
Development Services Department is the major source of coordination for financial and
administrative resources.
          2. El Dorado County Human Services Department
The El Dorado County Human Services Department offers a wide range of accessible
programs designed to meet basic needs and to improve the quality of life for all county
residents. Programs administered by El Dorado County HSD that are available to
Placerville residents include Housing Choice Vouchers (formerly known as Section 8
vouchers), CDBG Housing Rehabilitation Program, Home Energy Assistance Program,
and senior assistance programs offered under the Agency on Aging (see following
listing).
          3. El Dorado County Area Agency on Aging
The Area Agency on Aging is responsible for the administration of senior programs for
El Dorado County residents 60 years of age and older. The Area Agency on Aging
develops and implements the Area Plan for Senior Services in El Dorado County. This
includes the Commission on Aging, a board appointed by the County Board of
Supervisors to address issues with seniors throughout the County.
          4. Home of Elder and Adult Resource Team (HEART)
HEART provides a continuum of care designed to improve the quality of life of elders
and adults with disabilities, including centralized intake and referral, assessment and
consultation, protective and supportive services, and care coordination. Utilizing a team
of professional resource specialists, HEART’s goal is to ensure the delivery of client-
centered, compassionate, and comprehensive services to foster healthy, safe and
dignified living.
          5. Mercy Housing California
MHC is a non-profit developer that provides affordable housing for families, seniors,
formerly-homeless persons, individuals with HIV/AIDS and persons with chronic
              City of Placerville 2013-2021 Housing Element—FINAL—February 2014
                                               R - 114

mental illnesses and physical impairments. With the assistance of public and private
funding, MHC builds or rehabilitates housing to meet community needs. The types of
housing developed include multi-unit rental apartments and single-family homes, single
room occupancy apartments for formerly-homeless adults, and handicap-accessible units
for individuals with physical impairments.
         6. Habitat for Humanity
Habitat for Humanity is a non-profit, faith-based organization dedicated to building
affordable housing and rehabilitating homes for lower-income families. Habitat builds
and repairs homes with the help of volunteers and partner families. Habitat homes are
sold to partner families at no profit with affordable, no-interest loans. Volunteers,
churches, businesses, and other groups provide most of the labor for the homes.
Government agencies or individuals typically donate land for new homes.
         7. CBM Group
CBM is a private, for-profit developer of affordable housing throughout the western
United States. CBM has been active in Placerville in the past, seeking to provide
affordable housing developments. The company constructs, maintains, and manages
multi-family projects, and has worked with the City to help identify sites suitable for
affordable housing.
         8. Kaufman & Broad
Kaufman and Broad is a private, for-profit developer of single- and multi-family housing.
This company has been active in Placerville in the construction of housing projects
affordable to low-income residents, and has worked with the City to help identify sites
suitable for affordable housing development. The company constructs, maintains, and
manages both single-family and multi-family projects.
         9. California Department of Housing and Community
         Development
The California Department of Housing and Community
Development (HCD) provides a variety of housing resources for
communities, including coordination and distribution of state grants
and loans, advisement on maintaining consistency with state housing
laws, listings of at-risk housing units, and information for local
governments regarding housing law and development of affordable
housing. In addition to these programs and forms of assistance, HCD
also reviews Housing Elements for consistency with state law.
             City of Placerville 2013-2021 Housing Element—FINAL—February 2014
                                              R - 115

         10. California Department of Fair Employment and Housing
As related to housing issues, the mission of the Department of Fair Employment and
Housing is to protect the people of California from unlawful discrimination in housing
and public accommodations. This State agency is the proper referral point for issues
related to housing discrimination laws, practices, and complaints.
C. Financial Resources for Housing
         1. Community Development Block Grant (CDBG) Funds
The Federal CDBG Program provides funds for a variety of community development
activities. The program is flexible in that the funds can be used for a range of activities.
The eligible activities include, but are not limited to: acquisition and/or disposition of
real estate or property, public facility construction and improvements, relocation,
rehabilitation and construction (under certain limitations) of housing, homeownership
assistance, as well as clearance activities.
         2. HOME Investment Partnership Program Funds (HOME)
Federal HOME funds can be used for activities that promote affordable rental housing
and homeownership for lower-income households. Such activities include building
acquisition, new construction, reconstruction, moderate or substantial rehabilitation,
first-time homebuyer assistance, and tenant-based assistance. A federal priority for the
use of HOME funds is the preservation of at-risk housing projects.
         3. Housing Choice Voucher Program ("Section 8" Rental Assistance)
The Housing Choice Voucher Program (formerly known as the Section 8 program) is a
federal program that provides rental assistance to very-low-income households in need
of affordable housing. The program offers a voucher that pays the difference between the
current fair market rent and what a tenant can afford to pay (i.e. 30 percent of their
incomes). The voucher allows a tenant to choose housing that may cost above the
payment standard, but the tenant must pay the extra cost. The program is administered
by the Housing Authority of El Dorado County.
              City of Placerville 2013-2021 Housing Element—FINAL—February 2014
                                               R - 116

            Table 43: Financial Resources for Affordable Housing (Federal)
                                  1. FEDERAL PROGRAMS
   PROGRAM NAME                          DESCRIPTION              ELIGIBLE ACTIVITIES
                                                                - Acquisition
                                  Grants awarded to the City    - Rehabilitation
Community Development             on a formula basis for        - Homebuyer Assistance
Block Grant (CDBG)                housing and community         - Economic Development
                                  development activities.       - Homeless Assistance
                                                                - Public Services
                                  Grants potentially available
                                  to the City through the
                                                                - Shelter Construction
                                  County to implement a
                                                                - Shelter Operation
Emergency Shelter Grants          broad range of activities
                                                                - Social Services
(ESG)                             that serve homeless
                                                                - Homelessness
                                  persons. Funding
                                                                Prevention
                                  availability is uncertain for
                                  the current year.
                                  Grant program potentially
                                  available to the City on a
                                                                - Acquisition
                                  competitive basis for
                                                                - Rehabilitation
HOME                              housing activities. City
                                                                - Homebuyer Assistance
                                  competes for funds
                                                                - Rental Assistance
                                  through the State’s
                                  allocation process.
                                  Tax credits are available to
                                  persons and corporations
                                                                - New Construction
Low-income Housing Tax            that invest in low-income
                                                                - Acquisition
Credits (LIHTC)                   rental housing. Proceeds
                                                                - Rehabilitation
                                  from the sales are typically
                                  used to create housing.
                                  Income tax credits available
                                  to first-time homebuyers to
Mortgage Credit
                                  buy new or existing single-
Certificate (MCC)                                               - Homebuyer Assistance
                                  family housing.
Program
                                  County Housing Authority
                                  makes certificates available.
                                  Rental assistance payments
                                  from the El Dorado County
Housing Choice Voucher
                                  Housing Authority to          - Rental Assistance
Program (Formerly
                                  owners of private market-     - Homebuyer Assistance
Section 8)
                                  rate units on behalf of very-
                                  low-income tenants.
            City of Placerville 2013-2021 Housing Element—FINAL—February 2014
                                              R - 117

Housing Act - Section 202        Grants to non-profit          - Acquisition -
Supportive Housing for           developers of supportive      Rehabilitation
the Elderly Program              housing for the elderly.      - New Construction
                                 Provides long-term, low-      - Land Acquisition
                                 interest loans at fixed rate  - Rehabilitation
Housing Act - Section
                                 to finance acquisition and    - Relocation of Unit
203(k)
                                 rehabilitation of eligible    - Refinance Existing
                                 property.                     Indebtedness
                                 Grants to non-profit
                                 developers of supportive
                                                               - Acquisition
                                 housing for persons with
                                                               - Rehabilitation
Housing Act - Section 811        disabilities, including
                                                               - New Construction
                                 group homes, independent
                                                               - Rental Assistance
                                 living facilities and
                                 intermediate care facilities.
U.S. Department of
                                 Below market-rate loans
Agriculture (USDA)                                             - New Construction
                                 and grants for farmworker
Housing Programs                                               - Rehabilitation
                                 rental housing.
(Sections 514/516)
           City of Placerville 2013-2021 Housing Element—FINAL—February 2014
                                              R - 118

            Table 44: Financial Resources for Affordable Housing (State)
                                    2. STATE PROGRAMS
   PROGRAM NAME                         DESCRIPTION             ELIGIBLE ACTIVITIES
                                 Provides lower interest-rate
Affordable Housing
                                 CHFA loans to homebuyers
Partnership Program                                           - Homebuyer Assistance
                                 who receive local
(AHPP)
                                 secondary financing.
                                 Provides grants to local
                                 governments and non-
                                 profit agencies for local
                                 homebuyer assistance and
                                 owner-occupied
                                                              - Homebuyer Assistance
                                 rehabilitation programs
CalHOME                                                       - Rehabilitation
                                 and new home
                                                              - New Construction
                                 development projects. Will
                                 finance the acquisition,
                                 rehabilitation, and
                                 replacement of
                                 manufactured homes.
                                 Provides 3% silent second
                                 loans in conjunction with
California Housing
                                 97% CHFA first loans to      - Homebuyer Assistance
Assistance Program
                                 give eligible buyers 100%
                                 financing.
California Housing               Below-market-rate
                                                              - New Construction
Finance                          financing,
                                 Offered to builders and
Agency (CHFA) Rental             developers of multi-family
                                                              - Rehabilitation
Housing                          and elderly rental housing.
                                                              - Acquisition
Programs                         Tax exempt bonds provide
                                 below-market mortgages.
                                 CHFA sells tax-exempt
California Housing               bonds to make below-
Finance                          market loans to first-time
Agency (CHFA) Home               buyers. Program operates     - Homebuyer Assistance
Mortgage                         through participating
Purchase Program                 lenders who originate loans
                                 for CHFA.
California Self-Help             Provides grants for the
                                                              - Homebuyer Assistance
Housing Program                  administration of mutual
                                                              - New Construction
(CSHHP)                          self-help housing projects.
           City of Placerville 2013-2021 Housing Element—FINAL—February 2014
                                             R - 119

Emergency Housing and
                                 Provides grants to support   - Shelters & Transitional
Assistance Program
                                 emergency housing.           Housing
(EHAP)
                                 Federal grants awarded to
Emergency Shelter Grants
                                 non-profit organizations for - Support Services
Program
                                 shelter support services.
                                 Provides $7,500 silent
                                 second loans with
                                 forgivable interest in
Extra Credit Teacher
                                 conjunction with lower       - Homebuyer Assistance
Program
                                 interest rate CHFA first
                                 loans to assist eligible
                                 teachers to buy homes.
                                 Deferred payment loans for
                                 the new construction,        - New Construction
Multi-Family Housing
                                 rehabilitation and           - Rehabilitation
Program (MHP)
                                 preservation of rental       - Preservation
                                 housing.
                                 Tax credits are available to
                                 persons and corporations
                                                              - New Construction
California Low-Income            that invest in low-income
                                                              - Acquisition
Housing Tax Credits              rental housing. Proceeds
                                                              - Rehabilitation
                                 from the sales are typically
                                 used to create housing.
           City of Placerville 2013-2021 Housing Element—FINAL—February 2014
                                             R - 120

           Table 45: Financial Resources for Affordable Housing (Private)
                                 3. PRIVATE RESOURCES
   PROGRAM NAME                        DESCRIPTION                      ELIGIBLE ACTIVITIES
                                 Non-profit mortgage
                                 banking consortium
                                 designed to provide long
California Community                                                  - New Construction
                                 term debt financing for
Reinvestment Corporation                                              - Rehabilitation
                                 affordable multi-family
(CCRC)                                                                - Acquisition
                                 rental housing. Non-profit
                                 and for-profit developers
                                 contact member banks.
                                 - Fixed rate mortgages
                                 issued by private mortgage           - Homebuyer Assistance
                                 insurers.
                                 - Mortgages which fund the
                                                                      - Homebuyer Assistance
Federal National                 purchase and rehabilitation
                                                                      - Rehabilitation
Mortgage Association             of a home.
(Fannie Mae)                     - Low Down-Payment
                                 Mortgages for Single-
                                 Family Homes in                      - Homebuyer Assistance
                                 underserved low-income
                                 and minority cities.
                                 Provides first and second
                                 mortgages that include
                                 rehabilitation loan. County
Freddie Mac Home Works           provides gap financing for           - Homebuyer Assistance
                                 rehabilitation component.
                                 Households earning up to
                                 80% MFI qualify.
                 Source: Compiled by Cotton/Bridges/Associates, September 2003.
                               (Amended by City of Placerville, 2009)
           City of Placerville 2013-2021 Housing Element—FINAL—February 2014
                                             R - 121

H
H
V.                           HOUSING STRATEGY
A. Introduction
        1. Contents of the Housing Strategy
This chapter of the Housing Element contains the City’s strategy for meeting housing
needs identified in Chapter II, the use of resources available to the City, and the
reduction of barriers to the availability of housing for all residents as described in
Chapter III. As required by state law, this chapter contains quantified (numerical)
objectives for housing construction, housing rehabilitation, and the preservation of
affordable housing, with an eight-year program of actions that:
        Provides regulatory concessions and incentives, and uses local, federal, and state
        financing and subsidy programs to support the development of affordable
        housing;
        Identifies adequate sites with appropriate zoning, development standards,
        services and facilities to encourage the development of a variety of types of
        housing for all income levels;
        Assists in the development of adequate housing to meet the needs of low- and
        moderate-income households;
        Addresses, and where appropriate and legally possible, removes governmental
        constraints to the maintenance, improvement, and development of housing,
        including housing for all income levels and housing for persons with disabilities;
        Conserves and improves the condition of the existing affordable housing stock,
        which may include addressing ways to mitigate the loss of dwelling units
        demolished by public or private action;
        Promotes housing opportunities for all persons regardless of race, gender,
        religion, sex, marital status, ancestry, national origin, color, familial status, or
        disability, and
        Preserves assisted housing developments for lower-income households.
The following section sets forth the City’s goals, policies, and programs for the 2013-2021
period. The goals and policies discussed in this section address state requirements under
Housing Element law, and respond to the issues identified in the previous sections.
             City of Placerville 2013-2021 Housing Element—FINAL—February 2014
                                             H - 122

         2. Trends Influencing the Housing Strategy
Placerville has, historically, been the center of social and commercial services for the
Sierra foothills region of El Dorado County, which has naturally attracted a high
percentage of low-income and special needs residents to the City. Most of the multi-
family housing constructed in Placerville over the past 20 years has been subsidized
rental housing affordable to very-low- and low-income households. At the same time,
Placerville has experienced a growing influx of higher-income residents who desire the
quality of life offered by the Sierra foothills region. This trend is beneficial to the City in
that is provides opportunities to diversify the local economy and attract higher-paying
jobs for City residents.
In conjunction with strategies to improve older neighborhoods in the City, the City hopes
that a wider variety of housing will also attract a wider range of employment and
economic development opportunities for the City’s low- and moderate-income
households, allowing them more opportunities to afford housing. Placerville’s housing
strategy is shaped by these trends and is based on three principles:
         The City needs to create a more balanced community, which requires that it
         attract middle- and upper-income residents;
         The City must also address the significant unmet needs of its current low-income
         residents, and
         With economic growth comes additional affordable housing need, as many of the
         jobs to be created in Placerville will pay low-to-moderate wages.
         3. Coordination of the Housing Strategy
The Development Services Department is the City entity primarily responsible for
implementing the housing programs. However, several programs also involve
cooperation with other public and private entities, including the City Administration and
Engineering Divisions, El Dorado County Housing Authority, local lenders and real
estate agents, and non-profit developers.
Within the Administration Department, the Grants Administration Division will have the
primary role of coordinating the implementation of the programs. Staff from the Grants
Administration Division will meet with representatives of other agencies, track the
implementation of the programs in this chapter, report on progress and problems in
implementation, and recommend revisions to implementation measures and techniques
to improve the achievement of program objectives. The designated staff member will
meet with representatives of the various City divisions, departments, and non-profit
agencies as needed, but no less than annually, to review implementation progress and
identify solutions to implementation problems.
              City of Placerville 2013-2021 Housing Element—FINAL—February 2014
                                              H - 123

B. Housing Goals and Policies
     Goal A:            To Designate Sufficient Land to Accommodate Placerville’s
                        Share of El Dorado County’s Future Housing Needs
     Policy 1: The City will maintain an inventory of vacant residential sites, to be
     updated annually.
     Policy 2: As needed, the City will annex land within its Sphere of Influence (SOI)
     to maintain an adequate supply of residential land.
     Policy 3: The City will promote infill development by identifying suitable sites,
     design goals, and potential development incentives.
     Goal B:            To Facilitate the Development of Housing for Special Needs
                        Households
     Policy 1: The City will allow overnight shelters and transitional housing facilities
     for homeless individuals and families in appropriate zoning districts.
     Policy 2: The City will implement state and federal requirements for persons
     with disabilities in new residential developments.
     Policy 3: The City will facilitate the development of senior housing by working
     with senior housing providers to identify adequate sites, assisting in the
     acquisition of funds for low-income senior housing, and providing development
     incentives.
     Policy 4: The City shall encourage housing that is affordable to the local
     workforce by identifying funding sources and potential sites that would make
     the production of such housing financially feasible.
     Goal C:            To Facilitate the Development of Housing Affordable to
                        Lower- and Moderate-Income Households
     Policy 1: The City will encourage the use of density bonuses and regulatory
     incentives as tools to assist affordable housing development.
     Policy 2: The City will pursue state and federal funding to assist in developing
     housing affordable to low- and moderate-income households.
     Policy 3: The City will review the Zoning Ordinance, permit processes, and
     development fees to identify and remove potential constraints to the
     development of a range of housing for all income levels and needs.
     Policy 4: The City will review and, if necessary, revise its Hillside Development
     Standards to reduce their cost impact on housing while protecting the health and
     safety of Placerville residents and the character of the City.
          City of Placerville 2013-2021 Housing Element—FINAL—February 2014
                                          H - 124

Goal D:            To Promote Equal Housing Opportunity for all Residents
Policy 1: The City will continue to distribute information on fair housing laws to
residents, and refer discrimination complaints to the State Fair Employment and
Housing Commission.
Policy 2: The City will cooperate with local homebuilders, real estate agents, and
lenders to conduct an annual fair-housing public information campaign.
Goal E:            To Preserve the Existing Housing Stock
Policy 1: The City will continue to provide rehabilitation assistance to low- and
moderate-income households.
Policy 2: The City will conduct a housing condition survey to identify areas of
the community most in need of rehabilitation assistance.
Policy 3: The City will continue to conduct code enforcement inspections on a
complaint basis to ensure that the housing stock remains in habitable condition.
Policy 4: The City will continue to preserve historic structures within the City by
encouraging re-use of viable buildings within historic districts.
Goal F:            To Conserve Existing Affordable Housing Opportunities
Policy 1: The City will continue to cooperate with the El Dorado County Housing
Authority to provide rental assistance to Placerville residents.
Policy 2: The City will continue to monitor the status of the government-assisted
housing in Placerville and preserve the affordability of these units.
Policy 3: The City will conserve and improve mobile home parks that can meet
minimum health and safety standards by working with property owners and
residents to obtain funds for park improvements and/or conversion of parks to
resident ownership.
Goal G:            To Promote Residential Energy Conservation
Policy 1: The City will continue to implement the energy conservation standards
under Title 24 of the California Code of Regulations (state building code
standards).
Policy 2: The City will continue to distribute information on weatherization
programs, and pursue funding sources for weatherization assistance for low- and
moderate-income households.
Policy 3: The City will promote energy conservation through its land use
planning and development standards.
     City of Placerville 2013-2021 Housing Element—FINAL—February 2014
                                     H - 125

C. Housing Programs
        Goal A:           To Designate Sufficient Land to Accommodate Placerville’s
                          Share of El Dorado County’s Future Housing Needs
                PROGRAM 1. Available Land Inventory
Action:             The City will maintain an updated inventory of vacant residential
                    parcels in the City, and provide an annual report to the City Council
                    and Planning Commission regarding the same.
Discussion:         The Housing Resources section contains an inventory of vacant land
                    sufficient to meet the City’s RHNP allocation for the 2013-2021
                    planning period. In order to provide accurate information to
                    prospective developers, particularly developers of low- and
                    moderate-income housing, the City will maintain an updated
                    inventory of vacant residential parcels within the City. Information on
                    these parcels will be available at City Hall, posted on the City’s
                    website, provided to local homebuilder organizations, and provided
                    to non-profit homebuilders. The City will submit an annual report on
                    the vacant land inventory to the City Council and Planning
                    Commission in conjunction with the General Plan annual report.
Responsibility:     Development Services Department.
Funding Source:     General Fund.
Timeframe:          First update completed with adoption of Housing Element;
                    subsequent updates to be completed by September each year 2014-
                    2021.
Objective:          Accommodate at least 372 additional housing units, including 133
                    extremely-low-, very-low- and low-income housing units.
                PROGRAM 2. Infill Development and Potential Re-Use Sites
Action:             In conjunction with the updated vacant land inventory, the City will
                    identify suitable sites for infill development and re-use, including
                    commercially zoned properties. Before seeking to annex land within
                    the Sphere of Influence, the City will encourage the development of
                    these infill sites where adequate public facilities and services are
                    already in place and where small projects can be integrated with
                    existing neighborhoods. The City will provide the following
                    incentives for infill development and property re-use:
            City of Placerville 2013-2021 Housing Element—FINAL—February 2014
                                            H - 126

                        Conduct a site inventory of commercial properties in zones that
                        permit residential uses to note property characteristics and
                        physical conditions of buildings (for sites that are not vacant) that
                        would lend themselves to the feasibility of housing or mixed-use
                        development. A preliminary inventory is provided as Appendix B.
                        Approve density bonuses for projects that include affordable
                        housing (see Program 13).
                        Allow exceptions or alternative approaches to meeting zoning
                        standards that are consistent with standards met by surrounding
                        properties.
                        Promote infill development and property re-use opportunities on
                        the City’s web site, distribute the infill/re-use site inventory to
                        local homebuilder groups and non-profit organizations, and
                        provide the inventory to interested individuals at the City’s permit
                        counter.
                        Complete a development feasibility study that provides concept-
                        level design alternatives for infill properties with the greatest
                        potential to include affordable housing.
Discussion:         The City believes that the infill/re-use site inventory and the
                    proposed incentives will increase interest in the development of
                    housing or mixed-use projects in, or adjacent to, commercial zones,
                    particularly on sites close to the downtown area. Such development
                    would support several of the City’s General Plan orderly
                    development and infill development policies. The site inventory will
                    also provide the City with greater specificity regarding the potential
                    to develop housing close to services, transit, and jobs.
Responsibility:     Development Services Department.
Funding Source:     General Fund, Caltrans Transportation Planning Grants, CDBG, Air
                    Quality Control or SACOG planning grants.
Timeframe:          Update infill/re-use site survey and conduct feasibility study by
                    September 2017 and update annually thereafter; distribute inventory
                    to developers at least once a year.
Objective:          Provide additional opportunities to accommodate at least 372
                    additional housing units (see Program 1).
                PROGRAM 3. High-Density Development – Unmet Need
Action:             The City has an adequate inventory of potential sites for high density
                    zoning to more than meet its needs for the 2008-2013 and 2013-2021
            City of Placerville 2013-2021 Housing Element—FINAL—February 2014
                                            H - 127

                    planning periods. The City shall monitor its inventory of available
                    higher density residential sites as necessary to ensure adequate
                    availability over the entire 2013-2021 planning period. The City shall
                    also investigate with housing developers and applicants potential
                    parcels for higher density designation in an effort to generate
                    potential housing for affordable income families.
                    A)    To accommodate the unmet housing need of 106 units for lower
                          income households identified during the 2008-2013 Housing
                          Element planning period, the City will rezone land to
                          accommodate this need.
                    B)    To accommodate the unmet housing need of 133 units for lower
                          income households identified during the 2013-2021 Housing
                          Element planning period, the City will rezone land to
                          accommodate this need.
                    Rezoned land will permit a minimum density of 20 units per acre,
                    and permit owner-occupied or multifamily residential uses by right,
                    with compliance with local design standards, but without
                    discretionary action.
                    The sites to be rezoned may include, but are not limited to, the
                    potential sites identified in Table 40 and Appendix E. Appropriate
                    sites will be vetted and selected through a rezoning process in
                    accordance with legal requirements and the requisite CEQA analysis.
Responsibility:     Development Services Department.
Funding Source:     General Fund.
Timeframe:          A)    Rezoning to accommodate land inventory to support an unmet
                          need of 106 units for lower-income households during the 2008-
                          2013 Housing Element shall be completed within one year of
                          Housing Element adoption.
                    B)    Rezoning to accommodate land inventory to support an unmet
                          need of 133 units for lower-income households for the 2013-2021
                          Housing Element planning period shall be completed within
                          three years of Housing Element adoption.
Objective:          Increase the City’s vacant land inventory and opportunities for
                    development of housing affordable to lower-income households.
            City of Placerville 2013-2021 Housing Element—FINAL—February 2014
                                            H - 128

                PROGRAM 4. Single-Room Occupancy Units
Action:             State law requires that jurisdictions identify zoning districts available
                    to encourage and facilitate a variety of housing types, including
                    single-room occupancy units (SROs). Currently, the City’s Zoning
                    Ordinance does not define or address SROs.
                    The City shall revise the Zoning Ordinance to define SROs, identify
                    the zones in which they are permitted and establish regulatory
                    standards that encourage and facilitate single-room occupancy units.
Responsibility:     Development Services Department.
Funding Source:     General Fund.
Timeframe:          Within one year of Housing Element adoption.
Objective:          Increase opportunities for development of housing affordable to
                    lower-income households.
        Goal B:           To Facilitate the Development of Housing for Special Needs
                          Households.
                PROGRAM 5. Public Outreach
Action:             The City will coordinate an annual workshop with employers,
                    members of the housing community including the homeless and the
                    disabled, and City officials to identify the housing needs of the City
                    and take appropriate action as necessary as part of the annual
                    progress report pursuant to Government Code Section 65400.
Discussion:         The City recognizes the need for and benefit of a thorough and
                    comprehensive public participation process. The City will coordinate
                    annual workshops with a variety of participants including housing
                    advocates, employers, service providers, public agencies and the
                    public at large, with the goal of bringing ideas from the community
                    forward for the City to consider.
Responsibility:     Development Services Department.
Funding Source:     General Fund.
Timeframe:          The first workshop shall occur by May 2014 and annually thereafter.
            City of Placerville 2013-2021 Housing Element—FINAL—February 2014
                                            H - 129

                PROGRAM 6. Employee Housing
Action:             The State’s Employee Housing Act (Health and Safety Code 17000)
                    requires that each city and county permit and encourage the
                    development of employee housing as a means of addressing the
                    housing for seasonal farmworkers.
                    The City recognizes the need for housing opportunities for this
                    special needs household, as identified in the Housing Element. To
                    address the employee housing need and to comply with the
                    Employee Housing Act, the Zoning Ordinance shall be revised to
                    meet the local government land use and zoning requirements under
                    the State’s Employee Housing Act. A residential structure providing
                    accommodation for six or fewer agricultural employees will be
                    designated a single-family residential use and to be allowed by right
                    in any zone that allows single-family residential uses (Health and
                    Safety Code Section 17021.5).
                    The RE, Estate Residential (Section 10-5-4) zone shall be revised to
                    permit employee housing consisting of no more than 36 beds in a
                    group quarters or 12 units or spaces designed for use by a single
                    family or household as an agricultural use (Health and Safety Code
                    Section 17021.6). The City has one parcel containing approximately
                    twenty-one (21) acres, and less than one (1) acre of another parcel that
                    are zoned RE.
Responsibility:     Development Services Department.
Funding Source:     General Fund.
Timeframe:          Within one year of Housing Element adoption.
Objective:          Increase opportunities for development of housing affordable to
                    seasonal farmworkers.
                PROGRAM 7. Transitional, Supportive and Emergency Housing
Action:             Meeting annually with local non-profit and governmental service
                    providers to assess the shelter needs of the community and work with
                    non-profit organizations to identify suitable sites for the placement of
                    facilities.
Discussion:         In 2012 the City amended the Highway Commercial (HWC) Zone
                    designation, adding emergency shelters, supportive housing and
                    transient housing facilities as uses allowed by right for at least one
            City of Placerville 2013-2021 Housing Element—FINAL—February 2014
                                            H - 130

                    emergency shelter or transient housing facility for year-round use
                                        which meets the needs to serve local homeless and
                                        transient housing needs. Shelters will only be
                                        subject to development and management standards
                                        that apply to residential or commercial uses within
                                        the HWC zone.
                                        In May 2013 the City amended the Zoning
                                        Ordinance, adding state statutory definitions for
                                        transitional housing and supportive housing, and
                                        added each of these uses in all single-family and
                                        multi-family residential zones as permitted uses.
                                        These amendments fell short of the requirements of
                                        SB2, in that transitional and supportive housing
                                        must be allowed in all zones which permit
                    residential uses. Program 8 herein is included to address this
                    unintended issue.
                    In order to meet the community need for transitional housing and
                    emergency shelters, the City will meet annually with local non-profit
                    and governmental service providers to assess the shelter needs of the
                    community. If additional transitional housing or shelter capacity is
                    needed in the community, the City will work with the stakeholders to
                    identify a suitable site for the placement of a facility.
Responsibility:     Development Services Department.
Funding Source:     General Fund for administration, Emergency Housing Assistance
                    Program (state program that uses federal funds), Supportive Housing
                    Program (federal program that facilitates the transition of homeless
                    persons to independent living).
Timeframe:          Meet annually, assist non-profit organizations in applying for
                    funding. Amend Zoning Ordinance within one year of adoption of
                    the Housing Element.
Objective:          Assist with funding and development for an emergency shelter or
                    transitional housing facility, as identified herein, and ensure that the
                    proposed project is processed ministerially, to meet local needs
                    consistent with SB2. The City shall also consider permit and impact
                    fee waivers and other credits in consideration for such payment.
            City of Placerville 2013-2021 Housing Element—FINAL—February 2014
                                             H - 131

                PROGRAM 8. Transitional and Supportive Housing Zoning
                                    Amendments
Action:             Amend the Zoning Ordinance to permit transitional and supportive
                    housing as residential uses within Placerville’s mixed-use zones (e.g.
                    Business Professional (BP), Central Business District (CBD),
                    Commercial (C), Convenience Commercial (CC), Highway
                    Commercial (HWC), subject only to those restrictions that apply to
                    other residential uses in the same zone.
Responsibility:     Development Services Department.
Funding Source:     General Fund
Timeframe:          Within one year of Housing Element adoption.
Objective:          Increase opportunities for development of transitional and supportive
                    housing; to be consistent with the requirement of SB 2.
                PROGRAM 9. Accommodate Housing for Persons with Disabilities
Action:             The City will continue to permit accessory structures, building
                    modifications, and site plans that provide accessibility for persons
                    with disabilities and will continue to implement state building
                    standards for handicapped accessibility. The City will promote its
                    policies and development standards for persons with disabilities
                    through information provided at City Hall, pre-application meetings,
                    a link on the City website detailing the process for requesting
                    reasonable accommodation, and a notice to the Alta Regional Center.
                    The City shall also encourage housing developers of new
                    subdivisions to construct units within an overall housing
                    development that are accessible to persons with disabilities and the
                    aging. To illustrate this encouragement, the City enthusiastically
                    supported an "Independent Life Skills Training Center" on a parcel
                    approved within the Placerville Heritage Homes Subdivision along
                    Ray Lawyer Drive. This facility when constructed would be for
                    people with physical and developmental disabilities to learn living
                    skills in a residential setting. Mother Lode Rehabilitation Enterprises,
                    Inc., or M.O.R.E. is expected to operate this facility once it is built. To
                    help facilitate this construction and others like it, the City will explore
                    reductions and/or fee waivers of traffic and park development
                    impact fees that it controls.
            City of Placerville 2013-2021 Housing Element—FINAL—February 2014
                                             H - 132

Discussion:         As a part of the Housing Element Update, the City reviewed the
                    Zoning Ordinance to identify potential constraints to persons with
                    disabilities. The review revealed no specific constraints to persons
                    with disabilities. In order to ensure that zoning requirements and City
                    policies continue to accommodate persons with disabilities,
                    Placerville will continue to implement state building standards for
                    accessibility and continue to provide reasonable accommodations for
                    persons with disabilities.
Responsibility:     Development Services Department.
Funding Source:     General Fund.
Timeframe:          Ongoing.
Objective:          Improve housing accessibility for persons with disabilities.
                PROGRAM 10. Housing for Developmentally Disabled Persons
Action:             The housing needs of persons with disabilities, including persons
                    with developmental disabilities, are typically not addressed by Title
                    24 Regulations. The housing needs of persons with disabilities, in
                    addition to basic affordability, range from slightly modifying existing
                    units to requiring a varying range of supportive housing facilities.
                    To accommodate residents with developmental disabilities the City
                    will assist State and Federal monies, as funding becomes available, in
                    support of housing construction and rehabilitation targeted for
                    persons with disabilities, including developmental disabilities.
                    Placerville will also provide regulatory incentives, such as expedited
                    permit processing and fee waivers and deferrals, to projects targeted
                    for persons with disabilities, including persons with developmental
                    disabilities. The City shall reach out annually to developers of
                    supportive housing to encourage development of projects targeted for
                    special needs groups. Placerville will work with the Alta California
                    Regional Center to implement an outreach program informing
                    families within the City of housing and services available for persons
                    with developmental disabilities. Information will be made available
                    on the City's website.
Responsibility:     Development Services Department
Funding Source:     General Fund
Timeframe:          Ongoing, 2014-2021.
            City of Placerville 2013-2021 Housing Element—FINAL—February 2014
                                            H - 133

Objective:          To encourage the development or rehabilitation of one housing unit
                    per year of the planning period specifically for persons with
                    developmental disabilities through annually outreach to developers
                    and state or federal funds; to initiate a cooperative outreach program
                    with the Alta California Regional Center by 2014.
                PROGRAM 11. Senior Housing
Action:             The City will identify funding sources for the development of senior
                    housing, and facilitate senior housing development through the
                    density bonus program (Program 13), identification of suitable
                    development sites (Programs 1–2), through other development
                    incentives such as reduced parking, which can be granted in
                    conjunction with the density bonus provision, and through retrofits of
                    existing residential and non-residential facilities for adaptability to
                    serve the needs of disabled seniors and their guests. The City will
                    promote these potential incentives by providing information to
                    developers at pre-application meetings, notifying non-profit
                    organizations, and providing a link on the City website to its
                    affordable and senior housing policies.
Discussion:         Based on the data contained in the Community Profile, the senior
                    population in the City is projected to increase during the planning
                    period. Much of this growth will be the result of in-migration from
                    the surrounding areas, rather than from the aging-in-place of the
                    existing population. Many retirees are choosing to relocate to the
                    Sierra Nevada foothills, including Placerville. Though many initially
                    buy homes, the maintenance responsibilities may become too
                    burdensome as they continue to age, and the households may opt for
                    smaller senior housing units, including assisted living complexes.
                    Based on the projected growth in the senior population and the
                    resulting demand for senior housing, the City will identify potential
                    funding sources and work with non-profit developers to facilitate the
                    development of affordable housing and the retrofit of existing
                    residences for accessibility. In addition to identifying funding sources,
                    the City can facilitate senior housing through the density bonus
                    program, and identifying suitable sites for senior housing
                    development.
Responsibility:     Development Services Department.
Funding Source:     General Fund.
Timeframe:          Ongoing.
            City of Placerville 2013-2021 Housing Element—FINAL—February 2014
                                            H - 134

Objective:          Assist in the development of at least one senior housing project that
                    includes a continuum of care options, from completely independent
                    living to fully-assisted care.
        Goal C:           To Facilitate the Development of Housing Affordable to
                          Lower- and Moderate-Income Households
                PROGRAM 12. Workforce Housing
Action:             The City may prepare a study of options to provide housing that is
                    affordable to, and meets the needs of, residents who are employed
                    locally (workforce housing). The City Council will determine the need
                    for such a study, as indicated below, based on the availability of state
                    funding. If prepared, the study will consist of two parts:
                    1.   A survey of major employers to assess the wages of the local
                         workforce. This survey will assist the City in determining the mix
                         of affordability levels appropriate for the City workforce. The
                         City will update the wage study every two years.
                    2.   A Workforce Housing Policy Report that addresses:
                              Infill development workforce and self-help opportunities,
                              including densities, development standards and possible
                              development incentive programs;
                              Recommendations for revisions or additions to existing City
                              regulations or policies to encourage infill development, and
                              in particular the infill development of workforce housing
                              units;
                              Recommendations for policies and measures to maintain
                              long-term affordability of units developed in the Workforce
                              Housing Design Program, including identification of funding
                              programs and development resources;
                              Recommendations for the marketing of workforce housing
                              units to maximize existing local resident workforce;
                              A mix of unit types, sizes and prices to match with local
                              workforce needs.
                    The City will promote the results of the Workforce Housing Study, if
                    prepared, through a link to its website, distribution of the study to
                    local homebuilder organizations and non-profit housing providers,
                    and realtor organizations, and meetings with housing providers to
                    determine their interest in developing workforce housing.
Responsibility:     Development Services Department.
            City of Placerville 2013-2021 Housing Element—FINAL—February 2014
                                            H - 135

Funding Source:     General Fund, CDBG Planning Grant, other sources identified in
                    Program 14.
Timeframe:          Determine the need and apply for a CDBG planning grant, if
                    appropriate, by spring of 2015.
Objective:          Complete at least one housing development that provides very-low-
                    income, low-income, and moderate-income housing units.
                PROGRAM 13. Density Bonus
Action:             Promote the density bonus as a tool to assist in the development of
                    affordable housing by providing program information at City Hall,
                    promoting the use of the program at pre-application conferences,
                    providing a link on the City’s website, and through distribution of the
                    Workforce Housing Study (see Program 12).
Discussion:         The City currently provides density bonus provisions for
                    developments that include affordable housing for lower-income
                    households or qualifying residents, such as elderly households, up to
                    the maximum bonus permissible under state law of 35 percent, either
                    individual or combined for any single project.
                    All projects that are eligible for a density bonus shall receive between
                    one and three incentives if requested. As with the density bonus, the
                    intent of the incentives is to further encourage the construction of
                    affordable housing. The number of incentives increases
                    proportionally with the amount of affordable housing provided. The
                    breakdown is as follows:
                               One incentive for projects that provide at least the minimum
                               percentage of affordability required to receive a density
                               bonus as described above, as well as development of a
                               project intended for senior citizens;
                               Two incentives for projects that provide at least two times
                               the minimum percentage of affordability required to receive
                               a density bonus as described above, or
                               Three incentives for projects that provide at least three times
                               the minimum percentage of affordability required to receive
                               a density bonus as described above.
                          Incentives may include but are not limited to:
                               A reduction in development standards (reduction in lot
                               sizes, setbacks, lot coverage, building height, etc.),
            City of Placerville 2013-2021 Housing Element—FINAL—February 2014
                                             H - 136

                               A reduction in architectural design requirements,
                               A density bonus greater than the amount required by state
                               law, and/or
                               Other regulatory incentives proposed by the developer that
                               would result in identifiable, financially sufficient, and actual
                               cost reductions.
Responsibility:     Development Services Department, Planning Commission, City
                    Council.
Funding Source:     General Fund
Timeframe:          Complete program brochure and website link by December 2014.
                    Ongoing operation of the program thereafter, amending the program
                    as necessary to comply with potential future changes to state law.
Objective:          To increase awareness of density bonuses and other incentives for
                    affordable housing.
                PROGRAM 14. Pursue State and Federal Funding
Action:             The City will continue to pursue available state and federal funding
                    sources in cooperation with private developers, non-profit housing
                    corporations, the El Dorado County Housing Authority and
                    Community Services Department, and other interested entities to
                    assist in meeting the needs of extremely-low, low- and moderate-
                    income households. Based on meetings (at least annually) with non-
                    profit developers and service providers, the City will identify the
                    funding sources most appropriate to meet the needs of residents, and
                    apply for funds, or assist other entities in applying for funds, during
                    available funding cycles. City assistance to other entities will include,
                    but not be limited to:
                               Providing data that is necessary for a funding request, and
                               Expediting permit decisions on proposed projects that
                               require City approval or that will be more competitive with
                               City approval, prior to submitting funding requests.
                          Potential funding sources include, but are not limited to:
                               California Multi-family Housing Program:
                               California Housing Finance Agency (HELP Program)
                               California Housing Finance Agency direct lending programs
                               (single-family and multi-family)
                               Low-Income Housing Tax Credits (state & federal)
            City of Placerville 2013-2021 Housing Element—FINAL—February 2014
                                            H - 137

                               CalHome Program
                               Federal Home Loan Bank – Affordable Housing Program
                               Federal Department of Housing and Urban Development
                               Programs – Section 221(d), Section 202 (elderly), Section 811
                               (persons with disabilities)
                               Child Care Facilities Finance Program (administered
                               through the State of California), Special Housing Needs and
                               Supportive Services
                    As part of this program, the City will specifically seek or support
                    applications for funding programs, at least twice in each planning
                    period, that target the development of housing affordable to
                    extremely-low-income households. The City will establish special
                    incentives and concessions beyond what is already required through
                    density bonus law, or other mechanisms such as priority processing
                    and fee deferrals to encourage the development of housing affordable
                    to extremely-low-income households.
Responsibility:     Development Services Department.
Timeframe:          Meet annually with interested entities to determine funding priorities
                    for the subsequent 24 months. Establish specific incentives for the
                    development of housing for extremely-low-income households in
                    2014. Apply for funding, or assist other entities in applying for
                    funding, based on state and federal funding cycles. For most state
                    programs (except those that have continuous application periods),
                    applications are due either during the fall or in late winter. For most
                    federal housing and supportive service programs administered by
                    HUD, application deadlines are during the late spring/early summer.
                    Other state/federal funding opportunities will be pursued based on
                    individual funding deadlines and priorities established through
                    annual meetings between the City and interested entities.
Objective:          Increase the effective use of state and federal funds in support of
                    affordable housing, shelter, and housing-related services.
                PROGRAM 15. Permit and Development Impact Fees
Action:             In order to ensure that City permit and development impact fees do
                    not constrain the development of housing, the City will review its fee
                    structure annually and will report the findings to the City Council
                    and Planning Commission in conjunction with the annual report on
                    the General Plan. While fees typically represent the cost of providing
                    public facilities and services, the up-front cost can present a
                    significant burden to developers, especially in the case of affordable
                    housing. If the annual review determines that fees are constraining
            City of Placerville 2013-2021 Housing Element—FINAL—February 2014
                                            H - 138

                    the development of affordable housing in the City, Placerville will
                    offer one of several options to housing providers:
                               Deferment of fees until project completion or occupancy;
                               Payment of fees over a 12-month or longer period after
                               project completion, or
                               Reduction of fees for specific facilities or services for which
                               the applicant can show a connection between the lower fee
                               and lower facility/service demand from project residents.
                    Placerville will notify affordable housing providers of options to
                    reduce the up-front cost of fees through information provided at the
                    City’s permit counter, a website link, and pre-application meetings.
Responsibility:     Development Services Department, Planning Commission, City
                    Council.
Funding Source:     General Fund for program administration.
Timeframe:          Annually.
Objective:          Reduce the initial cost-impact of City fees on affordable housing
                    projects.
                PROGRAM 16. Self-Help Housing
Action:             The City will continue to work with non-profit developers in the area
                    to develop self-help housing (housing in which the eventual owner
                    participates in its construction under the supervision of a building
                    contractor). The City can facilitate the development of the self-help
                    housing through a variety of means, including:
                               Obtaining financing, including CDBG and HOME (see
                               Program 14 for discussion of the City’s role in funding
                               assistance);
                               Identifying an appropriate site for a self-help housing project
                               and pursuing state and federal funds for the purchase of the
                               site;
                               Reduction in the up-front costs of development impact fees
                               (see Programs 15 and 18), or
                               Other regulatory incentives, including density bonus and
                               streamlined permit processing (see Program 13).
            City of Placerville 2013-2021 Housing Element—FINAL—February 2014
                                            H - 139

Discussion:         The City will attempt to facilitate a self-help housing project during
                    the 2013—2021 period. A self-help project could be designed as part
                    of the City’s Workforce Housing Study (see Program 12).
Responsibility:     Development Services Department.
Funding Source:     CDBG, HOME, CHFA HELP Program.
Timeframe:          As part of annual meetings with non-profit housing providers,
                    identify opportunities for self-help housing projects.
Objective:          207 additional ownership housing units—50 very-low-income and 56
                    low-income.
                PROGRAM 17. First Time Homebuyer Assistance
Action:             Recognizing the need for homebuyer assistance, the City will
                    encourage developers and other entities to design a first-time
                    homebuyer program, which could include down payment assistance
                    loans and/or grants, and assistance with closing costs. Once
                    presented with a program design which will meet the needs of its
                    residents, the City will assist in the application for funds. In helping
                    to promoting the program, the City will provide information at City
                    Hall, provide a link on the City website, and help distribute
                    information to area real estate firms, lenders, and homebuilders.
Discussion:         Currently, the City does not operate a first-time homebuyer program.
                    Housing costs during the 2008-2013 Housing Element planning
                    period were reduced due to the economic condition of the housing
                    industry in California and other parts of the U.S. Should housing
                    costs in the region rise over the 2013-2012 planning period, as
                    expected from their 2012 lows, low- and moderate-income
                    households will have increasingly limited options for home purchase.
                    In encouraging the establishment of first-time homebuyer programs,
                    the City will seek collaboration with non-profit organizations, county
                    agencies, and/or local lenders.
Responsibility:     Development Services Department, City Council.
Funding Source:     CDBG, HOME, CHFA HELP Program, Federal Home Loan Bank
                    Board Affordable Housing Program.
Timeframe:          Beginning in fiscal year 2018, meet with non-profit organizations, El
                    Dorado County agencies and/or lenders interested in offering FTHA
                    programs to review suitability for Placerville residents. Help
            City of Placerville 2013-2021 Housing Element—FINAL—February 2014
                                            H - 140

                    developers apply for funding as soon thereafter as feasible based on
                    demand and administrative capacity.
Objective:          Assist very-low-income households, low-income households, and
                    moderate-income households in the purchase of a first home.
                PROGRAM 18. Statewide Community Infrastructure Program
                          (SCIP)
Action:             Implement the Statewide Community Infrastructure Program (SCIP)
                    to assist in the financing of certain capital improvement charges
                    (CICs) and impact fees.
Discussion:         The City intends to implement this program for all projects,
                    particularly housing projects, to provide housing developers this
                    program to finance impact fees.
                    If a developer/property owner chose to participate in SCIP, the
                    selected public capital improvements and the development impact
                    fees owed to the City would be financed by the issuance of tax-
                    exempt bonds by California Statewide Communities Development
                    Authority (CSCDA). CSCDA would impose a special assessment on
                    the owner’s property tax bill to repay the portion of the bonds issued
                    to finance the fees paid with respect to the property and the public
                    capital improvements benefiting the property. With respect to the
                    impact fees, the developer may either pay the impact fees at the time
                    of permit issuance and receive reimbursement from the SCIP bond
                    proceeds when the SCIP bonds are issued, or the fees will be funded
                    directly from the proceeds of the SCIP bonds. If the property owner
                    pays the impact fees in advance, the City is required to pay the fees to
                    SCIP. If the property owner does not pay the impact fees in advance,
                    SCIP holds onto the bond proceeds representing the fees. In either
                    case, the fees are subject to requisition by the City at anytime to make
                    authorized fee expenditures. By holding and investing the money
                    until it is spent, SCIP is able to monitor the investment earnings
                    (which come to the City for federal tax law arbitrage purposes). SCIP
                    encourages the City to spend the proceeds before any other fee
                    revenues of the City. If the fees are paid by the property owner and
                    bonds are never issued, the fees would be returned to the City by
                    SCIP. In this way, the City is never at risk of losing the impact fees.
Responsibility:     Development Services Department.
Funding Source:     General Fund.
Timeframe:          Ongoing.
            City of Placerville 2013-2021 Housing Element—FINAL—February 2014
                                            H - 141

Objective:          Assist in funding/financing of CICs and impact fees for all forms of
                    residential projects.
        Goal D:           To Promote Equal Housing Opportunity for all Residents
                PROGRAM 19. Fair Housing
Action:             The City will continue to promote equal housing opportunity for all
                    residents by supporting efforts of community groups (such as the
                    Housing Resources Board) that provide counseling, investigatory,
                    legal, or referral services to victims of discrimination by:
                         Training staff who have contact with the public on how to receive
                         and refer fair housing complaints;
                         Posting and distributing fair housing information at City Hall and
                         other community facility locations, and
                         Working with local lenders, rental property owners, real estate,
                         and legal service organizations to conduct fair housing training,
                         and identify an annual community event at which fair housing
                         information can be distributed.
Responsibility:     Development Services Department.
Funding Source:     General Fund.
Timeframe:          Ongoing referral and distribution of information.
Objective:          Increase community awareness of fair housing.
        Goal E:           To Preserve the Existing Housing Stock
                PROGRAM 20. Housing Rehabilitation
Action:             The City will continue to promote low-interest and deferred-payment
                    loans for housing rehabilitation for eligible owner-occupied and
                    renter-occupied units. Funds may be used to correct any health and
                    safety issue within a housing unit. In cases where a housing unit is
                    overcrowded, funds can be used for a room addition.
                    The City provides information on the rehabilitation program at City
                    Hall, and through its code enforcement activities. The City also has a
                    link on its website to the Grants Administration division. This link
                    will be enhanced with more specific program information and a
                    downloadable program application.
            City of Placerville 2013-2021 Housing Element—FINAL—February 2014
                                             H - 142

Discussion:         The economic downturn and an increase in costs associated with the
                    upkeep and maintenance of housing units were evident during the
                    2008-2013 planning cycle. Pursuing CDBG and/or other funding to
                    reinstitute this program is a priority for the 2013 fiscal year.
Responsibility:     Development Services Department.
Funding Source:     CDBG, HOME, State Multi-family Housing Program and Affordable
                    Housing Program (through the Federal Home Loan Bank Board).
Timeframe:          Annual applications for funding. Provide ongoing assistance as funds
                    are available.
Objective:          Rehabilitate two homes per year when funds are available.
                PROGRAM 21. Housing Conditions Survey
Action:             The City will conduct a Housing Conditions Survey to identify areas
                    to target code enforcement, rehabilitation assistance, and
                    neighborhood improvement efforts.
Discussion:         The most recent Housing Conditions Survey for Placerville was
                    completed in 1998. Since nearly 50 percent of housing units in the City
                    were built prior to 1970, an updated Housing Conditions Survey will
                    assist the City in targeting its efforts for housing and neighborhood
                    improvement, thereby conserving the existing housing in the
                    community.
Responsibility:     Development Services Department.
Funding Source:     CDBG Planning Grant.
Timeframe:          Update the Housing Conditions Survey by fiscal year 2015-2016.
                    Update the Survey every five years thereafter.
Objective:          To maintain a relatively current and relevant database of housing
                    conditions.
                PROGRAM 22. Code Enforcement
Action:             The City will continue to conduct code enforcement inspections on a
                    complaint basis. Eligible property owners will be directed to the
                    City’s rehabilitation program for assistance in correcting code
                    violations.
            City of Placerville 2013-2021 Housing Element—FINAL—February 2014
                                            H - 143

Discussion:         The City Building Division is responsible for enforcing both state and
                    City regulations governing maintenance of all buildings and
                    property. Due to currently minimal City staffing levels, code
                    enforcement is complaint-based. The Building Division responds to
                    approximately 100 complaints per year.
Responsibility:     Building Division.
Funding Source:     General Fund, inspection fees. See Program 16 for Housing
                    Rehabilitation Funding sources.
Timeframe:          Ongoing.
Objective:          To correct building code violations before they become serious health
                    and safety hazards to human habitation.
                PROGRAM 23. Historic Preservation
Action:             The City will encourage the preservation of historic homes and
                    buildings by:
                          Continuing to review requests for demolition of buildings within
                          historic districts;
                          Utilizing the California State Historical Building Code to
                          recognize the unique construction issues inherent in maintaining
                          and adaptively reusing historic homes and buildings.
                          The establishment of historic districts;
                          Continuing to allow the re-use of historic buildings as residential
                          uses, and
                          Identifying potential funding sources to assist in the
                          preservation of historic structures and referring property owners
                          to those sources.
Responsibility:     Development Services Department.
Funding Source:     General Fund. See Program 16 for housing rehabilitation funding
                    sources.
Timeframe:          Ongoing.
Objective:          Preserve the historic/architectural integrity of historic residential
                    structures.
            City of Placerville 2013-2021 Housing Element—FINAL—February 2014
                                              H - 144

        Goal F:           To Conserve Existing Affordable Housing Opportunities
                PROGRAM 24. Housing Choice Voucher Program
Action:             The City will continue to cooperate with the El Dorado County
                    Housing Authority in its administration of the Federal Housing
                    Choice Voucher (formerly called "Section 8") rental assistance
                    program to maintain the availability of housing vouchers in
                    Placerville. The City's role will be to:
                               Provide necessary documentation to the Housing Authority
                               to apply for annual commitments from the U.S. Department
                               of Housing and Urban Development;
                               Encourage rental property owners who have participated in
                               the City’s Housing Rehabilitation Program to participate in
                               the Housing Choice Voucher Program;
                               Provide information on the rental assistance program in the
                               City’s newsletter, and at City Hall, and
Responsibility:     Development Services Department, El Dorado County Housing
                    Authority.
Funding Source:     HUD Housing Choice Vouchers for rental assistance, General fund
                    for outreach activities.
Timeframe:          Ongoing.
Objective:          Increase rental property owner participation in the Housing Choice
                    Voucher Program.
                PROGRAM 25. Preservation of "At-Risk" units
Action:             The City will work with property owners, other public agencies, and
                    non-profit housing organizations to preserve existing subsidized
                    rental housing. To encourage existing owners to maintain the
                    affordability of such rental housing, the City would assist owners in
                    applying for state or federal assistance for refinancing, acquisition,
                    and/or rehabilitation.
                    The City will monitor properties identified as being potentially at-risk
                    to ensure that property owners comply with state and federal
                    notification requirements. For properties that are within 24 months of
                    potential conversion, the City will meet with property owners to
                    determine their plans and the type(s) of assistance desired, if any, to
                    maintain the affordable status of the rental housing units. For owners
            City of Placerville 2013-2021 Housing Element—FINAL—February 2014
                                            H - 145

                    who intend to sell their rental properties, the City will identify
                    interested non-profit organizations willing to acquire and continue
                    operating the rental properties as affordable housing.
Discussion:         As a part of the Housing Element Update, the City analyzed all
                    assisted housing to determine whether any units were at risk of
                    converting to market-rate uses. Based on this analysis, the City
                    determined that 67 units are at risk during this planning period. The
                    City will monitor the assisted housing units to ensure that property
                    owners comply with state and federal notification requirements if
                    there is change in funding status or eligibility to convert based on
                    changes in federal regulations. For owners who intend to sell their
                    rental properties, the City will identify interested non-profit
                    organizations willing to acquire and continue operating the rental
                    properties as affordable housing.
Responsibility:     Development Services Department.
Funding Source:     General Fund.
Timeframe:          January 2017; Monitor the assisted housing units at risk by contacting
                    the property owner to determine whether there is a change in status
                    or eligibility.
Objective:          Preserve affordable rental housing units.
                PROGRAM 26. Mobilehome Parks
Action:             The City will work with the mobile home park owners and the El
                    Dorado County Community Services Department to access state and
                    federal funds for park improvements and potential conversion to
                    tenant ownership, if desired by both the park owner and residents.
                    The City will meet with the park owners to discuss their long-term
                    goals for the properties and the feasibility of preserving the parks. If
                    park conversion to tenant ownership is desired, the City will assist
                    residents in identifying an experienced non-profit organization that
                    can facilitate the park conversion.
Discussion:         Two mobile home parks located in Placerville contain 162 spaces
                    total. One of these parks contains seven spaces while the other
                    contains 155 spaces. These mobile home parks provide a source of
                    affordable housing and homeownership for low-income households.
                    Note that The California Department of Housing and Community
                    Development lists nine other registered mobile home parks in the
                    Placerville area containing over 400 mobile home spaces. These parks
                    are located outside the City, however.
            City of Placerville 2013-2021 Housing Element—FINAL—February 2014
                                            H - 146

Responsibility:     Development Services Department.
Funding Source:     CDBG, HOME, California Housing Finance Agency HELP program,
                    California Mobile Home Park Resident Ownership Program.
Timeframe:          The City will continue to monitor and meet with park owners each
                    year to identify park improvements and mobile home rehabilitation
                    or replacement needs. Assist property owners and/or residents in
                    accessing state or federal funding, as requested and needed. If park
                    conversion to resident ownership is a desired alternative, the City will
                    assist park residents in identifying a non-profit organization that can
                    assist in the conversion process.
Objective:          Preserve mobile home park spaces (including space in the one mobile
                    home park on the City limit line), if determined to be feasible.
        Goal G:           To Promote Residential Energy Conservation
                PROGRAM 27. Weatherization & Energy Conservation
Action:             The City will distribute information on energy efficiency and
                    weatherization programs offered by PG&E and others in conjunction
                    with the City rehabilitation program. In addition, the City will
                    identify additional funding sources for weatherization improvements
                    to lower-income households and provide this information housing
                    rehabilitation program participants. A potential funding source is the
                    Property Assessed Clean Energy (PACE), a program the City and El
                    Dorado County are considering jointly participating in during 2013.
                    PACE is a loan program that helps pay the upfront costs of energy
                    efficient upgrades for homes and businesses. Loans are repaid over a
                    typical term of 15-20 years through an annual assessment on the
                    home and business owners' tax bills.
                    The City will continue to permit energy efficiency and weatherization
                    improvements as eligible activities under its housing rehabilitation
                    program.
Responsibility:     Development Services Department.
Funding Source:     CDBG, HOME, PACE, if initiated in 2013, and General Fund as
                    needed.
Timeframe:          Ongoing.
            City of Placerville 2013-2021 Housing Element—FINAL—February 2014
                                            H - 147

Objective:          Increase the energy efficiency of older residential structures and
                    reduce energy costs.
                PROGRAM 28. Energy Conservation for New Residential
                                            Development
Action:             The City will continue to enforce state energy efficiency requirements
                    for new residential construction (Title 24 of the California Code of
                    Regulations) and shall encourage, through the City’s plan review
                    process, additional energy conservation measures with respect to the
                    siting of buildings, landscaping, and solar access. In addition, the City
                    shall promote and encourage construction within new residential
                    development to accommodate energy efficient upgrades in the future
                    (e.g. plumbing conduit and roof supports for photo voltaic panels, or
                    conduit for plug-in electric vehicles, etc.) In order to promote the use
                    of energy-efficient construction, the City will provide information on
                    energy conservation measures with development application packets.
Responsibility:     Development Services Department.
Funding Source:     General Fund.
Timeframe:          Ongoing.
Objective:          Increase the energy efficiency in new residential developments.
            City of Placerville 2013-2021 Housing Element—FINAL—February 2014
                                            H - 148

VI.                                                     APPENDICES
APPENDIX A.
QUANTIFIED OBJECTIVES
The City of Placerville has established quantified (numerical) objectives for several
program categories to provide measurable standards for monitoring and evaluating
program achievements.
Quantified objectives have been established for accommodating the City’s share of future
housing needs under the SACOG Regional Housing Needs Plan, new housing
construction, housing rehabilitation, the preservation of existing affordable housing, and
homebuyer assistance (See Tables 44 & 45). The future housing needs objective addresses
the City’s ability to accommodate housing based on the availability of appropriately
zoned vacant and underutilized land, with public services and facilities.
These homes may or may not be built depending on market trends and the availability of
funding to developers of affordable housing. Quantified objectives are based on the 2012
SACOG Regional Housing Needs Plan. Quantified objectives cover 2013 – 2021, based on
anticipated market-rate housing production for moderate- and above-moderate-income,
availability of financial resources to assist the construction of very-low- and low-income
housing, and the City’s track record of producing affordable housing.
             Table 46: Quantified Objectives (October 2013 to October 2021)
     Income
                     New Construction        Rehabilitation    Conservation/Preservation
    Category
 Extremely-Low                 39                    4          67 (Section 8 at-risk units)
    Very-Low                   39                    6
                                                                  162 (mobile home park
       Low                     55                    6                    spaces)
    Moderate                   69                     -                      -
     Above-
                              170                     -                      -
    Moderate
    TOTALS                    372                    16                     229
             City of Placerville 2013-2021 Housing Element—FINAL—February 2014
                                             A - 149

APPENDIX B.
UPZONING/REZONING ANALYSIS
The following APNs were evaluated for potential upzoning or rezoning to provide
additional inventory of multi-family zoned parcels to facilitate the development of
housing to lower- and moderate-income households.
        1.        APN 323-570-01 and APN 323-570-37
                 (Middletown / Cold Springs Rd. / Placerville Dr.)
APN 323-570-01 and 323-570-37 total 7.6 acres. Parcels are zoned C, Commercial. They
front Middletown Rd., Cold Springs Rd. and Placerville Dr. Average slope is
approximately 21.5%. Sewer and water utilities exist within Middletown Road and
Placerville Drive. Parcels are within ¼ mile of Markham Middle School and El Dorado
High School. Site is adjacent to Placerville Dr. shopping and retail district. Transit stop at
Home Depot.
           Figure 1: Middletown Road / Cold Springs Road / Placerville Drive
                                                                         APN 323-570-01
                                                                         APN 323-570-37
                                                                                         N
Table 47 provides the gross and potential units from these parcels.
             City of Placerville 2013-2021 Housing Element—FINAL—February 2014
                                             A - 150

    Table 47: Gross and Potential Units from APNs 323-570-01 and 323-570-37
Max Zone Density                 Gross Units               Potential Units (75% of Gross)
  R-2 = 8 dua                 8 dua x 7.6 ac = 62                   0.75 x 62= 46
  R-3 = 12 dua               12 dua x 7.6 ac = 91                   0.75 x 91 = 68
  R-4 = 16 dua              16 dua x 7.6 ac = 121                  0.75 x 121 = 91
     20 dua                 20 dua x 7.6 ac = 152                 0.75 x 152 = 114
     2.      Mixed-use areas defined within Placerville Drive Development
             Plan
                                                   Figure 3: Green Valley Rd. /Placerville
   Figure 2: Central Village Core                                  Drive
                        Figure 4: Oetting Property Project Site
         City of Placerville 2013-2021 Housing Element—FINAL—February 2014
                                           A - 151

                Table 48: Potential Uses within Placerville Drive Development Plan Area
  Preferred Vision                                             Parcel    Parcel
                                  Address(es)                                             Analysis
     Plan Area                                                Number     Acres
Central Village Core 309-317 Placerville Dr.                 323:260:10     2.09
"                     347 Placerville Dr.                    323:400:21     2.78
"                     399 Placerville Dr.                    323:400:02     2.64
"                     415 Placerville Dr.                    323:400:03     2.08
"                     555 Pierroz Road                       323:400:04     1.45
                                                             323:400:06;
"                     332 Placerville Dr.                                   2.00
                                                             323:400:08
"                     338-344 Placerville Dr.                323:400:23     1.09
"                     358-374 Placerville Dr.                323:400:11     1.99
"                     386 Placerville Dr.                    323:400:12     1.08
"                     416-426 Placerville Dr.                323:400:13     5.00 Ostensibly all parcels
Placerville Dr. /                                                                contain existing
                      191-197 Placerville Dr.                325:120:87     0.33
Green Valley Rd.                                                                 commercial or residential
"                     183 Placerville Dr.                    325:120:37     0.42 structures, parking areas,
                                                                                 etc. Maximum density
"                     179 Placerville Dr.                    325:120:35     0.67
                                                                                 will be derived from a
                                                             325:120:62;
"                     175 Placerville Dr.                                   2.13 combination of maximum
                                                             325:120:63          building height, lot
"                     161 Placerville Dr.                    325:120:32     0.34 coverage, floor area ratios
                                                                                 and parking requirements
"                     163 Placerville Dr.                    325:120:33     0.46
                                                                                 defined under a mixed-
"                     155 Placerville Dr.                    325:160:41     0.66 use zone.
"                     -                                      325:160:37     0.40
"                     7502-7510 Green Valley Rd.             325:120:59     1.23
"                     7500, 7528, 7530 Green Valley Rd. 325:120:38          0.64
"                     7490 Green Valley Rd.                  325:120:92     0.39
"                     7460 Green Valley Rd.                  325:120:30     0.37
"                     7444 Green Valley Rd.                  325:160:08     1.00
"                     7509 Winter Ln.                        325:120:93     0.37
                                                                                 Res. "mixed-use" areas
                                                                                 located on >30% slope;
Oetting Property                                             Portion of Portion pre-graded "Professional
                      -
Project Site                                                 323:400:16 of 48.26 Offices" area suitable for
                                                                                 res. densities at 16-20 dua,
                                                                                 not the >30% slope.
                    City of Placerville 2013-2021 Housing Element—FINAL—February 2014
                                                    A - 152

          APPENDIX C. UTILITY INFRASTRUCTURE
          Figure 5: Utility Infrastructure
A - 153
                                             City of Placerville 2013-2021 Housing Element—FINAL—February 2014
                                                                             A - 153

          APPENDIX D. AVAILABLE LAND INVENTORY
          Figure 6: Available Land Inventory
A - 154
                                        City of Placerville 2013-2021 Housing Element—FINAL—February 2014
                                                                        A - 154

          APPENDIX E.
          CITY OF PLACERVILLE POTENTIAL LOW INCOME HOUSING LAND INVENTORY
          Figure 7: Potential Low-Income Housing Sites
A - 155
                                       City of Placerville 2013-2021 Housing Element—FINAL—February 2014
                                                                       A - 155

          The following potential sites if rezoned to the R-5 zone and density would permit owner-
          occupied or multifamily residential uses by right, with compliance with local design
          standards, but without discretionary action. This is consistent with State statute for the
          development of lower-income housing at the target density of 20 dwelling units per acre.
          The sites to be rezoned may include, but are not limited to, the potential sites identified
          in this appendix and Table 40. Appropriate sites will be vetted and selected through a
          rezoning process in accordance with legal requirements and the requisite CEQA analysis.
                  Site 1: APN 323-220-08 —Mallard Lane at Macintosh Drive
           Acreage: 4.04
                                                             Development Potential Under R-3
                                                             (12 DU/AC)
           Land Use Considerations
                                                             Gross Unit Capacity:     48 units
           Existing General Plan: High Density
                                                             Realistic Unit Capacity: 48 units
           Residential
           Existing Zoning: R-3
                                                             Development Potential Under R-5
           Existing Use: Vacant
                                                             (20 DU/AC):
           Pending Development: None
                                                             Gross Unit Capacity:     81 units
                                                             Realistic Unit Capacity: 81 units
           Potential Zoning: R5 (20 DU/AC)
A - 156                    Infrastructure Considerations
          Sewer and water utilities are within immediate vicinity along Mallard Lane. Traffic
          impact mitigation (improvement and/or fair share contribution) is likely along Green
          Valley Road offsite to offset anticipated traffic at build-out.
                           Environmental Considerations
          Noise: No noise generating land use in site vicinity.
          Flooding: Site is located outside FEMA 100-Year Flood Zone.
          Slope: Site rough graded
          Biotic Resources: Vegetation removed during mass pad grading. Both parcels are under
          common ownership.
          Notes: Site is along El Dorado Transit route, and one-half mile distance to Armory Drive
          Park & Ride Commuter Bus station. Site is less than one-half mile to Placerville Drive
          shopping and El Dorado County Center.
                      City of Placerville 2013-2021 Housing Element—FINAL—February 2014
                                                      A - 156

                    Figures 8 & 9: Site 1—Mallard Lane Photos
                  Figure 10: Site 1—Mallard Lane Location Map
A - 157
                                         SITE 1                               APN 323-220-08
          City of Placerville 2013-2021 Housing Element—FINAL—February 2014
                                          A - 157

                  Site 2: APN: 051-505-01—3607 Cedar Ravine Road at Country Club Dr.
                                                            Potential Zoning: R-5-AO
           Acreage: 1.12
                                                            (20 DU/AC)
           Land Use Considerations
                                                            Development Potential Under R-3
           General Plan: High Density Residential
                                                            (12 DU/AC)
           Existing Zoning: R-3-AO, Multi-Family
                                                            Gross Unit Capacity:     13 units
           Residential-Airport Overlay Zone (12
                                                            Realistic Unit Capacity: 13 units
           DU/AC)
           Existing Use: Vacant underutilized
                                                            Development Potential Under R-5
           residential site.
                                                            (20 DU/AC)
                                                            Gross Unit Capacity:     22 units
           Pending Development: None.
                                                            Realistic Unit Capacity: 22 units
                           Infrastructure Considerations
          Sewer and water utilities serve the site.
                           Environmental Considerations
A - 158   Noise: Noise generating land uses in site vicinity are: Lions Park, a City municipal park
          and Placerville Airport located east. The site is within the Placerville Airport’s High
          Noise/Risk Zone. Development of low-income residential uses on this site will require
          an overflight notification be recorded as a conditional of approval (Policy 4.5.2.,
          Placerville Airport Land Use Compatibility Plan, adopted by City by reference).
          Recorded overflight notifications will appear on property title. Their intent is to alert
          those interested in the project that the site is within an airport’s influence area, with
          aircraft overflight of the property.
          Flooding: Site is not located within FEMA 100-Year Flood Zone.
          Slope: Less than 10 percent.
          Biotic Resources: Interspersed mature oak and pine trees. Native and non-native grasses,
          shrubs and ground covers.
                           Other Considerations
          Site is adjacent to the City municipal Lions Park; it is approximately one mile southeast
          of employment sources Marshall Medical Center and associated professional uses; it has
          convenient US 50 (1.3 miles north) and Placerville Station commuter Park & Ride facility
          vehicle access (two miles northeast).
                      City of Placerville 2013-2021 Housing Element—FINAL—February 2014
                                                      A - 158

          Site would require only zone change due to existing High Density Residential land use.
                           Figure 11: Site 2—Country Club Drive Location Map
A - 159
                          Figures 12, 13 & 14: Site 2—Country Club Drive Photos
                      City of Placerville 2013-2021 Housing Element—FINAL—February 2014
                                                      A - 159

                  Site 3: APN 001-092-27 - Coloma Road (State Route 49)
                                                            Potential Zoning: R-5 (20 DU/AC)
          Acreage: 3.76 acres
                                                            Development Potential Under R-2
          Land Use Considerations                           (8 DU/AC)
          General Plan: High Density Residential            Gross Unit Capacity:     30 units
          Existing Zoning: R-2, Multi-Family Residential    Realistic Unit Capacity: 30 units
          (8 DU/AC)
                                                            Development Potential Under R-5
A - 160
          Existing Use: Vacant residential site.
                                                            (20 DU/AC)
          Pending Development: None.                        Gross Unit Capacity:     75 units
                                                            Realistic Unit Capacity: 75 units
                          Infrastructure Considerations
          Electrical, sewer and water utilities serve the site along Coloma Road.
                          Environmental Considerations
          Noise: Noise generating land uses in site vicinity is SR 49.
          Flooding: Site is not located within FEMA 100-Year Flood Zone.
          Slope: Less than 20 percent.
          Biotic Resources: Interspersed mature oak and pine trees. Native and non-native grasses,
          shrubs and ground covers.
          Note: Adjoining multi-family uses to the south; single-family residential uses located
          east; professional office use located north.
                      City of Placerville 2013-2021 Housing Element—FINAL—February 2014
                                                      A - 160

                      Figure 15: Site 3—Coloma Road Photo
                  Figure 16: Site 3—Coloma Road Location Map
A - 161
                                   SITE 3
          City of Placerville 2013-2021 Housing Element—FINAL—February 2014
                                          A - 161

                  Site 4: APN 003-241-55 - 928 Adams Way
                                                              Potential Zoning: R-5 (20 DU/AC)
          Acreage: 6.02
                                                              Development Potential Under R-4
                                                              (16 DU/AC)
          Land Use Considerations
                                                              Gross Unit Capacity:     96 units
          General Plan: High Density Residential
                                                              Realistic Unit Capacity: 72 units
          Existing Zoning: R-4, Multi-Family Residential
          (16 DU/AC)
                                                         Development Potential Under R-5
          Existing Use: Underutilized residential site.
                                                         (20 DU/AC)
                                                         Gross Unit Capacity:     120 units
          Pending Development: None.
                                                         Realistic Unit Capacity: 90 units
                           Infrastructure Considerations
          Water, sewer and electric utilities currently serve the site and vicinity.
                           Environmental Considerations
          Noise: Noise generating land use in site vicinity is Rotary Park and its lighted youth
          baseball field located southwest and adjacent to the site.
A - 162
          Flooding: Site is not located within FEMA 100-Year Flood Zone.
          Slope: Less than 10 percent on ¾ of site, with eastern ¼ at >20% slope.
          Biotic Resources: Mature pine trees. Native and non-native grasses, shrubs and ground
          cover most of the site.
                           Other Considerations
          Site is partially occupied by two dwelling units. Assessor’s records indicate that one
          dwelling unit was constructed in 1903. El Dorado Transit serves the site vicinity at the
          intersection of Clark Street and Pacific Streets.
          Site would require only zone change due to existing High Density Residential land use.
                       City of Placerville 2013-2021 Housing Element—FINAL—February 2014
                                                       A - 162

                                 Figure 17: Site 4—Adams Way Location Map
                                                               SITE 4
A - 163
                  Site 5: 323-450-11 - 2800 Cold Springs Road
                                                              Potential Zoning: R-5 (20 DU/AC)
          Acreage: 1.51
                                                              Development Potential Under R-4
          Land Use Considerations
                                                              (16 DU/AC)
          General Plan: High Density Residential
                                                              Gross Unit Capacity:     24 units
          Existing Zoning: R-4, Multi-Family Residential
                                                              Realistic Unit Capacity: 24 units
          (16 DU/AC)
          Existing Use: Underutilized residential site;
                                                              Development Potential Under R-5
          contains one single-family residence.
                                                              (20 DU/AC)
                                                              Gross Unit Capacity:     30 units
          Pending Development: None.
                                                              Realistic Unit Capacity: 30 units
                           Infrastructure Considerations
          Water, sewer and electric utilities currently serve the site and vicinity.
                       City of Placerville 2013-2021 Housing Element—FINAL—February 2014
                                                       A - 163

                           Environmental Considerations
          Noise: No noise related land uses are within site vicinity.
          Flooding: Site is not located within FEMA 100-Year Flood Zone.
          Slope: Less than 10 percent.
          Biotic Resources: Native and non-native grasses, shrubs and ground on site.
                           Other Considerations
          Site is partially occupied by one single-family dwelling. Assessor’s records indicate that
          one dwelling unit was constructed in 1960s.
          El Dorado Transit serves the site vicinity.
          Site would require only zone change due to existing High Density Residential land use.
                             Figure 18: Site 5—Cold Springs Road Location Map
A - 164
                                             SITE 5
                      City of Placerville 2013-2021 Housing Element—FINAL—February 2014
                                                      A - 164

                 Site 6: APN: 325-120-30 —7460 Green Valley Road at Mallard Lane
          Acreage: 2.11 acres, 1.88 buildable
                                                           Potential Zoning: R-5 (20 DU/AC)
          Land Use Considerations
          Existing General Plan: C, Commercial             Development Potential Under R-5
          Existing Zoning: C, Commercial                   (20 DU/AC)
          Existing Use: Vacant                             Gross Unit Capacity:     42 units
                                                           Realistic Unit Capacity: 37 units
          Pending Development: None
                         Infrastructure Considerations
          Sewer and water utilities are within immediate vicinity along Mallard Lane. Traffic
          impact mitigation (improvement and/or fair share contribution) is likely along Green
          Valley Road offsite to offset anticipated traffic at build-out.
                         Environmental Considerations
          Noise: No noise generating land use in site vicinity.
          Flooding: Site is located outside FEMA 100-Year Flood Zone.
A - 165
          Slope: Less than 20 percent
          Biotic Resources: Vegetation removal during future development.
                         Other Considerations
          Site is within walking distance to the Placerville Drive employment center (El Dorado
          County Government campus and commercial services along Placerville Drive), public
          transit and the El Dorado Transit commuter Park & Ride facility at the El Dorado County
          Fairgrounds. Proposed Boys and Girls Club facility located across Green Valley Road
          from site.
          Site would require general plan amendment and rezone due to the existing Commercial
          land use and zoning.
                      City of Placerville 2013-2021 Housing Element—FINAL—February 2014
                                                      A - 165

                   Figure 19: Site 6—Green Valley Road Photo
                    Figure 20: Site 6—Green Valley Road Map
A - 166
                                       SITE 6
          City of Placerville 2013-2021 Housing Element—FINAL—February 2014
                                          A - 166

                  Site 7: APN 325-160-08 - 7444 Green Valley Road
          Acreage: 1.16 acres
                                                           Potential Zoning: R-5 (20 DU/AC)
          Land Use Considerations
          Existing General Plan: C, Commercial             Development Potential Under R-5
          Existing Zoning: C, Commercial                   (20 DU/AC)
          Existing Use: Vacant                             Gross Unit Capacity:     23 units
                                                           Realistic Unit Capacity: 23 units
          Pending Development: None
                          Infrastructure Considerations
          Between early 1990s and 2009 this parcel and the adjoining parcel located southwest (Site
          6) were designated high density residential and had zoning of R-4. Sewer lift station is
          likely needed to accommodate development; existing single-family residential home on
          the parcel.
                          Environmental Considerations
          Noise: No noise generating land use in site vicinity.
A - 167
          Flooding: Site is located outside FEMA 100-Year Flood Zone.
          Slope: Less than 20 percent
          Biotic Resources: Vegetation removal during future development.
                          Other Considerations
          Site is within walking distance to the Placerville Drive employment center (El Dorado
          County Government campus and commercial services along Placerville Drive), public
          transit and the El Dorado Transit commuter Park & Ride facility at the El Dorado County
          Fairgrounds. Proposed Boys and Girls Club facility located across Green Valley Road
          from site.
          Site would require general plan amendment and rezone due to the existing Commercial
          land use and zoning.
                      City of Placerville 2013-2021 Housing Element—FINAL—February 2014
                                                      A - 167

                   Figure 21: Site 7—Green Valley Road Photo
               Figure 22: Site 7—Green Valley Road Location Map
A - 168
                                    SITE 7
          City of Placerville 2013-2021 Housing Element—FINAL—February 2014
                                          A - 168

                  Site 8: APN: 323-400-16 - Ray Lawyer Drive
          Acreage: 2.28 acres of 48 total acres
                                                            Potential Zoning: R-5 (20 DU/AC)
          Land Use Considerations
          Existing General Plan: BP, Business-              Development Potential Under R-5 at
          Professional and Low Density Residential          2.28 acres:
          Existing Zoning: BP, Business Professional        (20 DU/AC)
          Existing Use: Vacant                              Gross Unit Capacity:     45 units
                                                            Realistic Unit Capacity: 45 units
          Pending Development: None.
                          Infrastructure Considerations
          Site has access to Ray Lawyer Drive.
          Adjacent and east of Placerville Heritage Homes Subdivision, tentatively approved for
          twenty (20) dwelling units. Placerville Heritage Homes’ project would create a private
          sewer lateral to the public sewer located within Placerville Drive. This private service
          could be sized accordingly upon installation to accommodate Site 8 residential unit
          capacity.
A - 169   Existing water service is located within Ray Lawyer Drive.
                          Environmental Considerations
          Noise:          Placerville Speedway at El Dorado Fairgrounds located south of the site.
          Flooding:       Site is located outside FEMA 100-Year Flood Zone.
          Slope:          Less than 10 percent.
          Biotic Resources: None.
                          Other Considerations
          The Placerville Drive Development and Implementation Plan adopted by City Council in
          2009, envisions the site for professional offices. Existing land use for this portion of the
          site is BP, Business-Professional and Low Density Residential. Existing zoning for this
          portion of the site is BP, Business Professional and R1-20.
          Site would require general plan amendment and rezone due to the existing Business
          Professional land use and Low Density land use and zoning.
          Site is adjacent and east of a tentatively approved 20-unit single-family residential, zero
          lot line subdivision, and the existing Placer Village Apartments. Site is within walking
          distance to the Placerville Drive employment center (El Dorado County Government
                      City of Placerville 2013-2021 Housing Element—FINAL—February 2014
                                                      A - 169

          campus and commercial services along Placerville Drive), public transit and the El
          Dorado Transit commuter Park & Ride facility at the El Dorado County Fairgrounds.
                            Figures 23 & 24: Site 8—Ray Lawyer Drive Photo
                           Figure 25: Site 8—Ray Lawyer Drive Location Map
A - 170
                                                                           SITE 8
                     City of Placerville 2013-2021 Housing Element—FINAL—February 2014
                                                     A - 170

                  Site 9: APN: 325-240-16—201 New Morning Court
          Acreage: 2.36
                                                            Potential Zoning: R-5 (20 DU/AC)
          Land Use Considerations
          Existing General Plan: C, Commercial              Development Potential Under R-5 at
          Existing Zoning: C, Commercial                    2.36 acres:
          Existing Use: Vacant                              (20 DU/AC)
                                                            Gross Unit Capacity:     47 units
          Pending Development: Site of future New           Realistic Unit Capacity: 47 units
          Morning Youth and Family Services Offices
                          Infrastructure Considerations
          Site has full pedestrian and vehicle access to Ray Lawyer Drive (New Morning Court).
          Public utilities located within Placerville Drive.
                          Environmental Considerations
          Noise:          Placerville Speedway at El Dorado Fairgrounds located southeast of site.
          Flooding:       Site is located outside FEMA 100-Year Flood Zone.
A - 171
          Slope:          Less than 10 percent.
          Biotic Resources: None.
                          Other Considerations
          The Placerville Drive Development and Implementation Plan adopted by City Council in
          2009, envisions the site for High Density Housing. Site would require general plan
          amendment and rezone due to the existing Commercial land use and zoning.
          Site is adjacent and west of the existing Placer Village Apartments. Site is within walking
          distance to the Placerville Drive employment center (El Dorado County Government
          campus and commercial services along Placerville Drive), public transit and the El
          Dorado Transit commuter Park & Ride facility at the El Dorado County Fairgrounds.
                      City of Placerville 2013-2021 Housing Element—FINAL—February 2014
                                                      A - 171

                            Figure 26: Site 9—New Morning Court Location Map
                                                  SITE 9
A - 172
                  Site 10: APN 049-190-06—3013, 3021, 3025, 3029 Airport Road and
                  1831, 1837 and 1839 Valley Court
          Acreage: 2.35
                                                              Potential Zoning: R5- AO (20 DU/AC)
          Land Use Considerations
          Existing General Plan: HWC, Highway                 Development Potential Under R-5 at
          Commercial                                          75% of Gross Area due to flood plain:
          Existing Zoning: HWC-AO, Highway                    (20 DU/AC)
          Commercial, Airport Overlay                         Gross Unit Capacity:     47 units
          Existing Use: Vacant                                Realistic Unit Capacity: 35 units + 7
                                                              existing
          Pending Development: None.
                           Infrastructure Considerations
          Water, sewer and electric utilities currently serve the site and vicinity.
                       City of Placerville 2013-2021 Housing Element—FINAL—February 2014
                                                       A - 172

                          Environmental Considerations
          Noise: Noise generating land uses in site vicinity are the Placerville Airport located south
          and US 50 located north of the site. The site is within the Placerville Airport’s High
          Noise/Risk Overflight Zone. Development of low-income residential uses on this site
          will require an overflight notification be recorded as a conditional of approval (Policy
          4.5.2., Placerville Airport Land Use Compatibility Plan, adopted by City by reference).
          Recorded overflight notifications will appear on property title. Their intent is to alert
          those interested in the project that the site is within an airport’s influence area, with
          aircraft overflight of the property.
          Flooding: Northwestern portion of site within FEMA 100-year flood zone due to
          undersized culvert within Airport Road at Broadway.
          Slope: Less than 10 percent.
          Biotic Resources: Interspersed mature oak trees. Native and non-native grasses, shrubs
          and ground cover most of the site.
                          Other Considerations
          Site is partially occupied by seven existing, vacant dwelling / cabins. Site is served by El
A - 173   Dorado Transit at Broadway. Historical use of this site has been residential.
          Site would require general plan amendment and rezone due to the existing Highway
          Commercial land use and zoning.
                          Figure 27: Site 10—Airport Road and Valley Court Photo
                      City of Placerville 2013-2021 Housing Element—FINAL—February 2014
                                                      A - 173

          Figure 28: Site 10—Airport Road and Valley Court Location Map
                                     SITE 10
A - 174
          City of Placerville 2013-2021 Housing Element—FINAL—February 2014
                                          A - 174











































































































































