

  DALY CITY
  2030
GENERAL PLAN
   LAND USE
   HOUSING
   CIRCULATION
   SAFETY
   RESOURCE MANAGEMENT
   NOISE

                ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
                      CITY MANAGER
                       Patricia Martel
DIRECTORS OF ECONOMIC AND COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT
               Richard Berger 2007 to 2011
                Brian Millar 2011 to present
                 CITY COUNCILMEMBERS
               Ray Buenaventura (Mayor)
              David Canepa (Vice Mayor)
                    Michael Guingona
                         Carol Klatt
                          Sal Torres
               PLANNING COMMISSIONERS
                  Richard Crump (Chair)
            Laurie Rose Lubiano (Vice Chair)
                     Howard Edelman
                        Denise Kelly
                      Glenn Sylvester
             STEERING COMMITTEE MEMBERS
               Sam Bautista (through 2012)
                 Al Belotz (through 2007)
           Judith Christensen (through 2008)
                      Richard Crump
                     Howard Edelman
                   Constantine Glafkides
                       Vaughn Jones
                        Denise Kelly
                        Imran Khan
                       Anna Mostella
                       Paula Stillman
              Karen Vitulano (through 2010)
           Judith Christensen (through 2008)
                Ray Satorre (through 2009)
                    PRINCIPAL AUTHORS
        Tatum Mothershead, Planning Manager
        Michael VanLonkhuysen, Senior Planner

                                                                                TABLE OF CONTENTS
DALY CITY: TODAY AND TOMORROW (FORWARD)................................................................................ i
CITY PROFILE .............................................................................................................................................. iii
COMMUNITY VISION ................................................................................................................................ vii
THE GENERAL PLAN: HISTORY, PURPOSE, AND PROCESS ..................................................................... ix
LAND USE ELEMENT ...............................................................................................................................            1
HOUSING ELEMENT................................................................................................................................. 33
CIRCULATION ELEMENT .........................................................................................................................131
SAFETY ELEMENT .....................................................................................................................................163
RESOURCE MANAGEMENT ELEMENT ...................................................................................................177
NOISE ELEMENT .......................................................................................................................................205

                                                                                  DALY CITY:
                                               TODAY AND TOMORROW
                                                              Foreword by Patricia Martel,
                                                                                     City Manager
DALY CITY OF TOMORROW will be a very different place from the Daly City we know today. For
evidence of this, we need only look back to see how much has changed during the City’s 100 year
history. Most of Daly City’s neighborhoods were rolling pasturelands. Neighborhoods that were here
back then looked and functioned very differently than they do today. Many of the roads we use every
day were not paved and there were very few, if any, automobiles traveling on them. At that time,
Interstate 280 would not become a reality for over 50 years!
It is easy then to understand the importance of planning for the future. The document you are about to
read, Daly City 2030 General Plan, is precisely that: A General Plan for how Daly City will look and
function in the future. As you may ascertain from the title, this plan focuses on roughly the next 20 years,
from now until the year 2030. While we have chosen to address a 20-year timeframe for practical
purposes, it requires that we look far beyond 2030 to imagine how land use policies and decisions can
be facilitated in the 2030 timeframe to endure for the betterment of Daly City in the more distant future.
This General Plan, therefore, is different from the plans that have been developed for Daly City in the
past. In preparing this document, we have accepted the precept that change in Daly City is
inevitable, that the City will evolve, and that this evolution reflects a positive process that we should
embrace and one for which we must thoughtfully plan. More importantly, we have aligned our
awareness of the changes that will affect the community’s future with the reality that not only is Daly
City evolving, but so too is our nation, and our planet.
With these concepts in mind, it is our belief that we have developed a comprehensive set of land use
policies that will allow Daly City to flourish as a vibrant place where residents enjoy a healthy and
satisfying quality of life and where businesses prosper. At the same time we have created sound
guidelines to establish policies that foster responsible growth and development patterns throughout the
community.
                                                                                           Patricia E. Martel
                                                                                              City Manager
Daly City 2030 General Plan| Forward by Patricia Martel                                                     i


                                                                            CITY PROFILE:
                                                                    An Introduction to Daly City
Known as the “Gateway to the Peninsula,” Daly City is located at the northernmost edge of San Mateo
County adjacent to San Francisco and extends from the Pacific Ocean on the west to nearly San
Francisco Bay on the east. Central to both San Francisco and San Mateo County job centers, the City
offers a diversified economy, excellent transportation links, and a growing young and productive labor
force.
History
Much of Daly City occupies what were original Spanish land grants, largely unoccupied in the years
that followed the sighting of San Francisco Bay by Spanish explorers in 1769. In the early 1850's a few
settlers claimed lands on the old Spanish grants. By 1868 a dairy farmer named John Daly purchased
about 250 acres near what is today the Top of the Hill. As owner of the San Mateo Dairy, Daly became
a prominent businessman and leader among the burgeoning population of the area.
The 1906 earthquake and fire in San Francisco caused population to surge in the areas in and around
Daly’s ranch as he opened his farmlands for emergency use by scores of refugees who fled the
devastation. Supplying temporary shelter and food supplies, Daly began to realize that his lands were
far more useful for living on than grazing cattle. As a small community and railway station blossomed in
the vicinity of the ranch, Daly subdivided his property in 1907, establishing the City’s first residential
subdivisions in the area known today as the Crocker neighborhood.
By 1911 Daly City had incorporated into the newest town in San Mateo County, named in honor of John
Daly. Streets were paved, sewers and a water system were constructed; police and fire protection
became a reality. In the decades that followed, population gradually increased, but very little land
had been added to Daly City by World War II.
Significant growth in Daly City would not occur until after World War II when a San Francisco builder,
Henry Doelger, purchased 600 acres of sand dunes and cabbage patches that occupied much of the
land between the city’s original westerly edge and the ocean. Doelger’s land was annexed to Daly
City in 1948 and developed by him into the Westlake community. In the decade that followed, Doelger
doubled his land purchases and continued building west and south, as he and other builders
constructed thousands of homes and new satellite shopping centers in the St. Francis Height and
Serramonte subdivisions. Meanwhile, the 1963 annexation of the Bayshore neighborhood expanded
the City’s boundaries to the east.
People
According to the 2010 US Census, Daly City has a current population of 101,123 which makes it San
Mateo County’s largest city by population. The City is expected to remain in this position for the next
twenty-five years according to the Association of Bay Area Governments (ABAG). More information
about the Daly City’s population is provided in the Housing Element contained within this document
beginning on page 33.
Daly City 2030 General Plan| City Profile: An Introduction to Daly City                                 iii

Economy
Daly City has a labor force of 47,600 (mid-2010 estimate). Based upon ABAG’s estimate of 25,320 local
jobs, this equates to a participation rate of about 49 percent. Approximately 51 percent of Daly City’s
employed labor force works in San Francisco, about 17 percent work in either Daly City or South San
Francisco and the remainder work in other Bay Area communities. Mirroring national and local trends,
Daly City’s unemployment rate has modestly increased from 5.9 percent at the end of 2008 to nearly
11.6 percent as of January 2010. The County unemployment rate increased from 4.7 percent to 9.7
percent during the same period.
Daly City's economy is highly diversified, ranging from professional service providers to retail and
wholesale trade and manufacturing. Daly City’s retail sector continues to flourish as population growth
adds to the already high demand in the area. Three major regional shopping areas are within the City:
a) The Mission Street retail corridor, which borders San Francisco; b) Serramonte Center, a 860,000
square-foot regional shopping center located on Interstate 280; and c) Westlake Shopping Center,
another regional shopping center of 620,000 square feet that recently underwent extensive renovation.
Taxable retail sales are among the highest and fastest growing of all metropolitan areas in the county.
In total, Daly City boasts approximately 3.1 million square feet of retail space.
Medical services are another important aspect of the Daly City economy. Seton Medical Center is the
City’s largest employer with over 1,600 employees. This is an acute care hospital with 357 beds. Its
reputation as one of the leading medical facilities in the country has encouraged the development of
additional clinics and laboratories adjacent to or near the hospital. These include the Seton Medical
Office Center, San Francisco Heart Institute, the Spine Care Medical Group, the San Francisco Neuro-
Skeletal Imaging Center, and the Physician’s Medical Center. Among the newest additions to Daly
City’s health care field is Kaiser Permanente with 130,000 square feet of medical offices and clinics in a
new building at 395 Hickey Boulevard near Interstate 280.
A considerable amount of Daly City’s economic growth is attributed to its young, skilled and productive
labor force. Six colleges or universities are within a ten-mile radius, and twelve more are within a 50-mile
radius. According to the latest Census, nearly 78 percent of the City’s population is over eighteen, only
12 percent are of retirement age and the median age is 35. Of Daly City’s total labor force,
approximately half are working in local jobs--a participation rate close to 50 percent.
iv                                          Daly City 2030 General Plan | City Profile: An Introduction to Daly City

                                                        REGIONAL LOCATION
Daly City 2030 General Plan General Plan | Regional Location             v

                                                          COMMUNITY VISION
“We, the citizens of Daly City, proudly celebrate our history, our location in the Bay Area, our distinct
neighborhoods and the views of the fog-shrouded hills that define us. We take pride in our cultural
diversity and work hard to promote community interaction. Daly City will be a community with a strong
identity – with several attractively designed gathering and civic places including a “downtown”. We will
focus on being a clean and attractive city with an efficient infrastructure. We will provide services for a
full spectrum of age groups and mobility levels.
We embrace our future, while respecting the past, and believe in directed growth that will increase
opportunities to both live and work in the community. Our city will provide housing choices and
balance that with a variety of economic opportunities that will include both unique small businesses
and large businesses.
We are committed to constantly evolve our multi-modal travel environment to connect all
neighborhoods. Daly City will offer a variety of recreational, cultural and entertainment opportunities
for all. By our actions, we will showcase our environmental stewardship in being a sustainable and
livable community at all levels.
As a connected city and community working in partnership, we will emphasize interaction and
participation from all, find meaningful ways to display our civic pride and showcase our strengths.”
                                                                             Envision Daly City document
                                                                                                      2008
Daly City 2030 General Plan | Community Vision                                                           vii


                                                                    The General Plan:
                                                   History, Purpose, and Process
Planning in Daly City dates from 1958, when the City adopted its first land use plan encompassing the
Vista Grande, Crocker, Hillside, and St. Francis Heights neighborhoods, and much of the Westlake
neighborhood. By 1978, the City had prepared its first comprehensive plan which, in addition to land
use, included planning for housing, circulation, noise, safety, and open space. This plan covered almost
all of the area in present-day Daly City, including the Serramonte, Southern Hills, and Bayshore
neighborhoods, which were annexed to the City in the 1960s. Beginning in 1987 and through the early
1990s, the General Plan was again updated to reflect the changing nature of Daly City and State laws
intended to ensure that cities planned for adequate housing in their communities.
State Planning Law
This General Plan has been written and developed in compliance with State law which requires that
each city and county maintain an updated general plan “for the physical development of the county
or city, and any land outside its boundaries which bears relation to its planning” (Government Code
65300). The California Supreme Court has called the general plan the “constitution for future
development.” The general plan expresses the community’s development goals and embodies public
policy relative to the distribution of future land uses, both public and private.
General Plan Objectives
The General Plan represents the City’s attempt to portray both words and on maps the goals, policies,
and specific tasks that will improve the lives of existing residents while accommodating and planning for
the needs of future residents.
The objectives of the plan are:
1. To enable the community, speaking through the Planning Commission and City Council, to agree on
    long- and short-term policies related to each of the elements encompassed within the General Plan;
2. To establish a vision the physical nature of Daly City in the future and set the tone for the
    corresponding land use policies required to advance this vision; and
3. To provide a basis for determining whether private development proposals and public projects are
    in harmony with the policies of the plan.
As will be discussed further in this section, the City’s work to prepare the General Plan has included a
significant effort to gain public involvement, and to consolidate and understand various opinions about
what the future of the City should be. Naturally, the General Plan cannot incorporate all ideas
presented during public discussions. Rather that attempting to do so, the City staff has attempted to
address common themes of opinions in the development of General Plan policy. In developing policy,
the staff has accepted overarching precepts that change in Daly City is inevitable, that the City will
evolve, and that this evolution is a good thing that the City should embrace.
Daly City 2030 General Plan | The General Plan: History, Purpose, and Process                          ix

Public Participation
In the fall of 2006, the City Council initiated a comprehensive update of the Daly City General Plan. As
a first step, City staff and consultants from Metropolitan Planning Group developed a community-based
visioning process to give all residents and business owners the opportunity to express their concerns
about and aspirations for Daly City’s future. This four-month process included three community
workshops, an extensive community survey mailed to all postal customers, and focus group interviews.
In all, over 1,850 people participated in the process.
During this process, residents and business owners provided a number of ideas that were used in
developing the policies included in the General Plan. Examples of the ideas developed from this
outreach process include:
         Direction of future growth with more intense mixed-use infill developments along major transit
          corridors and other appropriate locations.
         The revitalization of Mission Street to become an urban walkable mixed-use neighborhood that
          provides a positive and cohesive identity for the entire city.
         The provision of a variety of housing that includes mixed-use housing, lofts, live-work, flats and
          other urban solutions.
         A focus on revitalization opportunities in the Bayshore neighborhood to provide major job
          opportunities.
A complete summary of the visioning process, including community survey is available as a separate
document, Envision Daly City, available from the Planning Division. The complete results of the
community survey are provided as an appendix to the Envision Daly City document.
General Plan Steering Committee
A 13-member Steering Committee was appointed by the City Manager to guide the General Plan
process, including the Visioning component. At its inception, the committee included two City Council
members, Planning Commission Chair, two business liaisons, and eight residents. The Steering
Committee met on a regular basis in an informal setting to provide the policy direction necessary to
advance the update process.
x                                      Daly City 2030 General Plan | The General Plan: History, Purpose, and Process

Introduction
Scope and Role of the Land Use Element
Although the predominant character of Daly City has been largely established by past land use
decisions, the city will continue to evolve as both population and economic growth pressures continue.
And because a severe lack of vacant land suitable for development presents a major constraint to
growth, Daly City’s leaders must seek creative ways to maintain its appearance and fiscal health, while
striving to provide housing and job opportunities for both existing and future residents. Commercial
areas can be intensified, remnant infill sites become available for development, and reinvestment for
some locations and land uses can be made attractive for redevelopment. There is no doubt that the
decisions the city makes today will have an enduring impact for generations.
The Land Use Element of the General Plan seeks to provide the framework for future decisions, providing
policy direction for the future development of vacant lands and underutilized parcels in the city. This
chapter accomplishes this by not only establishing areas within the city contemplated for future growth,
but also establishing broad policies to guide the intensity and character of this growth. These broad
policies will be refined and incorporated into the Daly City Zoning Ordinance, which the Planning
Division will update immediately after the General Plan is adopted.
Although Land Use is only one element in the General Plan, it constitutes the vital core which synthesizes
and thus brings consistency to the proposals of each individual element into a citywide plan that will
support the future development and open space network for the city. The plan is intended to provide
guidance for the time period ranging from 2010 through 2030, and should be re-evaluated annually to
ensure that the policies, objectives, and programs remain relevant.
Predominant Land Use Character
As identified in Figure LUE-1, Daly City is primarily a residential community. Significantly smaller portions
of the city are devoted to non-residential uses such as commercial centers, recreational facilities, and
open space. The majority of commercial land uses are neighborhood serving retail centers established
along transportation corridors (Mission Street and Geneva Avenue) and within suburban shopping
centers such as Westlake and Serramonte Shopping Centers. The city’s only industrial area is primarily
located in the Bayshore neighborhood north of MacDonald Avenue. The open space areas of the city
are primarily located along the coastline west of the Westlake Palisades neighborhood and in private
open space around the Pointe Pacific neighborhood.
Daly City 2030 General Plan | Land Use Element                                                              1

While suburban neighborhoods dominate Daly City’s landscape, all neighborhoods in Daly City are not
the same. Pre-war residential neighborhoods east of Interstate 280 are, for example, distinctly more
urban than newer post-war neighborhoods developed on the west side of the interstate where larger
lot sizes allow for physical distance between homes and larger automobile-oriented shopping centers
instead of corner markets serve residents’ retail needs.
Regardless of location, there exists very little vacant land in Daly City today. According to City
estimates, about 98 percent of the area within Daly City is built-out and there is no vacant land of any
significant size in the areas surrounding Daly City that could be annexed for development. This lack of
vacant land has placed increasing pressure on developers and homeowners alike to build up,
intensifying existing parcels, as what little land is left is
                                                              Figure LUE-1: Existing Land Use
used seemingly to its maximum potential.
Intensification of land use will without doubt be the
                                                                            Public
pervasive issue facing the city’s leaders, residents,                        5.1%      Other
developers, and planners throughout the planning                                        9.1%
period ending in 2030.                                                                                  Residential -
                                                                      Vacant                             Low Density
It is for this reason that many of the city’s land use                 1.7%                                 35.0%
and housing policies are inextricably intertwined. As
identified in the Housing Element, the housing policies           Education
                                                                    7.9%
have a wide-ranging impact to the Land Use and                                                                  Residential -
other elements. This is so true that, in many instances,                                                        Medium Low
the various elements share the same exact policies.                                                               Density
The repetition of these policies within each element          Open Space                                           11.3%
                                                                 12.5%
both ensures internal integration among elements
and establishes a bridge between the various
aspects of planning for the city’s future.                      Recreation                              Residential -
                                                                   7.6%                                    Medium
                                                                              Residential -                Density
State Planning Law                                                              Very High                    0.6%
                                                                                 Density     Residential -
                                                                                  8.7%       High Density
State planning law requires every City and County to
                                                                                                 0.6%
adopt a Land Use Element which shows the general
distribution, location, density, and intensity of land          Source: City of Daly City
uses for all parts of the jurisdiction. The City must adopt a set of goals and policies that are coordinated
with the proposed land use designations. In particular, Section 65302(a) of the California Government
Code states that Land Use Elements must:
    Establish a pattern of land use for housing, business, industry, open space, including agriculture,
     natural resources, recreation, education and public buildings, solid and liquid waste facilities;
    Set clear standards for density of population and the intensity of development proposed land uses;
    Identify areas which are subject to flooding.
2                                                                  Daly City 2030 General Plan | Land Use Element

                                               Figure LUE-1
                                               EXISTING LAND USE
                                                 CITY OF DALY CITY
                                               LAND USE ELEMENT
Daly City 2030 General Plan | Land Use Element                     3

Planning Areas
For the purposes of the land use element, Daly City has been divided into 13 distinct planning areas.
Figure LUE-2 identifies the boundaries for each of these areas which are generally established along the
lines of natural or topographic features, major roadways, or subdivision boundaries. While each
planning area has its land use issues unique to its physical and economical relationship to the City as a
whole, issues relating to one area in many instances overlap into an adjacent area. Also, while not
inside Daly City’s City Limit, unincorporated areas of San Mateo County located within Daly City's
Sphere of Influence, i.e., Broadmoor Village and unincorporated Colma near the Colma – Daly City
BART Station.
The following section provides an overview of the various planning areas within Daly City and the land
use issues that are anticipated to confront each of these areas between 2010 and 2030.
Westlake | Planning Area 1
The Westlake neighborhood consists of two subareas. The first subarea consists of the Westlake Center
commercial area and surrounding multi-family residential development. The second subarea consists of
two single family residential neighborhoods, Westlake North, and Westlake Terrace. A third Westlake
single family residential neighborhood, Westlake Palisades, is located in the Coastal Zone and will be
discussed as part of the Skyline planning area.
The Westlake Shopping Center is a major commercial shopping center serving the entire city as well as
the Westlake neighborhood. Westlake Shopping Center contains a mixture of retail and office uses,
with large anchors that attract shoppers from Daly City and surrounding areas. Since 2003, the center
has undergone a number of significant renovations, which have collectively added approximately
90,000 square feet of new retail to the center, two multi-level parking garages, and a complete
architectural remodel of the center. An expansion of the Safeway supermarket located at the
southeast corner of the shopping center has begun and is expected to be complete in 2011.
Along John Daly Boulevard, are several small commercial establishments including Joe's of Westlake
restaurant and Citibank bank building. The Country Club apartments are the multi-family units which
surround the shopping center. This concentration of apartments contains some of the highest
residential densities in the City. Densities in the Country Club Apartments range from medium densities
of over 30 dwelling units per acre to very high densities of over 70 dwelling units per acre. Most of the
recreational needs for the residents of this neighborhood are provided by the facilities in the nearby
Westlake neighborhoods.
The Westlake subdivision is one of the oldest in the western portion of Daly City, dating back to the early
1950's. The single family homes in this neighborhood are generally split level, detached units constructed
on 3,000 square feet or larger lots. Densities in the three Westlake neighborhoods are low and typically
between 12 and 15 dwelling units per acre. There was also a greater emphasis on building design,
unlike the other neighborhoods west of I-280, whose differences occur only in the building facade
treatments.
The Westlake neighborhoods contain the greatest number of recreational and open space
opportunities within the city. The Westlake Community Center and Doelger Senior Center are both
located in the Westlake neighborhood and are adjacent to Westlake Park. This neighborhood is also
adjacent to the San Francisco Golf Club, the Olympic Country Club, and the Lake Merced Country
Club. However, these are private facilities and are not readily accessible to the general public. There
are also two elementary schools as well as one private school located in this neighborhood.
Daly City 2030 General Plan | Land Use Element                                                            5

The single greatest development constraint in the Westlake neighborhood is the lack of vacant
developable land.
St. Francis | Planning Area 2
St. Francis Heights was subdivided in the late 1950's and early 60's into single family residential land uses
at low densities of approximately 14 dwelling units per acre. Since the parcels were platted in grid
fashion they are similar in shape and configuration to those in many parts of Westlake. The housing is
characterized by two story structures with living area above and two-car garage below. While not as
architecturally diverse as the Westlake neighborhoods, differences in facade details are prominent.
Seton Medical Center, the largest employer in Daly City is located in this area. Also located in the
southern portion of this area are several medical and dental office uses. These are located in close
proximity to the St. Francis Square neighborhood serving shopping center. Skyline Plaza is also located
in this neighborhood. Both are smaller centers than the Westlake or Serramonte Shopping Centers, and
are neighborhood-serving commercial centers containing a mixture of retail and office uses.
The neighborhood's recreational and open space opportunities are provided by the Alta Loma tot lot,
Westmoor High School and Pool, and Westmoor Park. In addition to the high school, four elementary
schools are located in the St. Francis Heights neighborhood.
The major development constraint in this neighborhood is the lack of easily accessible vacant land that
is not constrained by existing residential uses.          Opportunities for further development in this
neighborhood will center largely on the revitalization and intensification of existing neighborhood
serving commercial areas.
Skyline | Planning Area 3
Although physically similar to and technically a part of the Westlake neighborhood, this area is
distinguished due to its location within the California’s Coastal Zone. The Coastal Zone is designated by
the California Coastal Act and includes all areas in Daly City west of Skyline Boulevard and a portion of
the Westlake North neighborhood located west of Eastgate Drive. Like Westlake, the housing styles in
this neighborhood vary from one-story single-family homes with attached garages to the typical two-
story unit with living area above a two-car garage.
The basic goals of the Coastal Act are to protect environmental resources, promote a balanced
utilization and conservation of coastal resources, maximize public access (both physical and visual) to
the coastline, and assure priority for coastal dependent development. The Daly City Coastal Element
was been certified by the California Coastal Commission in 1984 as an implementation tool of the
Coastal Act and has been incorporated into the General Plan by reference.
To ensure that the Coastal Element effectively implements the Coastal Act, the Daly City Zoning
Ordinance identifies an overlay zoning district that includes all properties within 1,000 feet of the coast
wherein discretionary review by the Planning Commission and City Council is required prior to any
significant construction activity. Delineated by the State Geologist, the Alquist-Priolo Special Studies
Zone occurs in the southwest portion of Daly City’s Coastal Zone and includes all areas within 1,000 feet
of the San Andreas earthquake fault.
Development constraints in the Skyline neighborhood are directly related to the lack of vacant
buildable land, and the geotechnical and seismic constraints associated with parcels that have not yet
been developed. Proximity to the San Andreas Fault and continual erosion of the coastal bluffs will
continue to play a role in limiting the development of vacant parcels in the Skyline neighborhood.
6                                                              Daly City 2030 General Plan | Land Use Element

                                               Figure LUE-2
                                               PLANNING AREAS
                                                 CITY OF DALY CITY
                                               LAND USE ELEMENT
Daly City 2030 General Plan | Land Use Element                     7

Because of the unstable conditions of some of the bluffs in the area, 21 single-family homes located on
Westline Drive were declared unsuitable for human occupancy and subsequently removed. Blufftop
erosion will continue to pose a threat to existing homes. Like Westline Drive, Lynvale Court at the
northern portion of Skyline Drive also experienced the loss of several homes in the 1980s. The
vulnerability of these homes to natural hazards such as earthquakes is exacerbated by the fact that the
San Andreas Fault bisects the southern portion of Daly City's Coastal Zone.
Sullivan Corridor | Planning Area 4
The Sullivan Corridor comprises approximately 200 acres coterminous with the area encompassed by
the Sullivan Corridor Specific Plan. Adopted by the City Council in 1998, the Specific Plan provides land
use policies intended to guide the revitalization of properties adjacent to and within close proximity of
Sullivan Avenue that can take advantage of the area’s close proximity to the civic center and the
close-by Colma - Daly City BART Station.
To do so, the Specific Plan provides for a mixture of office, retail and office, and service commercial
uses as well as single and multi-family residential uses. Although the designations identified for these
land uses are similar in name to those identified throughout Daly City on the General Plan Land Use
Map, the range of allowed land uses and description of building intensity is distinct to the Sullivan
Corridor Specific Plan Area. It is therefore necessary to reference the Specific Plan and/or Zoning
Ordinance (which summarizes the Specific Plan’s regulations) for guidance in determining conformity to
the General Plan.
Since adoption of the Specific Plan, several new construction projects have emerged that will be begin
to transform the corridor, including the construction of new government office buildings, an 86-room
hotel, and a large mixed-use development that is presently under construction at the southwest corner
of Piece Street and Sullivan Avenue. Like other areas in Daly City, constraints within the Sullivan Corridor
will continue to be lack of contiguous vacant parcels of land, although several parcels which are
presently devoted to agricultural uses do exist in area between Pierce Street and 92nd Street. Also with
the boundaries of the Sullivan Corridor is the potential development of 4.5-acre surplus property
adjacent to Daniel Webster Elementary which has been identified as surplus property by the Jefferson
Elementary School District (JESD).
Serramonte | Planning Area 5
Serramonte is the newest large-scale subdivision in Daly City, constructed in the late 1960's and early
70's. Single family residences occur in strips along moderately steep hillsides in a fashion similar to that of
the St. Francis neighborhood. The housing style is also similar to that of St. Francis and can be
considered the most standard of all housing in the City. It is characterized by a two story structure with
the living area over a two car garage at a density of approximately 14 dwelling units per acre.
While a majority of the housing stock in the Serramonte neighborhood is low-density single family
residential, low to medium density multi-family residential units are located in the southeast area of the
neighborhood and very high density multi-family housing is located just west of the Serramonte
Shopping Center.
The Serramonte neighborhood residents' commercial needs are served by both the Serramonte
regional shopping area and the King Plaza neighborhood serving commercial center. The Serramonte
Shopping Center is an enclosed regional shopping center and is the largest in the City. It contains three
anchor stores and numerous other shops. To the south, Serramonte Plaza, a large concentration of
commercial offices, retail stores, and restaurants, exists on the eastern side of Gellert Boulevard. On the
western side of the street, retail stores occur in typical "strip" fashion. Several of the City's larger
Daly City 2030 General Plan | Land Use Element                                                                9

restaurants are located in Serramonte Plaza area, as well as two health and fitness clubs. King Plaza is
located in the southernmost portion of this neighborhood and contains a mixture of retail uses and one
of two bowling centers in the City.
The residents' recreational and open space needs are provided by Gellert Park, the largest park in the
City. The main branch of the Daly City Library is located in the park as well as tennis courts, picnic areas,
sports fields and a community center. Four tot-lots and two elementary schools are located in the
Serramonte neighborhood.
Constraints in this neighborhood include: lack of buildable, vacant land; small number of infill single
family residential parcels; and a portion of the neighborhood is in the Alquist-Priolo Special Study zone.
Opportunities in this neighborhood include intensification of existing regional and neighborhood serving
commercial centers, as well as the potential development of the non-operational Christopher
Columbus School site which has been identified as surplus property by the Jefferson Elementary School
District. The surplus school site consists of two developable areas totaling almost 13 acres.
Peninsula Gateway | Planning Area 6
This planning area is defined by the area subject to the Peninsula Gateway Plaza Specific Plan which
was prepared in the 1970s to facilitate BART’s expansion of service to the Colma-Daly City BART station
and the Daly City Redevelopment Agency’s (now dissolved and replaced by the Successor Agency to
the City of Daly City Redevelopment Agency) desire to facilitate redevelopment of a portion of the
Junipero Serra Corridor on the east side of Interstate 280 north of Citrus Avenue. With the completion of
Pacific Plaza, the implementation of the plan is now largely complete, although the two
Redevelopment Agency-owned parcels remain vacant at either end of the project area.
Vista Grande | Planning Area 7
The Vista Grande neighborhood consists of three subareas. The northern portion of the neighborhood
above John Daly Boulevard is characterized by atypical patterns of development, which include dense
housing construction along narrow streets, steep hillside construction, and dead-end streets. The area
contains predominantly single-family residential land uses at medium-low densities between 16-20
dwelling units per acre, some among the oldest in the City. Most structures are one-story above a small
one-car garage. Some California bungalows which have no garage can also be found. Medium
density (21-35 dwelling units per acre) multi-family units are usually located at the corners and in close
proximity to commercial areas. Hillcrest Gardens, a recently-completed affordable senior housing
development located at 35 Hillcrest Drive, provides an example of how very high-density construction
can be successfully blended into an established neighborhood.
The second subarea is the area located south of John Daly Boulevard and north of Jefferson High
School. The area resembles the older Crocker neighborhood in terms of development patterns: wide
variation in housing age and style; single residential land uses at medium-low densities (14.6-20 dwelling
units per acre) laid out on an essentially regular grid; little or no side yard setbacks; and little open space
other than Marchbank Park and the Jefferson High School campus. A number of duplexes have been
constructed within this area, as they are allowed subject to use permit approval. Several non-
conforming apartment buildings also exist in the area.
The area south of Jefferson High School contains neighborhood commercial (confined to School Street)
and service commercial (confined to Station Avenue) as well as a mixture of low; medium-low and very
high density residential uses. Many medium-low density multi-family units have been developed along
the southern side of School Street, and on the streets that intersect with School between Station Avenue
and Bruno Avenue. Below School Street, the single-family units are developed on somewhat larger lots
at lower densities. A decreasing number of small vacant lots remain in this area.
10                                                                  Daly City 2030 General Plan | Land Use Element

Constraints to development in this neighborhood include: lack of large vacant, buildable parcels of
land and aging infrastructure including water and sewer lines. Opportunities include: infill single family
residential parcels; reuse of underutilized land; and increase in density of residential development with
duplexes.
No concentration of large vacant parcels exists in the Original Daly City neighborhood. However, this
neighborhood accounts for the majority of small and medium size infill parcels in the City. The highest
assemblages of these parcels occur in the northern Top-of-the-Hill and southern portions of the
neighborhood. These represent a mixture of both vacant and underutilized parcels.
Mission Street | Planning Area 8
Just over 1.5 miles in length, Mission Street is characterized largely by retail/office, personal service, and
service commercial uses with the concentration of service commercial uses occurring on the southern
portion of the street and the retail/office uses located closer to the Top of the Hill. Although Mission
Street is largely built-out, a number of properties occupied by existing buildings and land uses
approaching the end of their economic lives will very likely provide potential development opportunities
over the planning period. The challenges presented in private redevelopment of parcels include
limited lot size, difficult access to and from Mission Street, and neighborhood acceptance of buildings
with greater mass and height.
As a means to opening a dialogue about how Mission Street could evolve into a more vibrant urban
corridor, the San Mateo County Chapter of American Institute of Architects (SMAIA) conducted an
Urban Design Charrette specifically for Mission Street in 2008. The Final Report issued from the charrette
outlined a number of very broad development concepts that could be worthy of exploration as Mission
Street continues to evolve. These concepts include a more walkable streetscape, more areas for public
gathering, taller and more-intensive buildings, and visual focal points (public art, monumentation, etc.).
The idea of advancing physical change Mission Street is not a new one. In 1976, the Daly City
Redevelopment Agency adopted a redevelopment plan for the street specifically for the purposes of
strengthening the retail and other commercial functions of Mission Street, and assembling land into
parcels suitable for modern development. One notable outcome from this Plan’s implementation has
been the almost-complete redevelopment of Mission Street between Hillside Boulevard and Alp
Avenue where a new mixed-use building and reconstructed War Memorial Community Center have
provided a notion of how Mission Street will likely continue to evolve in the coming decades. With the
dissolution of the Redevelopment Agency, this Plan is no longer in effect.
With the preconception that Mission Street will change, the policies contained within this land use
element strive to both promote and guide this continued evolution.
Colma – Daly City BART Station | Planning Area 9
This 110-acre area is coterminous with the BART Station Area Specific Plan area. Completed in 1993 in
conjunction with SamTrans and San Mateo County, the Specific Plan was conceived to establish a
physical development plan that allowed existing low-intensity uses in close proximity to the new Colma
BART Station (construction completed in 1996) to gradually transition to higher-intensity uses in support
the area’s intended role as a transportation/transit hub.
Much emphasis within the plan was placed on making all new land uses within the Specific Plan area
accessible by foot, bicycle, and transit, in addition to the automobile. For this reason, the plan provides
a very strong vision for linking new development to the BART station via a network of public spaces,
paths, plazas and new streets. New mixed-use development along El Camino Real exemplifies the
plan’s intent, providing high density residential development over ground-level commercial uses with
direct pedestrian connections provided westerly to the new BART station.
Daly City 2030 General Plan | Land Use Element                                                              11

This area is partially within Daly City and partially within an unincorporated area within San Mateo
County, and lies completely within the Daly City Sphere of Influence boundary. Uses anticipated
include a mix of moderate- and high-density housing, local and community shopping, and offices within
close proximity of the Colma-Daly City BART Station. The land use designations used for these uses are
similar in name to those identified throughout Daly City on the General Plan Land Use Map, the range of
allowed land uses and description of building intensity is distinct to the BART Station Specific Plan. It is
therefore necessary to reference the Specific Plan and/or Zoning Ordinance (which summarizes the
Specific Plan’s regulations) for guidance in determining conformity to the plan.
Three parcels in this planning offer the most potential for new development. The first two, located
adjacent to the Colma – Daly City BART Station, are the existing 7.5-acre SamTrans-owned park-and-
ride lot to the west of the station and the site previously occupied by Serra Bowl. The third is the
southern portion, roughly 1.4 acres, of the existing Jefferson Elementary School District’s maintenance
and operations Facility located at 23 Hill Street. This property has been declared surplus by the school
district and is being offered by the district for private development.
Hillside | Planning Area 10
The Hillside neighborhood contains the greatest mixture of residential densities in Daly City. Existing
densities range from a low of 12 dwelling units per acre to a very high density of over 50 dwelling units
per acre in the southeast corner of the Hillside neighborhood where several streets have been
developed in block-long rows of four-unit buildings. This neighborhood is also one area in Daly City
where vacant developable sites remain. Several blocks in the Hillside neighborhood were originally
used for greenhouses, but have steadily been subdivided for housing development. The oldest housing
in the area is located in the mid-section of the Hillside neighborhood adjacent to the Top of the Hill and
Crocker neighborhoods. The largest mobile home park in Daly City, The Franciscan, is located in this
neighborhood.
This neighborhood's recreational and open space needs are provided by Hillside Park which is located
in the eastern portion of the neighborhood and Edgewood Park located in the northern portion of the
neighborhood, near high density housing.
Constraints in the Hillside neighborhood include: aging sewer and water lines; lack of land zoned for
commercial uses and a wide mixture of different residential densities that indicate uncertainty and lack
of continuity in the neighborhood. Opportunities in this neighborhood include: reuse of underutilized
parcels and infill single family and multi-family subdivisions and residences.
A limited number of vacant areas exist within the neighborhood. The largest concentration of vacant
land exists in the northern and southern portions of this neighborhood. The vacant land in the northern
portion is on steep slopes with limited access and is not considered easily buildable. There is also vacant
land immediately east of Hillside Park. The vacant land in the southern portion of the neighborhood is a
mixture of vacant and underutilized parcels. These parcels represent the majority of infill residential
parcels in the neighborhood. The Colma School surplus site, approximately 2.7 acres, is a good
candidate for infill development.
Crocker | Planning Area 11
The Crocker neighborhood also consists primarily of single-family homes on small lots with little or no
setbacks, resulting in the density of the neighborhood as a whole being generally higher than any other
neighborhood in Daly City, approaching 20 dwelling units per acre.            Physically, the neighborhood is
characterized by a rich diversity of housing with distinctly different ages and architectural styles, and
contains a mixture of small scale services and amenities including local corner markets, the Lincoln Park
and Clubhouse, and two elementary schools. There are no large commercial areas within the Crocker
12                                                               Daly City 2030 General Plan | Land Use Element

neighborhood, although the commercial corridor along Mission Street provides a variety of retail and
restaurant uses.
Constraints to development in the Crocker neighborhood include a lack of buildable, vacant land;
aging water and sewer lines; and lack of street improvements in some areas. Many of the vacant
parcels in the area are located on the base of San Bruno Mountain and are either within or in close
proximity to the Habitat Conservation Plan area on steep slopes with no or limited access and no street
or infrastructure improvements. Limited opportunities for development do exist however and include
infill single-family residences, preservation or reconstruction of corner markets, and a five-acre
development site zoned for multiple-family residential uses at the end of Hanover Street.
Southern Hills | Planning Area 12
The Southern Hills neighborhood consists entirely of detached single family homes. In terms of urban
design, this neighborhood is the exception in the area east of I-280. The typical home is a post-1950's
detached single-family residence, usually two stories with the living area over a two-car garage. The
housing occurs in ribbons along the ridges of steeply sloped hillsides affording views of Daly City, San
Francisco, the Pacific Ocean, and San Francisco Bay. Recreational needs are met by two tot lots and
the playground of the Panorama Elementary School, McLaren Park in San Francisco, and San Bruno
Mountain Park. The major constraint in this neighborhood is the lack of buildable, vacant land.
Opportunities in this neighborhood include the maintenance of open space (remnant portions of
developed parcels located on steep slopes) and park or recreational development.
Bayshore | Planning Area 13
Annexed into Daly City in 1963, the Bayshore neighborhood consists primarily of detached single-family
residential homes, the Geneva Avenue commercial corridor, and a low intensity industrial area
immediately north of MacDonald Avenue near the San Francisco border. The Cow Palace, an indoor
arena owned and operated by the California Department of Food and Agriculture, is also located in
the Bayshore and represents one of the greatest opportunities for redevelopment in Daly City. In 1999,
the Daly City Redevelopment Agency established a redevelopment project area (no longer in effect)
encompassing the entire Bayshore neighborhood, with the goal of eliminating physical and economic
blight, while encouraging economic investment and rehabilitation/improvement of the housing supply
in the neighborhood.
Major constraints in this neighborhood include: aging water and sewer systems; dead end streets with
no curbs, gutter and sidewalk; and lack of large parcels of easily developable land. Major opportunities
in this neighborhood include: Geneva Avenue commercial area revitalization; the redevelopment of
the Cow Palace; infill single-family residences; retail and office development; and park and open space
development.
Unincorporated Areas
Broadmoor Village
Broadmoor Village is a low density, single family residential neighborhood completely surrounded by
Daly City thus creating an "island" or pocket of unincorporated County land. This neighborhood is
characterized by single-family residences located on large lots with a resulting density below 10
dwelling units to the acre. The houses in this area are different from those located in Daly City as they
are typical one story ranch style houses. From the standpoint of service delivery, Broadmoor should
become a part of Daly City. Police and fire protection services could be more easily rendered, the
Daly City 2030 General Plan | Land Use Element                                                         13
location and access to government would be more convenient for the Broadmoor residents and the
cost of providing these services would be less expensive for the City to provide than the County or
special districts.
Unincorporated Colma
Unincorporated Colma is a small urban neighborhood in the area between Daly City and the Town of
Colma. Extending along both sides of El Camino Real, the area is approximately 115 acres in size. The
area contains a mixture of land uses including retail and service commercial, industrial and low density
single-family and medium density multi-family residential uses. The residential uses located here are
considered to be one of the County's major concentrations of affordable housing, as the units tend to
be smaller and older than the County average.
Land Use Categories
This section provides an overview of the land use designations identified on the General Plan Land Use
Map (see Figure LUE-3). The map identifies the general proposed distribution of land uses in Daly City
through the use of the land use categories described below. As such, the map is intended to serve as a
general guide for the future distribution of land uses distribution rather than as a parcel-specific map of
allowed land uses. Instead, zoning classifications, consistent with the land use categories identified by
the General Plan Land Use Map, will be established for this purpose and will be identified on the Zoning
Map. Similarly, more specific development regulations will be identified by the Zoning Ordinance.
Residential
The General Plan Land Use Map identifies six residential categories. These categories identify areas in
Daly City that are acceptable for housing, clarify the type of housing to be developed within each
category, and establish minimum and maximum densities.
Residential densities are expressed as "dwelling units per net acre of land", abbreviated “du/ac”. Net
acre means that portion of land used for development on a specific property, excluding streets,
easements, and public rights-of-way. This is in contrast to "gross acre of land", a figure that includes all
land, whether it be used as a roadway, utility easement, or housing site. Using a "gross" figure is best
suited for communities that have not yet constructed streets. In Daly City's case, most of the streets are
built; therefore, residential densities are expressed in net acreage.
In an effort to better describe future residential development and more equitably allocate density
among numerous properties within a neighborhood, this General Plan requires that – for projects
proposed on parcels that are over 5,000 square feet in size – residential densities be calculated on a
parcel-specific basis. For example, a one-acre parcel located within an area designated Medium –
Low Density, where the density range is between 14.6 and 20 units per acre, could potentially have up
to 20 units. Neither adjacent public rights-of-way nor adjacent properties are included in net lot area.
The number of permissible units on lots less than 5,000 square feet in size would be as prescribed by the
Zoning Ordinance (one housing unit on lots zoned R-1 Single Family and two housing units, subject to use
permit approval, on lots zoned R-1A or R2).
14                                                               Daly City 2030 General Plan | Land Use Element

Residential — Open Space (R-OS). This designation is applied to those areas where the majority of the
site should remain in open space due to site constraints or a high degree of environmental resource
value. The designation allows for very low residential densities as long as the siting of the house respects
site characteristics. This designation allows up to two dwelling units per gross acre.
Residential — Low Density (R-LD). This land use designation applies generally to those areas which were
subdivided after January 1949, which have single family residences located on parcels of 3,000 square
feet or greater. These areas are located predominantly in the portion of Daly City which is located west
of Interstate 280, with the exception of the Southern Hills neighborhood located east of Interstate 280.
This is the predominant residential land use category in Daly City. This designation allows between 2 and
14.5 dwelling units per gross acre, except in the BART Station Specific Plan Area, where density
allowances are identified within the Specific Plan.
Residential — Medium Low Density (R-MLD). This land use designation applies to those areas which were
subdivided prior to 1949 and typically have zero lot line single-family residences located on 2,500 square
foot parcels. These areas are located predominantly in the older portions of Daly City which are located
east of Interstate 280. This designation allows between 14.6 and 20 dwelling units per gross acre.
Residential — Medium Density (R-MD). This land use designation applies to those areas that allow two
dwelling units per 2,500-3,000 square foot parcel. These areas are primarily dis-persed throughout the
older portions of Daly City, and correspond to areas developed with duplexes and some multi-family
areas where there are small multi-unit buildings located on large lots. This designation allows between
20.1 and 35 dwelling units per gross acre, except in the BART Station Specific Plan Area, where density
allowances are identified within the Specific Plan.
Residential — High Density (R-HD). This designation applies primarily to multi-family residential structures
where residential density is between 35.1 and 50 dwelling units per gross acre, such as is characteristic of
the existing apartments that are in close proximity to the Westlake and Serramonte shopping centers,
except in the BART Station Specific Plan Area, where density allowances are identified within the
Specific Plan.
Residential — Very High Density (R-VHD). This designation applies to very dense multi-family residential
development where density exceeds 50 dwelling units per acre. These developments are typically
characterized by the large number of units constructed with little or no private or public open space.
Commercial/Industrial
The General Plan Land Use Map identifies six commercial/industrial categories. These categories identify
areas in Daly City that are desired for commercial, mixed-use, and industrial uses, and identify the
intensity to which these uses may be developed, expressed in terms of floor area ratio (FAR).
Commercial — Retail and Office (C-RO). This land use designation consists of retail and office uses both
regional and citywide in scope, typically applicable to a wide range of commercial shopping areas,
including Westlake Shopping Center and Serramonte Shopping Center. The FAR varies for land uses
within this category and ranges from 2.5 to 5.0 square feet of building area for each square foot of land
area, except in the BART Station Area Specific Plan and Sullivan Corridor Specific Plan Area, which
contain specific development standards for properties within the boundaries of these plans. While
historically residential uses have been permitted within this General Plan land use category, the inclusion
of the Commercial Mixed-Use General Plan designation is now the most appropriate designation for
existing and new development which contains and is intended to contain residential land uses.
Daly City 2030 General Plan | Land Use Element                                                            15


                                               Figure LUE-3
                                               FUTURE LAND USE
                                                 CITY OF DALY CITY
                                               LAND USE ELEMENT
Daly City 2030 General Plan | Land Use Element                     17

Commercial — Mixed Use (C-MU). This land use designation pertains generally to areas fronting
Mission Street and Geneva Avenue, and includes certain areas within the Sullivan Corridor
Specific Plan and BART Station Area Specific Plan intended for mixed-use development. The
designation applies to areas where the City intends to provide, through the Zoning Ordinance,
regulatory incentives and/or requirements for developers to construct buildings which contain a
vertical mix of uses, e.g. retail or restaurant uses at the street level and office or residential uses
at levels above the street.
The introduction of the C-MU designation along Mission Street and Geneva Avenue is intended
to allow for residential intensification of these corridors, both of which are well-served by public
transportation, so that they may be transformed into more vibrant urban streets as identified
during the Envision Daly City process. The FAR for mixed-use land uses generally ranges from 1.0
to 6.0, except in mixed use areas of the BART Station Area Specific Plan and Sullivan Corridor
Specific Plan Area, which contain specific development standards for properties within the
boundaries of these plans.
Commercial — Neighborhood (C-N). This land use designation consists of uses that serve the
neighborhood and draw from the local area rather than the entire region or City. Neighborhood
commercial uses include personal services such as beauty parlors and barbershops, and
miscellaneous retail establishments such as liquor or grocery stores. With large surface parking
lots and relatively low-profile buildings, the FARs for neighborhood commercial centers generally
range between 0.5 and 1.0.
Commercial — Office (C-O). This land use designation consists primarily of office and locally-
serving office serving commercial uses. This category would include those office uses described
in the "Retail and Office Commercial" designation but the emphasis would be placed on the
office use rather than the retail use in terms of land use intensity. In addition to office uses, this
category includes office serving uses such as: health and fitness centers; small scale printing and
photocopying businesses; and eating and drinking establishments. The FAR for office
commercial land uses ranges from 1.0 to 3.5. Exceptions to this range do exist in a limited
number of areas in the City, such as in the Sullivan Corridor Specific Plan Area and Peninsula
Gateway Plaza Specific Plan Area, where FARs are established by each respective plan.
Commercial — Service (C-S). This land use designation consists of those commercial uses which
are more service or heavy commercial oriented. This includes: automobile sales and repair; gas
and service stations; small scale warehouse and storage; building material suppliers and small
scale manufacturing; and construction related services such as contractor yards. Service
commercial FARs typically range from 0.5 square foot or less to 3.0 square feet of building area
per square foot of land area, except in the Sullivan Corridor Specific Plan Area where density
allowances are identified within the Specific Plan.
Industrial (I). This designation includes light manufacturing, storage of merchandise produced on
the site, administrative offices, and research facilities that are subordinate to the primary
business. All industrial districts shall be developed with special urban design qualities that
maintain and enhance the aesthetic and functional relationships of surrounding development.
Maximum FAR is 1.0.
Parks and Open Space Land Use Categories
The General Plan Land Use Map identifies three open space categories, each providing differing
degrees of open space preservation. These open space designations are as follows:
Daly City 2030 General Plan | Land Use Element                                                       19

Public Park (PP). This land use designation applies to all developed public open space including
all state, regional and local parks and city maintained tot lots which provide recreational
opportunities to the community.
Private Recreation (PR). This designation includes facilities such as golf and country clubs, and
golf driving ranges which are privately owned and operated.
Open Space Preservation (OSP). This designation includes all vacant lands which because of
environmental factors, such as slope, soils, and topography, and/or prohibitive development
costs, such as nonexistent access or lack of infrastructure, effectively render the land unusable
except for permanent open space.
Public and Institutional Land Use Categories
The General Plan Land Use Map identifies four categories which relate to public and institutional
facilities. These facility designations are as follows:
BART (BART). This designation applies to all properties owned by the Bay Area Rapid Transit
District, including the Daly City BART Station, the Colma–Daly City BART Station, and all rights of
way associated with the BART operation.
Cemeteries (CEM). This designation applies to all cemeteries located in Daly City.
Public Facilities (PF). This designation applies to all land on which federal, state or local
government facilities are located. This includes the Daly City Civic Center and corporation yard,
the Department of Motor Vehicles office, War Memorial Community Center, the main branch of
the Post Office and the Cow Palace. This designation includes all lands which are owned by
public utilities companies such as Pacific Gas and Electric, North San Mateo County Sanitation
District, or other public utilities. These include telephone and electrical switching and corporation
yards and the Sanitation District's wastewater treatment plant. This designation also applies to all
public schools, including all elementary (K-6), middle (7-9), and high schools (9-12).
Hospitals (HOSP). This land use designation pertains to the area covered by the Sullivan Corridor
Specific Plan only and relates primarily to Seton Medical Center complex located on Sullivan
Avenue.
Public Property Development Sites
In addition to the above land use designations, there are several properties in Daly City owned
by public agencies (school district, State, etc.) that have been designated as surplus or for
which the agencies have expressed an interest in selling or leasing for private development.
Although current market conditions make the ultimate redevelopment potential of these sites
unclear, this redevelopment would likely have significant cumulative impacts to the City’s
roadway and infrastructure system.
Although amending the General Plan land use designations for these properties is premature at
this time, the City has included a rough approximation of development potential for these sites
in the traffic model prepared as a part of the General Plan Circulation Element. Vehicle trip
generation figures have also been included in the traffic impact analysis completed as a part of
the General Plan Environmental Impact Report.
A summary of public property redevelopment sites presently known to the City is as follows:
20                                                         Daly City 2030 General Plan | Land Use Element

Cow Palace (2150 Geneva Avenue). This property is owned by the State of California and
consists of a State-operated indoor arena on an approximately 70-acre site (partially located
within the City of San Francisco). The site is designated by the General Plan Land Use Map as G
- Government Facility. Redevelopment of the site for private purposes would require a General
Plan amendment, and would ideally occur together with an 11-acre private owned property
and 12-acre Daly City Housing Development Finance Agency property. Both the privately-
owned and Agency-owned properties are situated immediately west of the State-owned
parcel. In support of a cohesive and integrated redevelopment plan for the site, Land Use
Element Task LU-3.2 identifies the preparation of comprehensive land use, infrastructure, and
streetscape plan for the Geneva Avenue Corridor, including the Cow Palace property. For
purposes of the General Plan traffic model, the City has assumed the ultimate buildout of the
three aforementioned properties to include 1,700 new dwelling units in a higher density format
and 300,000 square feet of retail/office commercial in a multi-story and possibly mixed-use
(residential above) format.
SamTrans Park and Ride Lot (3451 Junipero Serra Boulevard). This property is owned by the San
Mateo County Transit District and consists of an existing parking lot that provides daily paid
parking for use by patrons to the Colma BART Station. The District has recently received
responses to a Request for Qualifications process for the purpose of private redevelopment of
the parking lot. For purposes of the traffic model, the City has assumed the ultimate buildout of
approximately 215,000 square feet of office space on the site, although the District has
communicated the possibility of introducing very-high density residential development in
combination with ground-level retail. Policy LU-3.5 has therefore been added to the to this
Element in an effort to provide policy support amending the BART Station Specific Plan to allow
for broader mix of land uses in a more intensive format than is currently provided by the plan.
Daly City BART Station Delong Street Parking Lot (500 John Daly Boulevard). This property is
owned by the San Francisco Bay Area Rapid Transit District (BART) and consists of a functioning
263-space parking lot on an 8-acre site just east of the Daly City BART Station. The entire site is
zoned BART and designated BART by the General Plan Land Use Map. Development of the site
for private purposes would require rezoning and General Plan amendment. For purposes of the
General Plan traffic model, the City included has preliminary square footages consistent with the
Comprehensive Station Plan prepared by BART in 2006 for the station. The plan envisions a
development concept that replaces the Delong Street parking lot with 145 residential units,
13,600 square feet of commercial space, a 2,000 square foot community center, and 9,000
square feet of open space on land that is currently being used for surface parking. As a
commitment to fully examine the potential for redeveloping the parking lot, Land Use Element
Task LU-3.4 identifies the need to work with BART to develop a Daly City BART Master Plan that
includes publicly-owned properties located within the Priority Development Area immediately
adjacent to and including the Daly City BART station.
Colma School Surplus Site (444 East Market Street). This parcel is owned by the Jefferson
Elementary School District and consists of a functionally obsolete school facility situated on an
approximately 4.4-acre site. The entire site is zoned U – Un-zoned consistent with the school
facility uses and is designated as a School facility by the General Plan Land Use Map.
Development of the site for private purposes would require rezoning and General Plan
amendment. For purposes of the General Plan traffic model, the City has assumed the ultimate
buildout of this property to include 160 new dwelling units.
Daniel Webster School Surplus Site (425 El Dorado Drive). This parcel is owned by the Jefferson
Elementary School District and consists of a functionally obsolete school facility situated on an
approximately 11.8-acre site. The entire site is designated as a School facility by the General
Plan Land Use Map. Development of the site for private purposes would require rezoning and
General Plan amendment. For purposes of the General Plan traffic model, the City has assumed
the ultimate buildout of this property to include 95 new dwelling units.
Daly City 2030 General Plan | Land Use Element                                                  21

Christopher Columbus School site (60 Christopher Court). This parcel is owned by the Jefferson
Elementary School District and consists of a functionally obsolete school facility situated on an
approximately 12.7-acre site. The site is designated as a School facility by the General Plan Land
Use Map. Development of the site for private purposes would require rezoning and General Plan
amendment. For purposes of the General Plan traffic model, the City has assumed the ultimate
buildout of this property to include 80 new dwelling units.
Hill Street Maintenance Yard (23 Hill Street). This parcel is owned by the Jefferson Elementary
School District and consists of a functionally obsolete school district maintenance and
operations facility situated on a 1.38-acre site. The entire site is zoned R1-B consistent with the
school facility uses and is designated as a School facility by the BART Specific Plan.
Development of the site for private purposes would require rezoning and General Plan
amendment. For purposes of the General Plan traffic model, the City has assumed the ultimate
buildout of this property to include 50 new dwelling units in a higher density format and 10,000
square feet of retail/office commercial in a multi-story and possibly mixed-use (residential
above) format.
Land Use Goal, Policies, and Tasks
The direction of this land use chapter is based on recognition of the above issues and directed
toward realization of a single goal. The City's land use goal is:
         "Create a balanced mixture of land uses that ensure equal opportunities for
         employment, housing, open space, and services which adequately serve
         both personal needs of the citizens and economic needs of the community."
Several important issues raised in this goal should be recognized. First, the goal seeks to
accomplish a "balanced mixture" of activities that serve a wide range of needs in the
community. Diversity in land uses means the City can accommodate change over time. Since
Daly City is primarily residential in nature, achieving a balanced mix of land uses will require an
emphasis on attracting commercial and office construction. While a fully balanced land use
pattern might not be achieved, the City can work toward a more equitable mixture of land uses
through the intensification of existing commercial areas, annexation of developable lands, and
the implementation of specific plans. Rather than converting residential or park land to
commercial or light industrial uses to attain a balance of land uses, these should be continually
maintained and revitalized.
Balanced development with the full complement of various land uses is desirable for many
reasons. Urban areas with a wide range of residential densities provide multiple choices of
housing costs, design and tenure type. This will lead to a mix of persons living within the City and
thus diversity in population, the key ingredient to creating a vibrant community. Citizens benefit
from a balanced land use within the city because sufficient commercial opportunity will allow
for the market to be more flexible in the goods and services provided to the public, and thus
offer a wider range of products for the consumer. Commercial opportunities, as well as office
and industrial locations, also provide for job possibilities for local residents. The balance of
housing and jobs in a local area has positive regional implications due to reduced commuting
time on congested freeways, a factor that will improve air quality. The demand for urban
resources in a balanced city is easier to accommodate. Water, electrical, and sewer service
peak demand is spread more evenly in a city where a stable mixture of land uses has been
developed.
22                                                      Daly City 2030 General Plan | Land Use Element
Since property tax is the single most important income source for a municipality, the concept of
a balanced use of land within the City becomes paramount in the effort to collect enough
revenues to support the level of service expected by the community. Typically, residential land
uses cost more in public services than they provide in revenues. While office uses are not overly
productive in terms of property taxes, they produce employment opportunities, which in turn
provide people with income that can be spent within the city. Office type land uses do not
demand the cost in city services that are associated with residential land uses. Industrial land
uses, in terms of cost/benefit to a municipality are the most productive.
The goal identifies four broad aspects of land use that are found in urban areas, "employment,
housing, open space, and services". Attaining a balance of these land uses is the key to this
goal and the challenge for the land use chapter. A balanced urban environment means
adequate job opportunities, a range of housing stock that allows a variety of tenure type, and
access to recreation and open space amenities. The reference to "services" includes the basic
governmental function such as the provision of safe road conditions for travel, infrastructure
needs for human activity and police and fire protection.
The most important concept behind the goal, "personal and economic needs of the citizens,"
confirms the City's intent to allow a variety of land uses. Basic needs of people, such as
opportunity for attractive and convenient shopping and restaurants, locations for entertainment,
and open space for recreational activity are recognized by the land use goal as vital to the
wellbeing of the community. Economic need relates not only to job opportunity but also
adequate tax base for the City so that the basic governmental services can be assured over
time.
To implement the land use goal, the General Plan provides the following policies and tasks:
Commercial Vitality and Revitalization
Policy LU-1:    Maintain and, where possible, encourage larger commercial development sites
                throughout the City.
                Task LU-1.1: Increase the minimum property sizes in all commercial zones and
                restrict the ability of existing sites within this zone to subdivide below the
                established minimum lot size. The minimum parcel size shall be established at the
                time of the Zoning Ordinance update and shall be such that it promotes the
                construction of mixed-use and/or higher density multifamily development, as
                determined by the respective zone to which it applies.
                Task LU-1.2: Incorporate a lot merger incentive allowance into the Zoning
                Ordinance whereby property owners electing to merge two or more adjacent
                lots for the purpose of development are provided specific incentives to do so.
                The incentive program shall establish incentives that are significant enough to
                promote voluntary lot mergers of lots that meet a minimum threshold size and
                shall be commensurate with the size of the parcels being merged and/or
                created.
Policy LU-2:    Continue to allow neighborhood-serving businesses in neighborhoods where such
                businesses presently exist and where such continued operation does not impact
                the quality of life within the neighborhood.
                Task LU-2.1: Amend the non-conforming section of Zoning Ordinance to allow
                the continued operation and reconstruction of neighborhood-serving businesses
                (markets, cafés, etc.) within neighborhoods where such uses presently exist.
Daly City 2030 General Plan | Land Use Element                                                 23

             Language shall be incorporated into the Zoning Ordinance which assures that
             only those uses with a neighborhood market are allowed and that those uses with
             a primarily City-wide or regional market are disallowed.
             Task LU-2.2: Amend the Zoning Ordinance and Building Code to require
             objective standards to control noise, odor, and rooftop emissions produced by
             non-residential uses.
             Task LU-2.3:     Support the continued establishment of ground-level retail and
             restaurant uses along the School Street corridor by codifying a parking waiver for
             retail uses in this area that occupy existing commercial spaces or are beneath a
             pre-established size threshold.
             Task LU-2.4:     At the time of remodeling and additions to neighborhood
             commercial centers, require mitigation of existing conflicts with residential uses,
             including screening, access, and landscaping.
Urban Corridor Enhancement
Policy LU-3: Implement a vision and long-term goals for Mission Street and Geneva Avenue,
             and consider the vision and goals in all land use planning decisions.
             Task LU-3.1:     Maintain the Priority Development Area (PDA) status of the
             Bayshore Area and the Colma BART Specific Plan Area/Mission Street Corridor,
             and take steps to secure capital infrastructure funds, planning grants, and
             technical assistance from ABAG to more fully realize the City’s vision and long-
             term goals for these PDAs.
             Task LU-3.2: Prepare a comprehensive land use, infrastructure, and streetscape
             plan for the Geneva Avenue Corridor, including the state-owned Cow Palace
             property. If necessary, the plan shall make specific recommendations for
             changes to the General Plan and Zoning Ordinance that will be necessary to
             assist with the plan’s implementation. The plan shall also identify which, if any,
             public improvements will be necessary for long-term implementation, including
             any necessary upgrades to existing public utilities in the area, and potential
             financing strategies to fund these improvements.
             Task LU-3.3: Expand on the efforts of the Mission Street Urban Design Charrette
             and Grand Boulevard Initiative by undertaking a residential and commercial
             opportunities analysis for Mission Street and developing an urban design plan.
             Development of the urban design plan shall include an evaluation of the Grand
             Boulevard Guiding Principles and, where feasible, implementation of these
             principles.
             Task LU-3.4: Work with BART to develop a Daly City BART Master Plan that
             includes publicly-owned properties located within the Priority Development Area
             immediately adjacent to and including the Daly City BART Station. The plan shall
             explore development concepts that include a public partnership between BART
             and the City of Daly City for joint development of the Agency-owned parcel at
             the north end of Pacific Plaza and the adjacent BART parking lot.
             Task LU-3.5:     Support comprehensive land planning and new development
             around the Colma BART Station, with particular focus on the development of the
24                                                   Daly City 2030 General Plan | Land Use Element

                SamTrans parking lot and the former Serra Bowl site (collectively encompassing
                approximately 10 acres). Development on these properties shall support the
                City’s Priority Development Area (PDA) status for the lands, and include transit
                oriented development concepts and a land use plan that may include very high
                density residential, office, commercial and related uses. Development plans shall
                also address the potential for creation of a mixed-use, “urban village”
                development that includes pedestrian-friendly design, along with amenities and
                customer services to support uses at the site and as a means of reducing vehicle
                trips. Development of the site shall provide a direct pedestrian connection to the
                Colma BART Station and shall strive to provide the aforementioned amenities and
                customer services in manner and location that is conveniently accessible to both
                site occupants and BART riders. Appropriate amendments to the 1993 BART
                Station Area Specific Plan would be required to support this vision for
                development. Such Specific Plan amendments can be processed concurrently
                with development entitlement applications.
Policy LU-4:    Provide regulatory incentives for developers to construct higher-density mixed-
                use development along Mission Street, Geneva Avenue, and any other locations
                within close proximity to public transit.
                Task LU-4.1: Establish a Commercial Mixed-Use (C-MU) zone for areas targeted
                for mixed-use development, including, but not limited to the boundaries of the
                existing C-1 Light Commercial zone presently encompassing Mission Street and
                Geneva Avenue, and establish development regulations in the Zoning Ordinance
                specifically for higher-density mixed-use development. The City shall, as a part of
                this task, explore increased building height within the C-MU zone, as determined
                sufficient to promote the construction of higher density mixed-use development
                within the zone.
                Task LU-4.2: Review the existing design guidelines for mixed-use development to
                ensure the guidelines adequately address pertinent issues related to the
                construction of the mixed-use development both within existing neighborhoods
                and when higher-density development is proposed adjacent to lower-density
                neighborhoods. Amend these guidelines and augment with development
                regulations identified in Task LU-4.1 above to incorporate methods for
                repositioning mixed-use building mass away from lower-density neighborhoods.
                Task LU-4.3: Remove the use permit requirement for mixed-use projects that
                contain a commercial component of sufficient proportion to the total building
                area, as identified by the Zoning Ordinance, and a residential component.
                Task LU-4.4: Amend the parking regulations to allow for a 30 percent parking
                reduction for all mixed-use development projects and clarify that the mixed-use
                parking reduction is allowed for buildings containing residential and retail
                components and parking available to both uses.
Policy LU-5:    Work to ensure that both public and private buildings along Mission Street and
                Geneva Avenue are continuously maintained in good condition.
                Task LU-5.1: Examine the merits and deficiencies of the existing Façade
                Improvement Program and identify ways to improve the program to affect a
                greater number of businesses along both Mission Street and Geneva Avenue.
Daly City 2030 General Plan | Land Use Element                                                   25

             Task LU-5.2: Support through technical assistance the efforts of Mission Street and
             Geneva Avenue business owners and property owners in organizing a common
             benefit district.
Policy LU-6: Eliminate obstacles to the development of new retail businesses and restaurants
             on Mission Street and Geneva Avenue.
             Task LU-6.1: Establish separate parking regulations for the Commercial Mixed Use
             zone and revise the Zoning Ordinance to require that any new restaurant provide
             the same number of parking spaces as that of a retail business (one space per
             each 300 square feet).
Neighborhood Preservation
Policy LU-7: Recognize the physical differences between different parts of the City and
             regulate land uses within these areas accordingly (same as Policy RME-20).
             Task LU-7.1:      Retain elements in the Zoning Ordinance which effectively
             preserve the architectural character of Daly City’s older neighborhoods (e.g.,
             predominant setback and tandem parking allowances) (same as Task RME-20.1).
             Task LU-7.2: Amend the Zoning Ordinance to provide development regulations
             that more closely reflect the predominant neighborhood character established
             when the neighborhood was constructed (e.g., provide for three-foot side yard
             setbacks in Westlake where there is currently no side setback required). Where
             necessary, establish either separate or overlay zoning districts for such
             neighborhoods (same as Task RME-20.2).
             Task LU-7.3: Update the Residential Design Guidelines to provide bulk, mass, and
             architectural guidelines for exterior additions and reconstructed homes in
             neighborhoods which possess unique architectural characteristics. Quantifiable
             guidelines shall be codified within the Zoning Ordinance where necessary (same
             as Task RME-20.3).
             Task LU-7.4:      Incorporate design features in new development that reflects the
             character of the neighborhood, to ensure that new construction is compatible
             with existing development (same as Task RME-20.4).
Policy LU-8: Ensure that landscape and hardscape improvements made to all residential
             properties are environmentally sound and do not negatively impact existing
             neighborhood aesthetics.
             Task LU-8.1: Conduct a public education campaign aimed at informing the
             public about water conservation measures that can be incorporated into
             residential landscaping projects. Information shall be included about the
             effective implementation of low-volume irrigation systems and any City
             requirements for such systems.
             Task LU-8.2:      Establish front yard paving design regulations and require, as a
             condition of permit issuance, compliance with these guidelines. The guidelines
             shall, at a minimum, disallow solid surface pavement, including non-porous
             concrete, to be placed so that it covers more than a certain percentage of the
             front yard setback area, including the driveway. The guidelines shall also require
26                                                    Daly City 2030 General Plan | Land Use Element

                solid permanent vertical features constructed in non-driveway locations to ensure
                the inability of vehicles to park off-driveway.
                Task LU-8.3:     Establish a program that ensures the long-term removal of existing
                pavement in the front setback area of existing homes which is non-compliant
                with the regulations established as a part of Task LU-8.2. The requirement for
                pavement removal shall be applied to all building permit applications exceeding
                a significant valuation established by City Council resolution.
Policy LU-9:    Ensure that traffic from commercial development does not significantly increase
                traffic on residential streets.
                Task LU-9.1:     Evaluate the traffic impacts associated with all discretionary
                projects subject to environmental review by the City and identify appropriate
                mitigation measures as may be necessary to reasonably ensure compliance with
                the City’s adopted Level of Service (see Policy CI-1.6).
Policy LU-10:   Ensure that new single-family homes and duplexes complement the scale,
                character, and street relationship of existing homes of the neighborhood in which
                they are constructed.
                Task LU-10.1: Explore ways to decrease the bulk of single-family homes and
                duplexes constructed within existing neighborhoods, including the potential for
                applying a floor area ratio to such structures and increasing third-story setbacks.
                Where necessary, these requirements shall be codified in the Zoning Ordinance.
Policy LU-11:   Ensure that accessory structures and additions in residential neighborhoods are
                architecturally compatible with the existing residence on the property and are of
                a character and scale compatible with the surrounding neighborhood.
                Task LU-11.1: Amend the Zoning Ordinance to develop regulations limiting the
                type, size, and quantity of accessory structures in residential neighborhoods.
Policy LU-12:   Review for consistency requests for annexations of unincorporated areas within
                the City's Sphere of Influence that do not negatively affect the fiscal health of the
                City and ensure an appropriate economy of scale in the delivery of City
                infrastructure and services.
                Task LU-12.1: Amend the Zoning Ordinance to require that, prior to Local Agency
                Formation Commission (LAFCo) approval, the City Council must find that the
                proposed annexation is consistent with the General Plan. To assist in this
                determination, the Zoning Ordinance shall identify the specific findings required
                and the requisite analyses necessary to determine whether such findings can be
                made.
Policy LU-13:   Continue to underground utilities when funding becomes available.
                Task LU-13.1: Develop a five-year plan that identifies which areas in the City
                should be targeted for the undergrounding of utilities when Rule 20A funds
                become available. Areas targeted for undergrounded shall be prioritized in the
                order that such undergrounding will positively impact overall community
                appearance.
Daly City 2030 General Plan | Land Use Element                                                     27

Permit Streamlining
Policy LU-14: Develop and implement land use regulations that are easily comprehensible,
              equitable, have sound justification, and do not hinder the implementation of
              reasonable project proposals.
              Task LU-14.1: Amend the Zoning Ordinance to incorporate all of the mandates
              specified within the General Plan and state planning law, and perform an annual
              maintenance of the ordinance to ensure that the ordinance is continually
              updated to reflect the City’s regulatory policy and consistently addresses land
              use issues encountered by the Planning Division.
              Task LU-14.2: To provide a more pedestrian-friendly environment, explore the
              use of commercial development regulations that more effectively address the
              relationship between building facades and the adjacent public street, the form
              and mass of buildings in relation to one another, and the scale and types of
              streets and blocks.
              Task LU-14.3: Explore the concept of unifying the Zoning Ordinance into a more
              broad set of development regulations, including subdivision regulations,
              environmental compliance standards, fees payment, and public improvement
              construction.
              Task LU-14.4: Continue to offer same-day, express plan check permitting for all
              second units (see also Housing Element Task HE-6.4).
Policy LU-15: Continue to streamline project review by ensuring that the City’s existing Specific
              Plans reflect development trends in the areas to which they pertain and are easy
              to implement.
              Task LU-15.1: Re-evaluate the lands use designations identified within the Sullivan
              Corridor Specific Plan and the policies associated with these designations to
              ensure that the plan reflects a realistic development pattern for the area
              governed by it. Where necessary identify and propose amendments to the plan.
Policy LU-16: Regulate of the size, quantity, and location of signs to maintain and enhance the
              visual appearance of Daly City.
              Task LU-16.1: Review and update the existing sign regulations, where necessary,
              to require that all new commercial signs be high-quality design, materials, and
              finish, while ensuring that the sign regulations are flexible enough to allow signs
              that add visual interest to the building on which they are proposed and not
              hinder creativity in design.
              Task LU-16.2: Unless specifically allowed by a Master Sign Program, amend the
              sign regulations to disallow cabinet signs and require that existing cabinet signs
              be replaced by channel letter signs at either the time of sign permit issuance or at
              the time of building permit issuance where the valuation of improvements
              exceeds a certain valuation.
              Task LU-16.3: Develop sign regulations that address permissible sign sizes for
              each tenant in multi-tenant buildings.
Policy LU-17: Ensure that private development is responsible for providing any on- or off-site
              improvements related to and/or mitigating the impacts it causes.
28                                                    Daly City 2030 General Plan | Land Use Element

                Task LU-17.1: Ensure that, where discretionary land use approvals are required
                from the City, the conditions of approval imposed by the City adequately
                mitigate any impacts to the public infrastructure.
                In instances where new projects require upgrading of services that have a benefit
                for existing uses and when the upgrade is a part of the City's Capital
                Improvement Program, the developer shall pay the proportional share of the
                costs based on the projected demand of the new project. This requirement shall
                also apply to single development of infill parcels. If infrastructure improvements
                are needed to service the proposal, the building permit shall not be issued until
                the project sponsor secures the necessary permits to upgrade the infrastructure.
                Task LU-17.2: Continue to collect AB1600 impact fees from new development
                and, from time to time, re-assess the amount and distribution of monies collected
                from such fees to ensure that these amounts are sufficient to provide an
                adequate pro-rata contribution toward the public improvements identified in the
                City’s Capital Improvement Program.
                Task LU-17.3: Review and amend the park in-lieu fee payment requirement as
                necessary to assure that the formula for park in-lieu fee payment is more
                standardized equitable among all residential uses, including rental housing.
                Task LU-17.4: Develop and implement a Capital Improvement Program (CIP) to
                identify the capital projects that are required to implement this plan and prioritize
                their importance. This program would evaluate the current process for distributing
                capital improvement funds and attempt to strengthen the linkage between the
                General Plan and the CIP.
Environmental Considerations
Policy LU-18:   Development activities shall not be allowed to significantly disrupt the natural or
                urban environment and all reasonable measures shall be taken to identify and
                prevent or mitigate potentially significant effects.
                Task LU-18.1: Ensure that potentially significant environmental impacts
                associated with development proposals are properly mitigated through
                conditions of approval, mitigation measures, project design, or project denial. In
                cases where the impacts may not be completely preventable but will not
                significantly disrupt the community, the City may recognize that the benefits of a
                project may outweigh the environmental consequences. In no case shall the
                City approve a project that endangers the health, safety, or welfare of the
                public.
Policy LU-19:   Archeological resources should be preserved where possible.
                Task LU-19.1: Archeological resources are a valuable educational resource for
                the residents of the city. Every effort should be made to preserve them in their
                natural state when found or be excavated by professional archeologists for
                display in a museum.
Policy LU-20:   The City shall require that privately-owned open space be maintained in an
                acceptable manner when it is either used or viewed by the public. When new
                development occurs, the provision of open space shall be enhanced.
Daly City 2030 General Plan | Land Use Element                                                     29

Policy LU-21: The City shall encourage National Park Service to incorporate the City-owned
              property along the coast into the Golden Gate National Recreation Area.
              Task LU-21.1: The City shall continue its longstanding effort to develop the Mussel
              Rock site as a park and complete the hiking trail along the coastline to Mussel
              Rock. Including the coastline stretch of Daly City in the Golden Gate National
              Recreation Area would provide the final link for the recreation area from San
              Francisco to Sweeney Ridge above San Bruno and Pacifica.
Policy LU-22: Continue to recognize the importance of the San Bruno Mountain Habitat
              Conservation Plan (HCP), uphold the integrity of the concepts behind the HCP,
              and respect the agreements that serve to implement it.
              Task RME-22.1: Through the development review process, the City shall continue
              to assist with the effort of preserving undisturbed habitat containing unique flora
              and fauna in areas adjacent to San Bruno Mountain State and County Park.
              Where mandated by State or federal law, the City shall adopt mitigation
              measures to either reduce to insignificance or eliminate the impacts on these
              resources as part of the approval private development occurring in the HCP area
              or vicinity (same as Task LU 23.1).
              Task LU-22.2: Amend the Zoning Ordinance to require approval of a San Bruno
              Mountain Site Activity Permit for any construction projects located with the HCP
              area (same as Task LU-16.2).
Policy LU-23: Prior to the issuance of any discretionary zoning or land use entitlement, a
              conceptual Master Land Use Plan (MLUP) shall be prepared for all vacant lands
              west of Carter Street designated Low Density Residential (R-LD) and Open Space
              Preservation (OSP). The MLUP shall be adopted by City Council and the resulting
              conceptual land use designations and public roadways identified in the MLUP
              would serve to guide future development of area lands. In adopting the MLUP, the
              City shall consider the topography of the areas included within the MLUP
              boundary, the feasibility of providing utility and street access to all parcels
              identified for development and utility provision, and any environmental
              constraints to development and utility provision that may be present within the
              MLUP boundary (geologic constraints, special status species protection, etc.).
              Adjacent parcels designated Open Space Preservation (or portions thereof) may
              be considered for redesignation to R-LD, provided the redesignation of these
              parcels (or portions thereof) implements all provisions of the MLUP. This
              requirement to prepare a MLUP shall be held in abeyance for a period of two
              years for any project which has a complete Planned Development application on
              the date of General Plan adoption. Any applicant for a discretionary zoning or
              land use entitlement may seek a waiver from the City Council to the requirement
              to complete a MLUP.
Public Property Development Sites
Policy LU-24: In order to ensure that a comprehensive site and land planning process is
              considered, any discretionary land use entitlements for any of the lands
              contained in the 37-acre area located on the east side of Carter Street between
              Geneva Avenue and Martin Street (currently consisting of three properties owned
              by the City of Daly City Housing Development Finance Agency, Syufy Enterprises,
30                                                     Daly City 2030 General Plan | Land Use Element
                and the State of California), shall address cross-parcel connectivity for vehicular,
                bicycle and pedestrian use, and utility planning. The entitlement applications
                shall also consider potential connectivity and land planning issues associated
                with the current use and possible future redevelopment of the adjoining Cow
                Palace property to the east.           Additionally, the City may entertain a
                comprehensive planning approach for development of the 37-acre area that
                allows for location of land uses and related site improvements based on overall
                site constraints and development opportunities.
Policy LU-25:   Facilitate housing production by carrying out the goals and policies in the
                Housing Element.
Daly City 2030 General Plan | Land Use Element                                                   31

Introduction
Scope and Role of the Housing Element
From an urban planning perspective, nothing has impacted Daly City more than the construction of
housing. Over the years Daly City has provided new housing opportunities for many thousands of
families, many of whom settled in the city at the close of World War II.
Like much of the Bay Area, housing demand has exceeded housing supply in Daly City for many years.
While job centers in the Bay Area region have flourished, housing construction has not kept pace with
the demand created by a vast influx of households taking advantage of the rich opportunities offered
by the region’s employers. In bedroom communities like Daly City, these economic forces have led to
soaring housing costs, overcrowding, and illegal construction.
Even in the current market downturn, the housing market continues to impact the daily lives of
households in Daly City and throughout the region. Steep increases in the cost of for-sale homes at the
beginning of the decade have been replaced by scarce credit to construct new housing and a
foreclosure crisis not seen since the Great Depression. This climate further challenges the abilities of the
State and local governments to assure equitable access to affordable housing.
What is a Housing Element?
State law requires each city and county to adopt a General Plan containing at least seven elements
including a Housing Element. Unlike the other mandatory General Plan elements, the Housing Element
must be updated every five years, is subject to detailed requirements of State law, and must be
reviewed by the State Department of Housing and Community Development. Housing elements have
been mandatory portions of general plans since 1969, reflecting the State recognition that the
availability of housing is a matter of statewide importance and that cooperation between government
and the private sector is critical to attainment of the State's housing goals. The regulation of the housing
supply through planning and zoning powers affects the State’s ability to achieve its housing goal of
“decent housing and a suitable living environment for every California family” and is critical to the
State’s long-term economic competitiveness.
Daly City 2030 General Plan | Housing Element                                                             33

This Housing Element provides a comprehensive analysis of the status of housing in Daly City, and sets
forth a goal, objectives, policies and programs to improve the quality of the City’s housing stock and
increase housing opportunities. Like other parts of this General Plan, the Housing Element has been
prepared within the context of urban transformation that will result from an ever increasing population
and mandates from State and regional agencies to build housing near existing transit. The policies
contained within the element are intended to provide a framework for evaluating specific housing
proposals; establish a coordinated, realistic course of action for dealing with Daly City’s concerns; and
be a tool for decision-makers when considering the approval of housing construction projects.
Legal Requirements
Housing element law requires local governments like Daly City to adequately plan to meet their existing
and projected housing needs, including their share of the regional housing need. Housing Element law is
the State’s primary market-based strategy to increase housing supply, choice, and affordability. The law
recognizes that in order for the private sector to adequately address housing needs and demand, local
governments must adopt land use plans and regulatory schemes that provide opportunities for, and do
not unduly constrain, housing development.
The Housing Element process begins with the Department allocating a region's share of the statewide
housing need to Councils of Governments (COG) based on State Department of Finance population
projections and regional population forecasts used in preparing regional transportation plans. In Daly
City, the Association of Bay Area Governments (commonly referred to as “ABAG”) serves as the regional
COG in the San Francisco Bay Area. In coordination with local governments, ABAG has been allocating
the region’s share of the statewide need to the cities and counties within the Bay Area. This allocation,
which is discussed further within this document, is called the Regional Housing Need Allocation (RHNA or
“ree-nuh”). The RHNA is required to promote the following objectives:
1.      Increase the housing supply and the mix of housing types, tenure, and affordability in all cities
        and counties within the region in an equitable manner;
2.      Promote infill development and socioeconomic equity, the protection of environmental and
        agricultural resources, and the encouragement of efficient development patterns; and
3.      Promote an improved intraregional relationship between jobs and housing.
Housing element law requires local governments to be accountable for ensuring projected housing
needs can be accommodated. The process maintains local control over where and what type of
development should occur in local communities while providing the opportunity for the private sector to
meet market demand.
Public Participation
Housing issues affect the entire community – residents, employers and the public and private sectors.
State Law requires that each city make a diligent effort to achieve public participation from all
economic segments of the community in the development of the housing element. This requirement
law presents an opportunity to engage constituents in a dialogue – defining problems and creating
solutions.
34                                                              Daly City 2030 General Plan | Housing Element

In the fall of 2006, the Daly City City Council
initiated a comprehensive update of the City’s
General Plan, including an update of this Housing
Element. Prior to this time, the General Plan had
not been updated since 1987.             The Housing
Element was more recently updated in 2004. At
the onset of the General Plan update, the City
hired a planning consultant (Metropolitan
Planning Group) to undertake an extensive public
outreach campaign to identify community values
and better define the land use priorities of both
residents and business owners in Daly City. This
campaign used three primary means for gaining
such input: a city-wide community survey,
community focus groups, and two visioning
workshops.      This outreach campaign, called
Envision Daly City, concluded in the spring of 2008
with a report by the same name.
Throughout the public outreach process, the City
of Daly City has made an extraordinary effort to
involve residents who have traditionally not
participated in the City’s efforts to plan for land
use and housing, including persons from
underrepresented        ethnic     and     economic
backgrounds.        The focus group format and
composition, for example, were intentionally
tailored to solicit input from these groups. Individual focus groups participants were selected with the
assistance of Our Second Home Early Childhood Development Center and the Jefferson High School
District based on their abilities to provide important insight into the land use and housing needs of
renters, parents of school-aged children, and community youth, most of whom represented households
with limited incomes.
As an additional effort to reach out to these groups, much of the
written public outreach communication for the Envision Daly City
campaign was multilingual (Spanish, Chinese, and Tagalog),
including the community survey and flyers concerning Envision Daly
City and Housing Element workshops, where translators were
provided to non-English speaking participants. Each of these
avenues for gaining community input has included discussions of
housing-specific topics, including measured evaluations of housing
affordability and conditions through the community survey and
discussions of housing-related topics.
Because many of the discussions held with the focus groups centered upon the need and/or desire for
community change and betterment, the specific discussions related to new housing policies were
instead more abstract, concentrating on how participants would like Daly City as a place to live in the
future. Not surprisingly, each focus group touched on the issue of housing provision and affordability.
Several of the parents of school-aged children, for example, were in the midst of a foreclosure and
expressed concern about the impact of that process on their family.
The City’s Housing Goal was established at the second visioning workshop and reported together with
other planning goals as part of the City’s Envision Daly City report, which is available for download at
Daly City 2030 General Plan | Housing Element                                                         35

the website dedicated           exclusively to the General   Plan   and    House   Element    updates    at
www.plandalycity.org.
Throughout the Housing Element update process, a City Council-appointed General Plan Steering
Committee has provided valuable insight and guidance to staff on housing and other land use issues.
The Committee reviewed and discussed the Administrative Draft Housing Element prior to public release
and considered the community input described in the subsequent paragraph.
The Administrative Draft was prepared and released for public review on May 1, 2009, with a 60-day
comment period ending June 30, 2009. Copies of the draft were mailed to all organizations, service
providers, housing providers, and other affected agencies and was made available at all public libraries
within Daly City, online at www.plandalycity.org, and at the Daly City Planning Division.
In May and June 2009, the City held two workshops
specifically for public introduction and review of the
Administrative Draft. Comment gained from this public
review was discussed further at General Plan Steering
Committee meetings held during the summer of 2009, all of
which were open for attendance by the public. Based on
the comments receive, the Committee requested that
several changes be incorporated into the Administrative
Draft before the Draft Housing Element was released on
August 20 for an additional 30-day comment period.
In September 2009, staff presented the Draft Housing Element to the Planning Commission and City
Council for initial consideration in anticipation of the releasing the draft element to the State
Department of Housing and Community Development for review. The Draft Housing Element was
subsequently submitted to HCD review in October 2009 and all State comments on the draft were
completed in [insert month/year], with HCD certification granted in [insert month/year].
Following HCD review and certification, the City of Daly City Planning Commission conducted a public
hearing on May 4, 2010 to discuss and receive comment on the Draft Housing Element. The general
public was invited to attend the hearings and comment on the draft through public notices published in
a newspaper of general circulation within the community. The Housing Element was subsequently
adopted by the Daly City City Council on [insert day/month/year]. A copy of the final adopted Housing
Element has been submitted to HCD.
Review of the 2004 Housing Element
Housing element law requires that each local government review its housing element to ensure that the
element’s goals, objectives, and policies are contributing to the attainment of the state housing goal,
have been effective in attaining the community's housing goals and objectives, and that the City has, in
general, made progress toward implementing its housing element. This review covers the time period
beginning July 1, 1999 and ending June 30, 2007, the housing element planning period established by
the State Department of Housing and Community Development and the Association of Bay Area
Governments (ABAG). Within San Mateo County, ABAG acknowledged the formation of the subregion
for the purpose of developing the Regional Housing Need Allocation (RHNA) in 2006. Daly City,
together with 20 other jurisdictions within the County, participated in the development of the RHNA
identified within this section.
36                                                            Daly City 2030 General Plan | Housing Element

Objectives from 2004 Housing Element
Table HE-1 identifies the construction objective set forth in the previous housing element, which was
adopted by the City in 2004. The objective mirrors the regional housing need allocated to Daly City for
the 1999-2007 time period consisting of 1,391 housing units, or roughly 200 housing units per year
between these years. Fifty-eight percent of the 1,391 units, or 813 housing units, were to be affordable
to lower income households.
                  Table HE-1: Housing Construction Objective (1999-2007)
                                                                               Annual
                                                  Dwelling Unit  Percent    Construction
                      Income Category              Allocation    of Total   Requirement
                      Very Low                          282         20%           40
                      Low                               139         10%           20
                      Moderate                          392         28%           56
                      Above Moderate                    578         42%           83
                                                       1391       100%           199
                     Source: Daly City Housing Element (2004)
Table HE-2 identifies residential permits finaled by the City Building Division between calendar years 1999
and 2007. In review of both the total and annual objectives, the total number of permits finaled within
this period is indicative that the City has not produced the desired number of new housing units.
Between 1999 and 2007, the time period subject to the 1,391-unit construction objective, at total of 506
units were constructed, fulfilling roughly 36 percent of the construction objective. On an annualized
basis, the closest attainment of the annual objectives was 2002, when 126 units were constructed,
roughly 63 percent of the annual objective. In half of the years, no greater than half of the objective
was fulfilled.
Table HE-2: Residential Permits Finaled (2004-2007)
                                                                                        Units
                                                                                     Constructed Growth Rate
 Unit Type               1999     2000 2001  2002   2003   2004 2005   2006  2007     1999-2007   1999-2007
 Single Family            31         7  70    105     52    38   20     12    10         345        1.7%
 Multiple-Family          11         8   0     0      4      4    2     18     6          53        0.5%
 Mobile Homes              7        13   5     21     17    17    0     21     7         108        19.4%
              Total       49        28  75    126     73    59   22     51    23         506        1.6%
Source: Daly City Building Division
Table HE-3 on page 7 provides an overview of the residential development activity containing
affordable units that has occurred in Daly City since 1999 and the numbers of affordable units that have
been constructed within the city as compared to the affordable construction objective set forth by the
2004 Housing Element.
Affordable Housing Accomplishments
As rental and for-sale housing costs have skyrocketed in the Bay Area, both the City of Daly City and the
Daly City Redevelopment Agency undertook extensive efforts to attract affordable housing developers
to the city and provide funding for affordable housing projects that are proposed. Like many public
Daly City 2030 General Plan | Housing Element                                                              37
agencies, the City and Agency have struggled to stretch limited financial resources to meet the housing
needs of Daly City’s diverse population. In the 1999 to 2007 planning period, the City and Agency
advanced the following three projects, two of which involved a land subsidy by the City. Following is a
description of each:
Habitat Way (complete). In October 2005, Peninsula
Habitat for Humanity (PHH) completed the construction
of seven completely affordable single-family homes on
a .49-acre in-fill development site located on Third
Avenue in Daly City. With financial subsidy from the
City of Daly City and the San Mateo County
Department of Housing, the project represented the
first affordable housing development in Daly City
consisting entirely of ownership housing. In an effort to
maximize housing potential on the site and assist with
feasibility, the City granted zoning variances for both
minimum lot size and lot dimension, allowing five of the
seven lots to be approximately 1, 500 square feet and a
sixth to be approximately 1,800 square feet. The
resulting net density of the project was 14.28 dwelling units per acre, exemplifying the City’s willingness
to promote affordable housing construction through relaxed lot size and dimension regulations. The
project was deed- restricted to very low-income households for 45 years. City HOME funds contributed
to the project totaled $877,500. County HOME funds totaled $162,000.
De Long Housing (complete).             In June 2006,
Peninsula Habitat for Humanity completed the
construction of four affordable single-family
detached homes on a .29-acre surplus BART
property located across the street from Daly City
BART Station on De Long Street. Like the Habitat
Way homes, this affordable development project
consisted entirely of ownership housing. Including
the City purchase and subsidized resale of the
property        to      PHH,       the       combined
City/Redevelopment Agency contribution to the
project totaled $365,000. Funding for the project
was provided through Redevelopment Agency
set-side funds and City HOME funds. County HOME
funds contributed toward the project totaled $280,000. The project was deed- restricted to very low-
income households for 45 years.
                             Hillcrest Gardens (complete). In August 2008, American Baptist Homes of the
                             West (ABHOW) completed construction of a 40-unit affordable senior
                             apartment project northwest of the Mission Street/Hillcrest Avenue
                             intersection. Located on a 0.4-acre lot occupied since 1973 by a City parking
                             lot, Hillcrest Gardens represents one of the densest affordable projects
                             undertaken in Daly City. At 100 dwelling units per acre, the development
                             demonstrates the City’s willingness to promote affordable housing through
                             both density allowances and flexible parking requirements. The project is
                             within walking distance to BART and public transit (SamTrans and Muni). All
                             units within the complex (except the manager’s unit) are deed-restricted for
                             55 years to very low-income seniors, aged 62 years or older. Local subsidies to
                             the project include the following: City HOME: $2,051,612; City CDBG:
38                                                              Daly City 2030 General Plan | Housing Element

$227,227; County HOME: $853,266; County HEART (Housing Endowment and Regional Trust), $510,000;
DCRA, $480,000; Land discount valued at $1,195,000; Also received HUD Section 202 funding of
$5,004,300.
Habitat for Humanity Condominiums (approved). In June 2009, the Daly City Redevelopment Agency
(DCRA) entered into a Disposition and Development Agreement with Habitat for Humanity Greater San
Francisco (HHGSF) for the Agency-owned parcel
at 7555 Mission Street, located within a mile of the
Colma BART station. HHGSF will build 36 units of
ownership multifamily housing that will be
affordable to households at up to 60% of area
median income. The Agency will provide a
forgivable loan to HHGSF for the land as long as
the units remain affordable for 45 years. The
Agency is also contributing up to $800,000 for
development costs, in addition to $1.26 million in
HOME funds. The project received $1.76 from the
State's HCD Infill grant program.
Review of 2004 Housing Element Objectives and Policies Actions
Table HE-4 beginning on page provides a summary review of the prior Housing Element objectives and
policies, and the status of the City’s implementation of each policy. All of the responsibilities for each of
the objectives and policies contained within this table were that of the Department of Economic and
Community Development.
Daly City 2030 General Plan | Housing Element                                                              39

Table HE-3: Affordable Housing Construction Activity (1999-2007)
                                                                                                                                                            Above
  Project                                  Location                 Site Size    Density         Status         Funding Source       Very Low Low Moderate          Total
                                                                                                                                                           Moderate
  Landmark Daly City Condominiums (Mixed-
                                           6501 Mission Street      1.70 ac     56 du/ac     Construction      Private financing         0      0    14       81     95
  Use)
  The Geneva Condominiums (Mixed Use )     2665 Geneva Avenue       1.26 ac     57 du/ac     Construction      Private financing         0     11    0        61     72
                                                                                                            ABHOW, HOME, CDBG,
  Hillcrest Gardens Senior Apartments      35 Hillcrest Boulevard   0.40 ac    100 du/ac       Complete                                 40      0    0        0      40
                                                                                                              HEART, DCRA, HUD
  Habitat for Humanity Single Family Homes 523 - 539 De Long Street 0.29 ac     14 du/ac       Complete       PHH, HOME, DCRA            4      0    0        0       4
  Habitat for Humanity Single Family Homes 301 - 313 Habitat Way    0.49 ac     14 du/ac       Complete           PHH, HOME              7      0    0        0       7
  Monarch Village Senior Apartments        165 Pierce Street        3.18 ac     65 du/ac       Approved        Private financing        0      16   16       176     208
  Mission/Westlake Mixed Use (Alpha Group) 6800 Mission Street      0.42 ac     86 du/ac       Approved        Private financing         0      6    0        30     36
  Zita/Eastmoor Townhomes                  211 Eastmoor Avenue      1.00 ac     17 du/ac       Approved        Private financing         0      0    3        14     17
                                                                                         Total Affordable Housing Activity 1999-2007    51     33   33       362     479
                                                                              Regional Housing Needs Allocation (RHNA) 1999-2007       282    139   392      578    1391
                                                                                                        RHNA Unit Construction Rate    18%    24%   8%       63%    34%
Sources: City of Daly City Housing Division; Daly City Redevelopment Agency
Daly City 2030 General Plan | Housing Element                                                                                                                            40
Table HE-4: Implementation of 2004 Housing Element Objectives and Policies (1999-2007)
                                                              Principle 1: Encourage new residential development in suitable locations
                         Support infill housing on appropriate sites in existing           The City has approved numerous infill projects that provide housing opportunities (see Table HE-19
                  1.1
                         neighborhoods.                                                    for complete list of approved projects).
                                                                                           The City remains fully supportive of utilizing surplus public property for affordable housing
                  1.2    Foster housing development on suitable, surplus lands.            construction. The four-unit DeLong Housing development constructed by Habitat for Humanity in
P O L I C I E S
                                                                                           2006 on surplus BART property explemplifies this support.
                                                                                           The City continues to allows second units without any requirement for condtional use permit in all
                         Continue to allow secondary units in single-family
                  1.3                                                                      zoning districts. Approximately 100 new secondary units have been built within the planning
                         neighborhoods.
                                                                                           period.
                         Assure that standards for new housing construction
                  1.4                                                                      The City continues to enforce the uniform codes adopted by the Daly City City Council.
                         adequately safeguard life and property.
                         Assure that standards for new housing construction comply         Noise mitigation was required for two projects approved within the 65dB CNEL noise contour for
                  1.5
                         with appropriate aircraft noise abatement requirements.           San Francisco International Airport.
                        Principle 2: Increase the supply of housing in a manner compatible with the character, density, and integrity of existing neighborhoods
                         Establish zoning controls and density limits that maintain the    Higher density and mixed-use buildings are under construction on Mission Streeet and Geneva
                  2.1
                         prevailing character of existing neighborhoods.                   Avenue (Land mark and El Rancho).
P O L I C I E S
                         Encourage higher density residential development in areas         The City has approved several projects that have densities exceeding 50 dwelling units per acre
                  2.2
                         where such development will not have adverse effects.             (see Table HE-3: Affordable Housing Construction Activity).
                         Allow mixed residential/retail or office uses along the Mission   The City continues to allowed mixed-use development along the Mission Street corridor and has
                  2.3
                         Street corridor.                                                  approved several projects that incorporate retail at the ground level.
Daly City 2030 General Plan | Housing Element                                                                                                                                                   41
     Table HE-4: Implementation of 2004 Housing Element Objectives and Policies (1999-2007)                                            (continued)
                                                              Principle 3: Assure the quality of housing is continually maintained or upgraded
                                                                                             The City has not instituted a mandatory code compliance program for multi-family buildings upon
                             Assure that existing housing is maintained in decent, safe,
                       3.1                                                                   sale or tranfer, as identified in the 2004 Housing Element. Instead, the current Housing Element
                             and sanitary conditions.
                                                                                             identified a more broad program that also includes single family homes.
                                                                                             The City allocates a significant portion of CDBG funds to operate its Residential Rehabilitation
     P O L I C I E S
                             Operate a residential rehabilitation program that meets the
                       3.2                                                                   Program that targets low income households.. The City’s ongoing Residential Rehabilitation
                             needs of the low and moderate income population.
                                                                                             program assists about 20 low income households annually.
                                                                                             The City continues to offer housing rehabilitation grants to eligible low income homeowners
                             Establish an incentive program for voluntary housing
                       3.3                                                                   through its Residential Rehabilitation Program and CDBG-funded nonprofits like Center for the
                             rehabilitation.
                                                                                             Independence for the Disabled and North Peninsula Neighborhood Services.
                                                                                             The City's Code Enforcement Program continues to dilgently pursue prompt code enforcement
                       3.4   Assure the timely correction of code violations.                whenever code violations exist. In 2000, the City added a code enforcement technician to
                                                                                             augment its code enforcement acitvities.
                                                                          Principle 4: Provide housing affordable to all income groups
                                                                                             In 2007, the City adopted an inclusionary housing ordinance. The Ordinance requires that, for all
                             Establish incentives for the inclusion of low income units in
                       4.1                                                                   residential projects of five or more units, least 10 percent of the total units must be deed-restricted
                             new residential developments.
                                                                                             for occupancy by moderate-, low- or very low-Income households.
                                                                                             The City has committed more than $3 million dollars in HOME and CDBG funds, and more than
                             Use the financial resources available to the City to reduce
                       4.2                                                                   $600,000 in DCRA funds (excluding land discounts) to create 51 units of housing affordable to low
                             the cost and increase the amount of affordable housing.
     P O L I C I E S
                                                                                             and very low income households.
                             Allow construction of a variety of cost reducing, innovative    The City continues to allow modular houses and mobile homes pursuant to its prefabricated
                       4.3
                             housing types.                                                  housing ordinance.
                                                                                             Since the beginning of the planning period, the City has taken several steps to expedite housing
                             Streamline the permit process to expedite housing
                       4.4                                                                   permitting, including a streamlined development review process, and has worked to implement an
                             construction.
                                                                                             automated plan check system.
                             Ensure that City amendments to and interpretations of
                                                                                             The City's Planning Division has, ensure that building code requirements do not unnecessarily add
                       4.5   construction-related codes and ordinances do not
                                                                                             to construction costs.
                             necessarily increase the cost of construction.
42                                                                                                                                                 Daly City 2030 General Plan | Housing Element

Table HE-4: Implementation of 2004 Housing Element Objectives and Policies (1999-2007)                                                         (continued)
                                                                        Principle 5: Ensure housing opportunities for all people
                                                                                          The City continues to fund and support fair housing activities and organizations that help make
                        Prevent housing discrimination based on age, race, religion,
                  5.1                                                                     homes more handicapped accessible, and provides CDBG funding to a community organization
                        sex or ethnic background.
                                                                                          specializing in fair housing..
                        Promote adaptability and accessibility of residential units for   Recent changes to the building code have provided greater acceessibility standards for disabled
                  5.2
                        disabled occupants.                                               occupants.
                                                                                          The City has mandated economic integration in most new development through the adoption of
                  5.3   Encourage economic intregration in housing.
                                                                                          an inclusionary zoning ordinance.
P O L I C I E S
                        Support a balanced distribution of quality residential care
                  5.4                                                                     The City has not denied any proposed residential care facilities within the planning period.
                        facilities.
                                                                                          The Daly City Community Service Center continues to operate the Housing Assistance Program that
                        Provide financial assistance to lower income households in
                  5.5                                                                     grants eligible lower income families money to cover housing related emergencies. The Center
                        emergency situations.
                                                                                          also assists with temporary emergency shelter needs.
                                                                                          The City continues to implement a First Time Homebuyer Education Program. The City also
                  5.6   Expand homeownership opportunities.
                                                                                          provided financial assistance to onwership housing projects undertaken by Habitat for Humanity.
                                                                                          The City has approved all proposals for rental housing within the planning period, include a
                  5.7   Support the development of rental housing.                        number of duplexes, a 36-unit senior affordable apartment complex (Hillcrest Gardens), and a 208-
                                                                                          unit market rate apartment complex (Monarch Village).
                                                   Principle 6: Maintain and enhance the quality and diversity of Daly City’s neighborhoods
                                                                                          The City requires design review of most residential development project to assure compliance with
                  6.1   Encourage the development of well-designed housing.               pre-established design guidelines. New projects on Mission Street and in the Bayshore
P O L I C I E S
                                                                                          neighborhood are subject to the special design requirements in these areas.
                                                                                           The City continues to implement its AB1600 fee program, which provies a single, equitable
                        Assure housing is provided with adequate public
                  6.2                                                                     development fee on all construction projects to finance the appropriate infrastructure needed to
                        improvements, service and amenities.
                                                                                          support all future planned development.
                        Minimize the disruption caused by institutions expanding into     The City did not receive any requests for expansion by larger insitutional facilities within the
                  6.3
                        or adjacent to residential areas.                                 planning period,
Daly City 2030 General Plan | Housing Element                                                                                                                                                 43

Table HE-4: Implementation of 2004 Housing Element Objectives and Policies (1999-2007)                                          (continued)
                                      Principle 7: Reduce unnecessary or wasteful energy practices and encourage more energy efficient housing
P O L I C I E S
                        Educate the residents in conservation and heighten energy      The City provides a variety of materials to educate residents about the need to conserve water and power,
                  7.1
                        awareness                                                      and continues to coordinate closely with allied agencies in this effort.
                  7.2   Actively enforce the Title 24 Energy Efficiency Standards      The City continues to promote energy efficiency standards in housing construction.
                                                 Principle 8: Avoid or reduce the economic and social difficulties caused by displacement
                        Encourage the relocation of sound housing units that are
                  8.1                                                                  There have been no such relocations in the planning period.
                        threatened by development activities or natural forces.
                        Protect apartment dwellers who are affected by a
                  8.2                                                                  No condominium conversions were proposed during the planning period.
                        proposed condominium conversion.
P O L I C I E S
                        Provide relocation services where publicly financed actions
                  8.3                                                                  No publicly financed actions caused displacement during the planning period.
                        cause displacement
                        Preserve the 120 existing low-income housing units, which
                  8.4                                                                  The 120 existing low-income units have not converted to market rate housing.
                        are at risk of being converted to market-rate housing.
                        Require property owners to provide relocation assistance to
                        renters displaced where rental units in which they live were
                  8.5                                                                  There was no need for such relocation assistance during the planning period.
                        constructed or maintained in violation of the Daly City
                        Municipal Code.
44                                                                                                                                          Daly City 2030 General Plan | Housing Element
Population Characteristics
Population forecasts provided by the Association of Bay Area Governments (ABAG) provide population
projections through the planning period ending in 2030 and have been developed using a number of
factors including birth rates, in-migration, and job growth. Figure HE-1 below provides a population
statistics and projections from 1930 to the end of the planning period in 2030.
From a historical perspective, population growth within Daly City has increased tremendously since
1930, most significantly in the decades immediately following World War II. Between 1950 and 1970, the
City’s population quadrupled to almost 67,000 people as the residential subdivisions of Westlake and
Serramonte dotted Daly City’s landscape west of newly-constructed Interstate 280. By 1990, the
population had increased to over 90,000. In 2010, the United States Census reported the City’s
population to be 101,123.
       Figure HE-1: 100 Years of Population Growth (1930-2030)
       Source: U.S. Census (2000) for historical; Association of Bay Area Governments for projected
       Note: Data does not reflect Daly City Sphere of Influence
Although population growth will continue, it will do so at a modest rate, reflecting the fact that the City
is largely built out with many existing neighborhoods of single-family detached homes that are not
expected to undergo redevelopment in the foreseeable future. According to ABAG growth estimates,
Daly City can expect to add about 19,000 more residents between 2010 and 2030, or about 950
residents per year. This numerical estimate is likely accurate given the amount of population growth
documented during the past twenty years (between 1990 and 2010), when about 14,400 people were
added to Daly City’s population.
Between 1990 and 2008, Daly City exhibited a population growth rate comparable to adjacent
jurisdictions within San Mateo County, as well as the City and County of San Francisco (see Figure HE-2).
Like Daly City, these communities are largely built-out and it is for this reason that their population
growth rates are much less than those projected for the entire state. Population growth projections
provided by ABAG also identify a slightly higher growth rate for the Bay Area region, where population is
projected to increase by almost 20 percent through the end of the planning period. The projected
population growth rate for Daly City during this same time period is estimated to be about 13 percent,
which is very comparable to growth rates projected for San Mateo and San Francisco Counties, as well
as the jurisdictions immediately adjacent to Daly City.
Daly City 2030 General Plan | Housing Element                                                           45

                 Figure HE-2: Comparable Growth Rates (1990 to 2030)
                               California               28%                         22%
                                Bay Area            21%                    19%
                     South San Francisco          17%                16%
                                Daly City        15%             13%
                                                                                 Realized (1990-2008)
                       San Mateo County         14%            14%               Projected (2008-2030)
                               San Bruno       12%            16%
                    San Francisco County        14%           12%
                 Sources:           U.S. Census; California Department of Finance; ABAG
                 Notes:             For ease of comparison, population figures used to generate growth rates for San
                                    Mateo County cities due not include population within Sphere of Influence
                                    boundaries
Household Growth Trends
To provide a meaningful statistic for analysis within the Housing Element, the population figures discussed
in the preceding section must be translated to household growth figures. The household growth and
formation rate is critical to understanding how many housing units will be needed to provide for Daly
City’s future population.
Much of the data reported within this Element is from the United States Census Bureau (U.S. Census).
According to the Census Bureau, a household comprises either one person living alone or a group of
people, who may or may not be related, living (or staying temporarily) at the same address, with
common housekeeping, who either share at least one meal a day or share common living
accommodation (i.e., a living room or sitting room). Members of a household are not necessarily
related by blood or marriage. An important distinction between households and families (which are
also discussed in this element) is that a family is defined as either a married or cohabiting couple who
live with their never-married children who have no children of their own, or lone parents with similar such
children.
According to the ABAG Household Growth projections identified in Table HE-5, Daly City can expect to
the add about 4,230 households between 2010 and 2030, mirroring the 13 percent population growth
rate for this period identified in the preceding section. This projected number of households equates
roughly to just over 200 new households per year.
   Table HE-5: Household Growth in Daly City and Region (1990 to 2030)
                                                                                                        2010-2030
                                                                 Projected Households               Estimated Growth
                   Place            1990         2000           2010         2020         2030      Number        Rate
               Daly City         28,923       30,777          31,810       34,120       36,040         4,230       13%
     San Mateo County          241,914       254,104         267,230      287,470      304,660        37,430       14%
               Bay Area      2,245,865     2,466,020       2,696,580    2,941,760    3,177,440      480,860        18%
   Sources:      U.S. Census; ABAG Projections 2000 and Projections 2007
46                                                                       Daly City 2030 General Plan | Housing Element

Household Size
Daly City’s average household size today is about 3.4 persons per household. This household size is
considerably larger than that of San Mateo County, the Bay Area region, and all adjacent jurisdictions.
Among jurisdictions within San Mateo County, only East Palo Alto has a larger household size (4.3 persons
per household). Among the 116 incorporated cities in the Bay Area region, only five jurisdictions have
larger household sizes. Like Daly City, four of the five jurisdictions with large household sizes have foreign-
born populations exceeding 40 percent of the total population.
               Figure HE-3: Comparable Household Size (2008)
                                               Daly City                                                          3.36
                                               South San
                                                                                                          3.07
                                               Francisco
                                               California                                        2.90
                                               San Bruno                                  2.73
                                               Bay Area                             2.66          Persons Per Household
                           San Mateo County                                 2.45
                                          San Francisco
                                                                     2.31
                                             County
               Source:                               California Department of Finance
As identified in Figure HE-4, the average household size in Daly City increased significantly from 2.9
persons per household in 1990 to 3.3 persons per household in 2000. While a change of less than one-
half a percent may seem small, the household size statistic in Daly City is a departure from decreasing
household size trend that has continued nationally since 1980 with the slowing of baby-boomer
household formation, and societal and attitudinal shifts toward smaller households.
               Figure HE-4: Average Household Size – Daly City vs. National Trend (1960 - 2000)
                                         3.5
                                                                             Daly City
                                                   3.3                                                                    3.3
                 Persons Per Household
                                                                             National trend
                                                   3.2
                                         3.0
                                                                                                                          2.6
                                         2.5
                                                   1960          1970              1980                 1990        2000
               Source: U.S. Census
Daly City 2030 General Plan | Housing Element                                                                                   47

The shift toward larger than national average households in Daly City since 1990 is noticeable in several
ways which will be discussed throughout this document. Chief among these is the disproportionate
population-to-housing growth ratio present in Daly City and the associated overcrowding caused by a
general lack of housing necessary to meet the demands of a growing population. Both topics will be
further explored further in the Housing Characteristics section.
Age Composition
The age of Daly City residents remained more or less the same between 1980 and 2000. The bulk of
population within the City continues to be persons aged between 18 and 64, and the proportion of this
age group relative to the entire population is expected remain constant at about two-thirds of the
population through 2030 (see Figure HE-5).
Changes in the two remaining age categories, persons less than 18 and persons over 64, could however
be significant through the end of the 2030 planning period. The result of an aging baby-boomer
population, a demographic shift has occurred since 1980 away from younger persons and toward older
persons. Assuming this shift continues, the proportion of the population aged 17 or younger will
decrease to 19 percent in 2030, with a corresponding increase in the proportion of the persons aged 65
and over, who would comprise 15 percent of the population by that time.
This demographic shift would add 6,300 seniors to Daly City’s senior population. This figure could be an
important one because, unlike the declining population growth among younger people who typically
live with their parents, an increase in the older population will create additional housing demand and
the need for housing targeted specifically to a senior population.
Figure HE-5: Age of Daly City Residents (1980 to 2030)
                        1980                             2000                                      2030
                                           65 or older
           65 or older                                                           65 or older
                                               12%
               9%                                                                    15%
                                                                 17 or                                    17 or
                                17 or                          younger                                  younger
                              younger                            22%                                      19%
                                26%
                                                    18 to 64 years old
                 18 to 64 years old                        66%                               18 to 64 years old
                        64%                                                                         66%
        Source: U.S. Census; Daly City ECD
Ethnic and Racial Characteristics
As the most populated city in San Mateo County, Daly City is also one of the most ethnically and racially
diverse. Ethnic and racial data from the 2000 Census is presented in Figure HE-6. This information is not
directly comparable with information from the 1990 Census because of changes in the way racial
information is collected. The 2000 Census, for the first time in census history, allowed persons to indicate
more than one race. Almost four percent of the City's population identified themselves as multi-racial,
which is identified as “other” in Figure HE-6.
Based on these Census figures, Daly City appears to be about 51 percent Asian and about 18 percent
White; in contrast, the County is about 50 percent White and only 20 percent Asian. Filipinos make up
the dominant racial category in the City, comprising almost 32 percent of the population. In the 1990
Census, they were 27 percent of the City's population. Hispanics comprise about 22 percent of the
population, and African Americans make up less than five percent of the population for both the City
and County.
48                                                                     Daly City 2030 General Plan | Housing Element

         Figure HE-6: Racial Composition of Daly City and San Mateo County Residents (2000)
                          Daly City                                             San Mateo County
          Native American                                                                African American
         or Pacific Islander     Other                                                          3%
                 1%                                                                                Asian
                                           Hispanic                                                  20%
                                              22%                                                        Native American
                                                                                                        or Pacific Islander
          Asian                                                                                                 2%
           51%                                                        White                             Other
                                                                       49%                                4%
                                           White
                                            18%
                                                                                                 Hispanic
                                  African American
                                                                                                    22%
                                         4%
         Source: U.S. Census
Employment Trends
Employment growth within Daly City and adjacent jurisdictions has been historically affected by a
number of factors, including natural population growth, in-migration, and regional job growth within the
Bay Area. As discussed in the subsequent section, the jobs/housing ratio in Daly City is dissimilar to many
other similarly-sized jurisdictions in the Bay Area, many of which provide more jobs than housing units.
Table HE-6 below shows employment growth in Daly City in the context of Daly City’s jobshed and the
County, as projected by ABAG. For this analysis, the Daly City “jobshed” is the area roughly within a 30
minute travel distance within which persons will seek employment. It is comprised of all inland
jurisdictions on the San Francisco Peninsula north of Highway 92, including the cities of San Mateo, Foster
City, and San Francisco. An analysis of the jobshed is important due to the fact that the provision of jobs
to Daly City residents -- and the demand for housing which results -- is caused largely by market forces
outside Daly City’s jurisdictional boundaries.
         Table HE-6: Employment Growth within Daly City and Region (2000-2030)
                                                   Projected      Projected          Projected
                         Place         2000           2010           2020               2030
                     Daly City      16,450        19,330    18%  23,510     22%      27,920     19%
           Daly City jobshed       897,720       841,070    -6% 973,810     16%   1,139,290     17%
         San Mateo County          386,590       363,060    -6% 423,100     17%     487,420     15%
               Daly City as %
                                       1.8%           2.3%           2.4%               1.8%
                  of Jobshed
               Daly City as %
                                       4.3%           5.3%           5.6%               5.7%
                    of County
         Source: ABAG Projections 2007
As of 2000, about 16,500 jobs existed within Daly City, a number expected to increase to almost 28,000
jobs by 2030, an increase of 60 percent. If these ABAG employment projections prove accurate, job
growth in Daly City will outpace the rate of growth for both the Daly City jobshed and the County as a
Daly City 2030 General Plan | Housing Element                                                                          49

whole between 2010 and 2030, which are projected to realize 25 percent increases within the same
period.
Based on the 2000 Census, the estimated number of employed persons within Daly City is 53,850 (mid-
2008 estimate). Approximately 51 percent of Daly City’s employed labor force works in San Francisco,
about 17 percent works in either Daly City or South San Francisco and the remainder work in other Bay
Area communities.
Jobs/Housing Balance
The concept of the jobs/housing balance stems from the ideal that a balanced community is one in
which residents can both live and work. Implicit in the concept is a broad mix of housing types to
accommodate households (workers) of a range of income categories. The jobs/housing balance refers
to the distribution of workers within a given geographic area, like Daly City. An ideal jobs/housing
balance, where there is adequate housing to accommodate employed residents, is approximately 1.0
to 1.5 (one to one and half jobs for each dwelling unit). In theory, this ideal balance is achieved when
the available housing choices complement the earning potential of available jobs within the
geographic area.
Since the early 1990s, the Bay Area has suffered from a housing shortage caused largely by the inability
of housing construction to keep pace with the amount of job creation in the region. This economic
growth has caused a significant imbalance in the ratio of jobs to housing units, especially in places like
the San Francisco Peninsula, where the rate of job growth far exceeds that of residential construction.
Combined with a number of other factors such as natural population increase and higher wages, the
jobs/housing imbalance has resulted in spiraling housing costs for both renters and homeowners.
Communities like Daly City, which are largely residential and within easy commuting distance to major
jobs centers in San Francisco and the Silicon Valley, are heavily impacted by this imbalance.
         Figure HE-7: Jobs/Housing Balance for Daly City and Select Jurisdictions (2005)
                     Daly City          0.54
                                                                       Ratio
                    San Bruno                   0.90                of Jobs to
                                                                     Housing
                                                                       Units
           San Mateo County                              1.27
                     Bay Area                             1.29
            Daly City jobshed                                 1.42
                San Francisco
                                                                  1.56
                   County
          South San Francisco                                                    2.06
         Source: California Department of Finance; Association of Bay Area Governments
In 2005, jobs/housing ratio exceeded 1.0 in a number of Bay Area counties and larger communities
surrounding Daly City (see Figure HE-7). San Francisco, South San Francisco, and San Mateo County all
had jobs/housing ratios exceeding 1.25, meaning that at any given time, there were 25 percent more
jobs available than housing units. This figure is generally true of the Bay Area region as a whole, as well.
The immediately adjacent community of South San Francisco has one of the highest jobs/housing ratio
in the state, exceeding two jobs per housing unit.
50                                                                      Daly City 2030 General Plan | Housing Element

At the opposite end of the jobs/housing spectrum from South San Francisco is Daly City, where the ratio
was 0.54 in 2005, meaning that there were twice as many housing units as there were jobs available to
residents. While this may have the outward appearance of an abundance of housing within Daly City,
Daly City’s geographic location on the San Francisco Peninsula allows the city to serve as a bedroom
community to the surrounding region, which has an abundance of jobs compared to housing
opportunities.
Although the jobs/housing ratio remains high in the Bay Area region high, the imbalance between jobs
and housing units has decreased slightly since 2000, when the dot-com bust shed as many as 400,000
jobs from Bay Area job rolls. Figure HE-8 shows the historical jobs/house ratio since 2000 for the Daly City
jobshed (see jobshed explanation in Employment section). It is noteworthy that the reduction to the
jobs/housing ratio appears to have had no effect on the median home price in Daly City, which
increased 70 percent for single family detached homes and 50 percent for condominiums between
2000 and 2005. This observation could support the notion that, in the Daly City jobshed and Bay Area
region, strong demand for ownership housing remains high despite a declining job market and is caused
by factors external to this market, including increasing household formation, international immigration,
and financial considerations, such as low interest rates and market speculation.
                     Figure HE-8: Jobs/Housing Imbalance for Daly City Jobshed (2000-2005)
                                          900,000                                                            2.00
                                          800,000
        Number of Housing Units or Jobs
                                          700,000
                                                                                                                    Jobs/Housing Ratio
                                          600,000
                                          500,000
                                                                                                     1.42    1.50
                                          400,000
                                          300,000
                                          200,000
                                          100,000
                                              -                                                              1.00
                                                    2000       2001   2002          2003   2004      2005
                                                                             Year
                                                           Housing            Jobs            Jobs/Housing Ratio
       Source: California Department of Finance; Association of Bay Area Governments
Household Income
Table HE-7 on the subsequent page identifies the approximate number of households in each of nine
income categories reported by the Census in 2000. As shown in the table, households earning less than
$150,000 constituted over 90 percent of the income ranges. The household median income at the time
was $62,310, which was slightly less than that of the County.
Daly City 2030 General Plan | Housing Element                                                                                            51

                            Table HE-7: Daly City Households by Income Group
                             Income Level                   Households           %
                             $0 to $14,999                         2,718        9%
                             $15,000 to $29,999                    3,515       11%
                             $30,000 to $44,999                    4,021       13%
                             $45,000 to $59,999                    4,303       14%
                             $60,000 to $74,999                    4,214       14%
                             $75,000 to $99,999                    5,144       17%
                             $100,000 to $149,999                  4,731       15%
                             $150,000 to $199,999                  1,309        4%
                             $200,000 or more                        839        3%
                             Total households                    30,794
                             1999 Household median income (DC)            $62,310
                             1999 Household median income (County)        $70,819
                            Source: U.S. Census
Figure HE-9 below identifies the number of households by income group for both Daly City and San
Mateo County. The data, which was developed for Daly City’s 2004 Housing Element, was calculated
utilizing ABAG's definition of income groups and applying it to the household income data provided by
2000 Census. San Mateo County's median household income, which is higher than the City's median
household income, was used as a basis for the four income groups. The resulting figures estimate that
24.4 percent of households in Daly City are very low-income, compared to 21.1 percent of households
for the County. Alternatively, 41.2 percent of households in the County are above moderate,
compared to 32.4 percent of households in the City.
Figure HE-9:        Existing Households by Income Group (2000)
                          Daly City                                            San Mateo County
                                        Very Low
                                         (<50%)                                                  Very Low
 Above Moderate                            24%                                                    (<50%)
       (>120%)
                                                                                                   21%
         32%                                                  Above Moderate
                                                                  (>120%)
                                                                    41%
                                                                                                        Low
                                                                                                     (51%-80%)
                                             Low                                                        18%
                                          (51%-80%)
                                             20%
                Moderate
                                                                                      Moderate
               (81%-120%)
                                                                                     (81%-120%)
                  24%
                                                                                        20%
Source:             U.S. Census
Note: Figures are close estimates using percentages of the 1999 San Mateo County median household income.
Table HE-8 indicates that seven percent of Daly City's population is below the poverty level. The County
level is approximately the same at six percent. For both geographic areas, persons between the ages
of 18 and 64 make up about two-thirds of the population below the poverty level, and seniors comprise
close to ten percent. Children under 18 years of age are about 25 percent of the population below
poverty level in both Daly City and San Mateo County.
52                                                                   Daly City 2030 General Plan | Housing Element

                 Table HE-8: Persons Below the Poverty Level (2000)
                                                Daly City                        San Mateo County
                                                     Percent of                           Percent of
                  Age Group             Persons      Population            Persons       Population
                  0 to 17                 1,813           8%                10,285             6%
                  18 to 64                4,817           6%                26,059             5%
                  Over 65                  635            1%                 4,348             1%
                                          7,265           7%                40,692             6%
                 Source: U.S. Census
Density
While Daly City’s population has increased significantly over the past few decades, the area that
encompasses Daly City has not. A direct result of this is that Daly City is second only to San Francisco as
the densest city in the Bay Area. The following table illustrates Daly City’s density when compared to
adjacent cities and cities of the same size in the Bay Area.
        Figure HE-10: Daly City Population Density Compared (2008)
                San Francisco                                                           17,320
                      Daly City                                            13,270
                    San Mateo                              7,829
                    San Bruno                              7,719
          South San Francisco                           6,957
                                                                 Persons per square mile
                    Sunnyvale                        6,197
                        Vallejo               4,021
                       Concord               3,968
                     Richmond              3,415
                      Hayward              3,337
                       Fairfield         2,796
        Sources: State Department of Finance (population); Wikipedia (city size)
Public Transit Use
As identified in Figure HE-11, residents of Daly City are significantly more inclined to use public
transportation for getting to work than their counterparts in other cities and in the entirety of San Mateo
County. When compared to the residents of the entire State of California, Daly City residents are almost
four times as likely to use public transit as a method of travel to and from work. The reasons for this are
very likely Daly City’s relatively easy access to Sam Trans and Muni bus services, and close proximity to
two BART stations, both of which provide public parking.
Daly City 2030 General Plan | Housing Element                                                            53

         Figure HE-11: Daly City Workers Aged 16+ Using Public Transit
         San Francisco                                                       31%
             Daly City                                18%
             Bay Area                   10%
   South San Francisco                 9%
            San Bruno                8%
    San Mateo County                7%
            California          5%
                 Source: U.S. Census
The propensity of Daly City’s residents to use public transit is an important factor in the evaluation of the
City’s parking policies as those policies relate to affordable housing construction and City’s promotion of
transit-oriented development along Mission Street and Geneva Avenue, and within close proximity to
public transportation hubs.
Housing Characteristics
This section provides an evaluation of both the current composition and condition of housing in Daly
City, including the extent to which housing construction is fulfilling the needs of new residents. Housing
affordability is also addressed in this section. Because the economy of Daly City is deeply integrated
into the economies of adjacent communities, much of the analysis of Daly City’s housing conditions are
best evaluated in the context of these communities, the County, and the greater Bay Area.
Housing Types and Tenures
Single-family residences continue to be the predominant type of housing in Daly City, making up about
65 percent of all housing units. Buildings with between two and four units (including duplexes) comprise
nine percent of the housing stock. Buildings with at least five units comprise 24 percent of the housing
stock and mobile homes make up two percent. As shown in Figure HE-12, this composition of the
housing stock closely mirrors that of the entire county.
54                                                                Daly City 2030 General Plan | Housing Element

                 Figure HE-12:             Housing Types: Daly City and San Mateo County (2008)
                                        Daly City                                          San Mateo County
                                         Mobile Homes                                          Mobile Homes
                                              2%                                                    1%
                     Buildings 5+ Units                                   Buildings 5+ Units
                            24%                                                  26%
                 Buildings 2-4 Units                                   Buildings 2-4 Units
                         9%                           Single Family            7%                             Single Family
                                                           65%                                                     66%
                 Source: State Department of Finance
As identified in Table HE-9, most owner-occupied housing units are single-family homes. Between 1990
and 2000, the total number of single and multiple-family units for owners and renters increased reflecting
a slight trend towards homeownership. Most of the single and multiple-family units for renters increased
as well, except for one unit single family attached units and five or more unit buildings. There was a
decrease in mobile homes for both owners and renters. Mobile homes will continue to represent a very
small portion of housing in Daly City. The Franciscan Mobile Home Park is the only mobile home park in
Daly City and provides housing that is fairly affordable relative to the other types of housing units in the
City. Also, there was a reduction from 1990 to 2000 for “other” types of housing units (e.g. RV, van, boat)
in regards to both owners and renters.
          Table HE-9:              Housing Types: Daly City and San Mateo County (2008)
                                               Owner Occupied                    Renter Occupied                     2000
                                              1990      2000                   1990            2000                 Totals
           Single Family                     14,803          16,296             3,679                  3,779           20,075
           Duplexes                                98            187              531                    726                913
           Multiple Family                     1,174           1,484            7,772                  7,706             9,190
           Mobile Home                            537            507                67                    31                538
           Other                                  235               11            137                       0                11
           Totals                           16,877           18,485          12,186                 12,242             29,063
            % of Totals                                         60%                                     40%              100%
           Source: HUD Consolidated Plan 2003/04-2007/08, 1990 and 2000 Census
In addition to owner and renter occupied housing, some Daly City residents live in group quarters. The
Census defines group quarters as living arrangements such as nursing homes or rooming houses, which
are not households. According to the 2000 Census, 790 persons lived in group quarters, and 70.6
percent of these were over 65 years of age. Of the persons living in group quarters, 532 were
institutionalized and 258 were non-institutionalized.
Housing Construction
Estimates for the number of housing units in Daly City are presented in Table HE-10 and reflect data for
completed housing units reported to the State by the Daly City Building Division. As identified in the
table, the residential growth rate in Daly City has decreased significantly since the 1980s and 1990s,
when 10-year growth rates were 8.5 and seven percent, respectively. Since 2000, approximately 300
units have been constructed in the City, representing a 1.5 percent growth rate.
Daly City 2030 General Plan | Housing Element                                                                                   55

     Table HE-10: Housing Units and Vacancy Rate (1980-2008)
                                                                                      Growth Rates
                                    1980       1990      2000        2008         1980s      1990s      2000s
      Single Family               17,533     19,027    20,355      20,653          8.5%       7.0%       1.5%
      Multiple Family              9,817     10,433    10,402      10,455          6.3%      -0.3%       0.5%
      Mobile Homes                   461         612      556         670         32.8%      -9.2%      20.5%
      Total Housing Units         27,811    30,072     31,313      31,778          8.1%       4.1%       1.5%
     Source: U.S. Census; State Department of Finance
By comparison, the residential growth rate in Daly City is half that of San Mateo County as a whole,
significantly smaller than most adjacent jurisdictions, and much smaller than the Bay Area region and
state. There are a number of potential reasons for this, which will be explored in the Constraints to
Housing Production section of this Housing Element. Chief among these is the relatively limited supply of
developable land within Daly City given the lack of parcels that are large enough for substantial
development projects.
         Figure HE-13: Comparative Housing Construction Rates (2000-2008)
                     Daly City      1.5%
            San Mateo County              3.0%
           South San Francisco               3.4%
                 San Francisco                    4.4%
                    San Bruno                            6.3%
                     Bay Area                                 7.1%
                    California                                              10.1%
         Source: State Department of Finance
Households to Housing Unit Growth Ratio
As identified in the previous section, the rate of new housing construction in Daly City has been in
decline since the 1980s, when the annual average housing units constructed was about 225 units per
year. In the 1990s, the annual average decreased to about 125 units per year. Between 2000 and 2008,
this annual average decreased sharply to about 52 units per year (467 units constructed in nine years).
These figures include second unit construction.
Despite declining housing construction numbers, both population and household growth continue to
increase at a disproportional rate to the housing construction rate. Between 2000 and 2008 the number
of housing units increased by approximately 1.5 percent while the number of households in Daly City
increased by about 2.7 percent. These comparative growth rates show that significant numbers of new
households are finding housing accommodation within the existing housing stock, i.e., multiple
households sharing a single dwelling unit.
56                                                                 Daly City 2030 General Plan | Housing Element
Figure HE-14 provides a comparative statistic illustrating the extent to which new housing construction
has accommodated new household growth since the 1980s. The year-by-year analysis provided in the
graphic shows how housing construction has not kept pace with the annual average influx and
formation of new households within the city (on average, 103 new households per year). In 2007, for
example, only 23 new housing units were constructed. Assuming 103 new households were added to
the City population during this year, this number exceeded the number of new dwelling units by a
factor of 4.5. This factor is identified as the Household to Dwelling Unit ratio (HH/DU ratio). Ideally, the
HH/DU ratio is 1.0, meaning that one new dwelling unit has been constructed for each new household.
    Figure HE-14: Household to Dwelling Unit Growth Ratio (1980-2008)
                                                        126
                                                                                                   10.3
                                                                               HH/DU Ratio
                                                                               DU Constructed
                                                  75           73
                                                                           59   4.7            4.5
                                                                                        51
                                         3.7
     IDEAL = 1.0
                                                                        1.7            2.0
                          1.3                   1.4             1.4
             0.9                         28             0.8                                         10
                                                                                22              23
            1980s       1990s           2000   2001   2002     2003    2004    2005   2006    2007 2008
    Source: State Department of Finance; Daly City Housing Element (1987); Bay Area Census
As identified in the graphic, the HH/DU ratio has exceeded 1.0 for every year since 2000, except for 2002
when 126 housing unit were constructed. While the completion of two large projects presently under
construction (Landmark Daly City and The Geneva – 167 units total) will provide additional housing
opportunities as the close of the decade nears, these projects will not significantly impact the overall
lack of housing construction that occurred during the earlier part of the decade.
In general, these findings support notions that have been suggested anecdotally that Daly City’s
existing neighborhoods are becoming more crowded as new residents seek unconventional housing
solutions to accommodate their families (e.g., renting rooms within existing single-family homes).
According to the Community Priorities Survey completed as part of the Envision Day City (General Plan
Update) process, resident respondents identified “It’s More Crowded” as their first choice as a long-term
trend that is changing Daly City for their worse. Similarly, respondents identified “More Affordable
Housing Opportunities” as a top priority for the community.
Vacancy Rate
Vacancy rates serve as good indicators of existing housing need because they identify the extent to
which housing choice is available within the marketplace. Generally, a higher vacancy rate is optimal
from the perspective of the would-be renter or home purchaser. As a direct result of more units being
vacant, housing supply and therefore housing choices are more plentiful. Consequently, housing prices
remain at reasonable levels because the number of households demanding housing is within better
proportion to the supply of housing in the marketplace. The optimal vacancy rate for rental housing is
five percent and two percent for ownership housing.
Daly City 2030 General Plan | Housing Element                                                             57

Figure HE-15: Comparative Vacancy Rates (1990-2008)
                              1.2%
             Daly City
                                                 3.8%
                                1.4%
            San Bruno
                                               3.5%         2008
                                                            1990
                                  1.6%
   South San Francisco
                                          3.0%
                                    1.9%
    San Mateo County
                                                  3.9%
                                             3.3%
             Bay Area
                                                          5.0%
                                                       4.7%
         San Francisco
                                                                         7.0%
                                                                 5.9%
            California
                                                                           7.2%
Source: State Department of Finance; U.S. Census (1990 and 2000 data)
Figure HE-15 identifies the historical vacancy rate of all housing units in Daly City, surrounding
communities, the Bay Area region, and state between 1990 and 2008. Currently, Daly City has the
lowest vacancy rate of any of these jurisdictions with only a 1.2 percent of units vacant. This rate reflects
a considerable decrease since 1990 when the vacancy rate stood at 3.8 percent. The decrease in Daly
City’s vacancy represents the single largest decline in a vacancy rate from among the jurisdictions
identified.
The vacancy rate among Daly City’s neighbors in San Mateo County and including the county is
generally the same, where none of the vacancy rates exceed two percent and all rates have
experienced significant vacancy declines since 1990. According to State Department of Finance
figures, Daly City had the sixth lowest vacancy rate in the entire State of California in 2008. Five
communities in San Mateo County were among the lowest ten vacancy rates in the state.
For-Sale Housing Cost and Affordability
Like many communities throughout California, Daly City experienced a significant escalation in for-sale
housing prices between 2000 and 2007, and is now experiencing a significant price correction as the
impact of the home foreclosures and inability for would-be buyers to obtain financing continues to send
the median sales price for both single-family homes and condominiums downward.
58                                                                    Daly City 2030 General Plan | Housing Element

                                   Figure HE-16: Median Sales Price for Single-family homes and Condos (2000-2009)
                                                  25% Change from 2000
                                                  86% Change from 2000
                               $800,000
                                                                                                           $745,000
                                                      Single Family Homes                       $726,500
                               $700,000               Condominiums
                                                                            $685,000
   Annual Median Sales Price
                               $600,000
                                                                 $530,000
                                                                                                           $500,000
                               $500,000
                                          $400,000                                                                           $500,000
                               $400,000                                                             $447,500
                                                                                   $410,000
                               $300,000                               $324,250
                                                                                                                             $300,000
                                           $275,000
                               $200,000
                                                  82% Change from 2000
                               $100,000
                                                   9% Change from 2000
                                   $-
                                           2000       2001    2002    2003       2004    2005      2006     2007      2008   2009
                                   Source: Multiple Listing Service
                                   Note: 2009 sales prices reflect the median sales price in January 2009 only
According to data compiled by the Multiple Listing Services (MLS), the median sales price for both
resale and new single-family homes in the first quarter of 2009 was $500,000, down about one-third from
the $745,000 median price peak reported by MLS in 2007. The downturn in the condominium market has
been even greater, with the median sales price down about 40 percent from the 2007 price peak when
median sales price for a condominium was $500,000. Notwithstanding the recent market downturn, the
median sales price for single-family homes remains 25 percent higher than the 2000 price level at
$500,000, while the condominium median sales price is up nine percent from this time.
The recent fluctuations in Daly City’s for-sale housing prices can be largely attributed to the deflation of
the housing market bubble in the Bay Area region during which rapid increases in the home values
since 2000 reached unsustainable levels relative to household incomes, price-to-rent ratios, and other
economic indicators of affordability. While the causes of the Bay Area housing bubble are complex,
factors believed to have contributed to it include historically low interest rates, lax lending standards,
and a market speculation.
Within the context of the Housing Element, it is important to recognize how these factors have had a
unique effect on Daly City, which has a large minority and foreign-born population. According to area
realtors and county housing counselors, most Daly City homeowners facing foreclosures were immigrant
buyers who have never owned a home before. As of March 2008, almost all Daly City homeowners
facing foreclosure were minorities — mostly Hispanic and Filipino (San Francisco Examiner, Daly City
Foreclosure Rate Highest in County, March 31, 2008). Many of these buyers likely purchased homes in
Daly City because of its proximity to major job centers on the San Francisco Peninsula and Daly City’s
relative affordability.
By comparison, Daly City is among the more affordable communities in San Mateo County. Figure HE-
17 identifies the sales price per square foot for homes sold in Daly City from July through October 2008.
Daly City 2030 General Plan | Housing Element                                                                                           59

                                Figure HE-17: Comparative Median Price Per Square Foot (July – Oct 2008)
                                        East Palo Alto                   $276
                                South San Francisco                                    $409
                                            Daly City                                  $411
                                        Redwood City                                     $436
                                           San Bruno                                          $458
                                             Pacifica                                                $507
                                           San Mateo                                                   $540
                                          Menlo Park                                                         $578
                                Source: MDA Dataquick; SFGate
The California Association of Realtors (CAR) provides a monthly housing affordability index that
measures the percentage of first time homebuyers that can afford to purchase an entry level home in
California and within various counties and regions throughout California. According to indices reported
by CAR between 2003 and the end of 2008, the affordability index decreased discernibly between the
beginning of 2003 and mid-2007 when the index for both San Mateo County and the Bay Area as a
whole settled beneath the 20 percent mark. Since this time however, the affordability index has
increased considerably within California to almost 60 percent, although affordability levels within San
Mateo and San Francisco counties remain beneath 40 percent.
Figure HE-18: First Time Homebuyer Housing Affordability Index for SM/SF Counties, the Bay Area, and
              California (2000-2009)
                           60
                           55
                                                            California
                           50
                                                            San Francisco Bay Area
                           45                               San Francisco City and County
 Affordability Index (%)
                           40                               San Mateo County
                           35
                           30
                           25
                           20
                           15
                           10
                                 2003                2004        2005           2006                        2007     2008
Source: California Association of Realtors
60                                                                                       Daly City 2030 General Plan | Housing Element

Rental Housing Cost and Affordability
Not only have prospective homeowners suffered from the housing affordability crisis in the region,
renters have also faced high housing costs. Figure HE-19 identifies the average rent paid during the
second quarter of 2008 in Daly City and selected communities within San Mateo County for which data
is available. According to this data, average rents in Daly City range from just under $1,100 for a studio
apartment to about $2,450 for a three bedroom apartment unit. This data does not reflect rentals of
existing single-family homes and condominiums.
Rents in Daly City are generally as affordable, or more affordable, than the rents of adjacent
communities identified (Pacifica and Redwood City). At the three-bedroom price point, Daly City rents
are significantly lower than those of the other communities that have three-bedroom apartments, for
which monthly rents are upwards of $3,500. According to figures provided by the U.S. Census (2000),
about 20 percent of all rental units within Daly City are studios, 37 percent are one-bedroom units, 24
percent are two-bedroom units, and 19 percent are three-bedroom units.
               Figure HE-19: Comparative Average Rent for Apartment Buildings (Q2 2008)
                                                                                                                           studio
                                                                             $3,666
                                                                                                                           1bd 1bth
                                                                                                          $3,506           2bd 1bth                                   $3,451
                                                                                                                           2bd 2bth
                                                                                                 $2,803                    3bd 2bth
                                  $2,001                                                                                                                                                          $2,490
                                                               $1,931                                                                                   $1,876
                                        $2,454
                                                                                        $1,985
                                                                    $2,292                                                     $1,954                                                    $1,875
               $1,094                            $1,410                                $1,881
                                                                                                                   $1,547                                    $2,273
                                                                                                                                                                                        $1,811
                                                                                                                                               $1,558
                                                                                                                   $1,531
                   $1,336                             $1,751
                                                                                                                      $1,749
                         $1,779                                                                                                                                                $1,079
                                                                                                                                        $869
                  Daly City                        Foster City                        Menlo Park                     Pacifica           Redwood City                              South San
                                                                                                                                                                                  Francisco
               Source: RealFacts MarketOverview; 21 Elements
Figure HE-20 identifies the hourly and annual incomes that would be necessary for a household to rent
each of the apartment types available in Daly City. This analysis assumes that, ideally, monthly rent
payments do not exceed 30 percent of the household’s annual gross income. Given the average
household size in Daly City, it is very likely that households would opt for two- and three-bedroom
apartments. In order to be comfortably able to do so, it would be necessary to earn $80,000 and
$98,000 to rent a two- or three-bedroom unit, respectively. These incomes equate to hourly incomes of
$38 and $47, respectively, for a single wage earner household. It is noteworthy that, unlike homeowners,
renters are unable to deduct rental payments and passed-through property tax from their adjusted
gross income for Federal and State income tax purposes.
Daly City 2030 General Plan | Housing Element                                                                                                                                                              61

                                            Figure HE-20: Rental Affordability Index (Second Quarter 2008)
                                                                       $110,000                                                                                            $50
                                                                                                   Annual Household Income
                                                                                                                                                                 $47       $45
                                                                       $100,000                    Hourly Income (single wage earner)
                                                                                                                                                                           $40
                                                                                                                                                                 $98,160
                                               Annual Income (Gross)
                                                                        $90,000                                                                     $38
                                                                                                                                                                           $35
                                                                                                                                  $34
                                                                                                                                                                                 Hourly Wage
                                                                                                                                                                           $30
                                                                        $80,000
                                                                                                                                                     $80,040
                                                                                                                                                                           $25
                                                                                                              $26
                                                                        $70,000
                                                                                             $21                                   $71,160                                 $20
                                                                        $60,000                                                                                            $15
                                                                                                                 $53,440                                                   $10
                                                                        $50,000
                                                                                                                                                                           $5
                                                                                                $43,760
                                                                        $40,000                                                                                            $0
                                                                                            studio          1bd 1bth            2bd 1bth          2bd 2bth     3bd 2bth
                                                                                                                          Apartment Type
                                            Source: RealFacts MarketOverview; 21 Elements
The preceding analysis is substantiated by a report prepared by the National Low-income Housing
Coalition in December 2008 which indicated that 48 percent of renters in San Mateo County are unable
to afford fair market rate (FMR) for a two bedroom apartment. Their annual Out of Reach report
calculates a housing wage (i.e., amount a worker would have to earn per hour in a 40 hour work week
to afford a two bedroom unit at the area's FMR). The housing wage rate calculated for San Mateo
County was $28.06. Using the minimum wage rate in California of $5.75 per hour, the report also
calculated that a worker earning the minimum wage would have to work 195 hours per week in order to
afford a two-bedroom unit at the area's FMR.
Overpayment
Overpayment involves the number of lower-income households, both owner and renter occupied, that
are paying more than 30 percent of their monthly income for housing. Figure HE-21 provides data on
housing costs for all households for various income groups in Daly City based on information from the
2000 Census. The data reflects that overpayment is an issue for more renters than homeowners. Thirty
percent of owner-occupied respondents from all income groups spent greater than 30 percent of their
household income on monthly housing costs. By comparison, forty-two percent of rental respondents
from all income groups spent greater than 30 percent of their household income on housing costs. For
both homeowners and renters, the percentage of households facing overpayment decreased as
household income increased.
       Figure HE-21: Percent of Renters and Owners Overpaying for Housing (2000)
                                                                                  0%
                                        $100,000 and over
                                                                                       5%
                                                                                                                                        Owners
                                                                                   3%
                                        $75,000 to $99,000
                                                                                                      25%                               Renters
        Gross Household Income (2000)
                                                                                              15%
                                        $50,000 to $74,999
                                                                                                                    43%
                                                                                                                               56%
                                        $35,000 to $49,999
                                                                                                                             53%
                                        $20,000 to $34,999                                                                                          83%
                                                                                                                          49%
                                                                                                                                                         86%
                                         $10,000 to 19,999
                                                                                                                       46%
                                         Less than $10,000                                                                              66%
                                                                                                                                                   80%
                                                                                                               Percent Overpaying
       Source: U.S. Census (2000)
62                                                                                                                                                   Daly City 2030 General Plan | Housing Element
Overcrowding
The United State Department of Housing and Urban Development defines “overcrowding” as having
more than 1.01 persons per room. Balconies, porches, bathrooms, foyers, halls, utility rooms, unfinished
attics, basements and other spaces used for storage are not counted as rooms. Living rooms and
kitchens are counted. According to the 2000 Census, the City of Daly City had 7,945 overcrowded
housing units or approximately 26% of all occupied housing units in the City. Based on an average
household size of 3.34 persons from the 2000 Census, Daly City had an estimated population of 26,536
persons living in overcrowded units. This is a 50% increase from the estimated number based on the
1990 Census which indicated 3.153 persons per household and 17,540 overcrowded housing units. The
number of persons per household in Daly City has increased and continues to be greater than the
persons per household figure for San Mateo County. Recent data from Census 2000 indicates an
average household size for the County of 2.74 (up from 2.64).
Figure HE-22: Overcrowding by Tenure
          Owner Occupied Units                           Renter Occupied Units                     All Occupied Units
         1.51 or more                                                                           1.51 or more
              10%                                 1.51 or more                                      15%
 1.01 to 1.50                                          24%
     9%
                                                                                    1.01 to 1.50
                                                                                        11%
                                                                    1.00 or less
                                              1.01 to 1.50              63%                                 1.00 or less
                      1.00 or less                13%                                                           74%
                          81%
Source: U.S. Census (2000)
Figure HE-22 above shows the number of overcrowded units by tenure throughout the City. Like the
problem of overpayment recently discussed, overcrowding appears to be an issue more common to
renters than homeowners. Fifty-six percent of overcrowded units are renter-occupied, and 44 percent
are owner occupied. Looking at the total number of housing units, 19 percent of owner-occupied
housing are overcrowded, and 36 percent of renter-occupied housing are overcrowded.
Existing Housing Conditions and Rehabilitation Needs
The Planning Division has updated a city-wide windshield survey of existing housing conditions
completed for the 2004 Housing Element update. As reported in 2004, survey results are organized
according to the census tracts as defined by the U.S. Census in 2000.
The rating criteria for the survey are as follows:
     1 - Housing structure is in sound condition and requires minimal improvements
     2 - Housing structure is in need of minor rehabilitation
     3 - Housing structure demonstrates the need for major or substantial rehabilitation
     4 - Housing structure is in critical condition that is beyond rehabilitating or economically infeasible to
          fix.
The housing survey focused only on the exterior structural features visible from the street such as walls,
stairs, roofs, porches, windows, doors, garages, and miscellaneous features (e.g., chimneys, gutters,
etc.). As a result, the housing condition survey is inherently limited in determining the problems within
each housing unit in the City and, therefore, does not represent the most accurate summary of housing
conditions.
Daly City 2030 General Plan | Housing Element                                                                            63

All existing housing structures, whether vacant, single family or multifamily, were evaluated under the
survey. As for multifamily housing, the survey methodology generally assessed their conditions by
building, not individual units. For instance, a building containing 15 apartment units was evaluated as
one structure. A total of 19,870 residential structures were surveyed.
Table HE-11 displays the survey results for housing stock with minor, major, or critical problems. The
housing stock surveyed and determined to be in sound condition were not included in Table HE-11,
which examines housing rehabilitation need, because they are not in need of rehabilitation assistance.
The quantity of housing by census tract or City-wide in critical condition is negligible. Older
neighborhoods east of Interstate 280 appear to have greater housing improvement needs. The
Bayshore, Crocker, Vista Grande, Top of the Hill (i.e., Census tracts #6002, 6004, 6006, and 6007)
neighborhoods, according to Table HE-11 contain up to 43 percent of the City's housing stock in need of
minor improvements, 69 percent requiring major rehabilitation, and 88 percent in critical condition.
These four census tracts contain some of the oldest housing in the City. Housing age, however, should
not be assumed to automatically correspond to housing conditions without considering other factors
such as regular and adequate maintenance.
Newer neighborhoods such as Skyline, St. Francis, and Serramonte (i.e., Census tracts #6010, 6014,
6015.01, 6015.02, 6016.03, 6016.04, 6016.05) have a larger quantity of housing in need of minor or major
repairs than was revealed in the 1986 survey. One explanation may be that the homes in these areas
are showing the effects of aging and insufficient maintenance. Also, homes situated near the coast
face greater exposure to moisture.
                Table HE-11: Housing Conditions Survey (Updated 2009)
                 Census                                          Number of Structures by Condition
                 Tract       Neighborhood                      Minor             Major           Critical
                 6002        Bayshore                           544                54               3
                 6003        Southern Hills                      75                 2               0
                 6004        Crocker                            175                19               2
                 6005        Hillside                            94                 1               0
                 6006        Vista Grande                       129                27               1
                 6007        Top of the Hill                    257                25               2
                 6008        Westlake Apartments                 15                 1               0
                 6009        Westlake                           108                 5               0
                 6010        Skyline                            287                20               0
                 6011        Westlake-Southgate                  61                 2               0
                 6012        Civic Center                        27                 9               0
                 6013        East Market                         62                 2               1
                 6014        St. Francis - North                191                 8               0
                 6015.01     St. Francis - Southwest            181                 0               0
                 6015.02     St. Francis - Southeast             22                 2               0
                 6016.01     Franciscan Mobile Home              25                 0               0
                 6016.03     Serramonte - Southeast             192                 4               0
                 6016.04     Serramonte- North                    0                 0               0
                 6016.05     Serramonte - Southwest             138                 0               0
                                                         Total 2,583              181               9
                Source: City of Daly City Department of Economic and Community Development
The primary difference between the housing condition survey completed for the 2004 Housing Element
and the previous one from 1986 is that results from the current survey show a larger number of housing
structures throughout the City in need of minor (i.e., 2,558 structures versus 931 structures in 1986) and
major (i.e.,181 structures versus 97 in 1986) rehabilitation. The combination of increased age and
delayed upkeep seem to be possible factors justifying the differences. However, the number of homes
64                                                                  Daly City 2030 General Plan | Housing Element
in critical condition, while very small, decreased from 10 to nine between the 1986 survey and the most
recently completed one. The City’s existing housing rehabilitation programs and policies will continue to
play an important role in improving the City’s housing inventory.
Conversations with Code Enforcement personnel and a regional nonprofit agency providing legal
assistance with housing issues have expressed concerns about the conditions of secondary units,
particularly illegal secondary units. Both have cited cases where tenants have been living in illegal
secondary units that are not maintained and pose health and safety issues. In response to this, the City
adopted an ordinance requiring property owners to provide relocation assistance to tenants forced to
vacate their unit because of code enforcement activity.
According to the 2000 Census, the median year of the construction of housing units in Daly City is 1962.
An estimate of the maximum housing rehabilitation need of the City is derived by looking at the number
and percentage of units built before 1960. This estimate of 14,003 units is 45 percent of Daly City's
housing stock.
Special Housing Needs
"Special Needs" groups can be defined as persons with disabilities, households with persons over the
age of 65, persons who are developmentally disabled, large households, farmworkers, single-parent
households, and households needing emergency shelter. This section looks at each of these groups
and assesses their housing needs.
Elderly. The housing needs of the elderly are varied. Some elderly persons have substantial retirement
incomes and own their own homes, while others live on limited incomes in substandard rental housing.
The 1990 Census documented 9,877 persons to be 65 years of age or older. At the time, this was 11
percent of Daly City's population. The most recent Census information from the year 2000 documents
that there are 12,486 persons that are 65 years and older: 5,159 males and 7,327 females. Twenty-nine
percent of all households or 8,872 households have individuals that are 65 years and older.
Many of the elderly have unique housing needs such as poor health and infirmity, limited income, and
mobility difficulties. Daly City Community Development Block Grant funds assist the elderly in several
programs. Rehabilitation funds are available to provide minor home repairs and handicap accessibility
for disabled seniors. Many seniors take advantage of this program because the additional income from
renting the unit supplements their limited retirement income. Groceries are provided to needy seniors
through Operation Brown Bag, a program of Second Harvest Food Bank. The Doelger Senior Center
offers a daily reduced price hot lunch for qualified seniors and provides a place for seniors to
congregate and take part in recreational activities.
Figure HE-23 shows that about 25 percent of the owner-occupied housing units (4,573) and 11 percent
of rental housing units (1,362) are elderly households.
         Figure HE-23: Age of Householder by Tenure (2000)
                        Owner occupied units …                       Renter occupied units …
                           15 to 24 years
                                 1%                                                                 15 to 24 years
                                          25 to 34 years                            65 + years
                                                9%                                     11%                9%
                65 + years
                   25%
                                                                      55 to 64 years
                                                                            10%
                                                      35 to 44 years                                               25 to 34 years
                                                           22%                                                          26%
                                                                     45 to 54 years
                                                                          19%
         55 to 64 years
              18%
                                          45 to 54 years                                       35 to 44 years
                                                25%                                                  25%
         Source: U.S. Census (2000)
Daly City 2030 General Plan | Housing Element                                                                                     65

Single-Parent Households. Single-parent households often have special housing needs because these
households usually are faced with the challenges of raising children on limited income. These factors
result in a need for lower priced housing and affordable child care to be available in the community.
The 2000 Census documented 3,134 single-parent households with children under 18 years of age in
Daly City. This number constitutes 14 percent of all households. Approximately 375 of these households
were identified by the U.S. Census as having family incomes below the poverty level. As identified in
Figure HE-24, these single-parent households below the poverty level equate to 1.6 percent of the total
number of households in Daly City. By comparison, Daly City’s rate of single-parent households below
the poverty level does not appear to be significantly different from the rate of adjacent communities
and San Mateo County as whole. The rate is in fact significantly lower than the Bay Area region and
state.
Daly City has established several programs to meet the needs of low-income households with children.
While not all of the programs listed below provide direct assistance for housing, they cover other
necessary costs that allow more income sources to go towards housing costs. Child care costs can be
almost as expensive as housing, and with large families it can actually exceed housing costs.
         Figure HE-24: Comparative Single-Parent Households Below Poverty Level
             California                                             4.8%
  San Francisco County                               3.0%
              Bay Area                          2.6%
              Daly City                 1.6%
   South San Francisco               1.4%
     San Mateo County               1.3%
             San Bruno              1.3%
         Source: U.S. Census (2000)
The City Council has allocated Community Development Block Grant (CDBG) funds to help meet an
array of special needs. These include providing funds for local child care programs, and housing and
supportive services that assist homeless families find permanent housing. The City's Community Service
Center also provides information and referral for emergency housing and food services, clothing and
other social services.
Persons with disabilities. A disability is defined as a long lasting condition that impairs an individual’s
mobility, ability to work, or ability to care for themselves. Persons with disabilities include those with
physical, mental, or emotional disabilities. Disabled persons have special housing needs because of their
fixed income, shortage of affordable and accessible housing, and higher health costs associated with
their disability.
The 2000 Census indicates that 21 percent of Daly City’s civilian non-institutionalized population over five
years of age had a disability. The types of disability may include sensory, physical, and mental. About
66                                                              Daly City 2030 General Plan | Housing Element

three percent of persons between the ages of five to 15 years had a disability. In contrast, about 43
percent of persons 65 years and older were disabled. Table HE-12 below identifies the total number of
disabilities reported by persons with disabilities (note that the table counts disabilities, not the number of
persons with disabilities).
          Table HE-12: Disabilities Reported By Age
                                                                 Age
                                                      5 to 15    16 to 64      65 +      Total
           Sensory disability                             48       1,260     1,444      2,752
           Physical disability                           107       3,425     3,358      6,890
           Mental disability                             246       1,640     1,238      3,124
           Self-care disability                          145         914       997      2,056
           Go outside the home disability                  -       7,596     2,879     10,475
           Employment                                      -      11,012         -     11,012
                                             Total       546      25,847     9,916     36,309
          Source: U.S Census (2000)
The Center for Independence of the Disabled (CID) is a nonprofit community agency that provides
assistance programs for disabled persons. According to CID, most disabled households require
accessible housing with special design features (e.g. appropriate dimensional reach, shelf heights, floor
finishes, barrier free entrances and floor plans, and provision of turning radius for wheelchairs, etc.) The
City provides support to CID's Housing Accessibility Modification program designed to address home
architectural barriers that persons with disabilities face. The program provides a variety of relevant
modifications to make homes safer and more accessible for disabled persons of all ages.
In addition to the efforts of CID, Task HE 15.3 mandates that the City amend the Zoning Ordinance to
establish clear procedures and regulations that ensure that residential development regulations contain
flexibility to accommodate the special needs of the physically disabled, including provisions for relief
from the various land-use, zoning, or building regulations that may constrain the housing for persons of
disabilities.
Developmentally Disabled. A developmental disability is defined by the State of California as a lifelong
disability caused by a mental and/or physical impairment manifested prior to the age of 18 and is
expected to be lifelong. The conditions included under this definition include: mental retardation,
epilepsy, autism, cerebral palsy, and other conditions needing services similar to a person with mental
retardation. The term is used most commonly to describe substantial limitations in three or more of these
major life areas:          self-care, expressive or receptive language, learning, mobility, capacity for
independent living, economic self-sufficiency, and self-direction.
According to the State Developmentally Disabled Board, there are 482 persons with developmental
disabilities living in Daly City, as of 2008. There is some overlap between the developmentally disabled
population and the mentally and physically disabled populations (approximately 10 and 15 percent,
respectively).
                   Table HE-13: Developmentally Disabled Persons By Age
                    Zip Code          0-14     15-22       23-54      55-65        65+      Total
                        94014           66         28         65           7         4        170
                        94015          103         42        129          26        12        312
                         Total         169         70        194          33        16        482
                   Source: State Developmentally Disabled Board
Daly City 2030 General Plan | Housing Element                                                               67
While developmentally disabled individuals with more severe disabilities may require 24-hour care, many
individuals with developmental disabilities are independent and can live on their own apartments or
homes with very little support. According to the State Developmental Disabilities Board, seven out of ten
people with disabilities are unable to earn substantial gainful income and must rely on Supplemental
Social Security Income (SSI) to support themselves. The current SSI monthly payment is under $900,
which equates roughly (using the HUD housing affordability definition) to a maximum monthly rent of
$270/month.         It is for this reason that affordable housing opportunities for persons who are
developmentally disabled are extremely important, as is ensuring that the City zoning regulations
provide the maximum flexibility for developmentally disabled persons.
Farmworkers. State Housing legislation has identified farmworkers as persons with special housing needs.
This is because the wages are typically very low and the work is often seasonal. The 2000 Census reveals
that less than one percent of the labor force is employed in agriculture in Daly City, and it is likely that
this figure has decreased since the remaining agricultural land has been developed. There is not
sufficient need for farmworker housing in Daly City to justify the establishment of special housing
programs. It is believed that persons in need of housing in this category will obtain assistance from
programs available to all low-income persons.
Large Households. The Department of Housing and Urban Development defines a large family as
having five or more persons. Figure HE-25 indicates that approximately 23 percent of Daly City
households are large families. This is an increase of 2 percent from the 1990 Census. Large families may
require housing assistance due to increased household expenses and the need for larger living quarters.
Sixty-five percent of housing units with five persons or more live in owner-occupied housing. Thirty-five
percent live in rental housing units.
         Figure HE-25: Percent of Households That Are Large Households (5+ persons) in Daly City and
                               Select Jurisdictions (2000)
                       Daly City                15%               8%
                      San Bruno         8%           5%
            South San Francisco            11%              7%
           San Francisco County     5%         4%              Owner occupied
                                                               Renter occupied
              San Mateo County          8%            5%
                       Bay Area        8%           5%
                      California         9%              7%
         Source: U.S. Census (2000)
Extremely Low-Income Households. Extremely low-income (ELI) households are defined as households
earning 30 percent of the area median income or less. The area median income for Daly City is $96,800
and so an income of $33,950 or less for a four-person household is considered extremely low-income.
Households with extremely low-incomes have a variety of housing situations and needs. For example,
most families and individuals receiving public assistance alone, such as social security or disability
benefits, are considered extremely low-income households.
In 2000, approximately 3,629 extremely low-income households resided in Daly City, representing 11
percent of the total households. Approximately 65 percent of extremely low-income households are
renters and experience a high incidence of overpayment for housing, which is defined as a monthly
cost burden greater than 30 percent of income, and/or overcrowding without complete kitchen or
plumbing facilities. In 2000, the City estimates that 73 percent of extremely low-income households
overpaid for housing and 84 percent were in overcrowded situations. Even further, 61 percent of
68                                                                     Daly City 2030 General Plan | Housing Element
extremely low-income households paid more than 50 percent of their income toward housing costs,
compared to 10 percent for all households.
         Table HE-14: Housing Needs for Extremely Low-Income Households
                                                                                Renters   Owners   Total
           Total number of ELI households                                        2,367     1,262  3,629
           … percent with any housing problems                                     78%       64%    73%
           … percent with cost burden 30% or > of income                           74%       62%    69%
           … percent with cost burden 50% or > of income                           65%       51%    61%
           Total number of households                                           12,222    18,474 30,696
           … percent of total ELI                                                  19%        7%    12%
         Source: Daly City’s HUD Comprehensive Housing Affordability Strategy (CHAS) 2000
To calculate the projected housing needs for extremely low-income households, the City has assumed
that 50 percent of its very low-income regional housing need consists of extremely low-income
households. As a result, from the very low-income need of 241 units, Daly City has a projected need of
121 units for extremely low-income households. Many extremely low-income households will be seeking
rental housing and most likely facing overpayment, overcrowding, or substandard housing conditions.
Some extremely low-income households could be with mental or other disabilities and special needs. To
address the range of needs and to encourage the production of additional housing opportunities for
these households, the Housing Element incorporates Policy HE-19.1 mandating that the City do so and
specifying the following tasks:
1.       Provide an exception to the proposed zoning regulation identified in Task HE 3.6, whereby any
         housing development that is willing to deed-restrict at least 20 percent of units for extremely low-
         income households would be exempt from the minimum one parking space per unit rule
         identified by this task (applies to projects qualifying for transit-proximate parking reductions) and
         instead a be subject to providing at least 0.5 parking spaces per unit.
2.       Revise the Zoning Ordinance to waive the parking requirements altogether for ELI deed-
         restricted second units that are transit proximate, as described in Task HE 3.4.
3.       For any new housing development utilizing public funding or publicly-owned land, the City and
         project developer shall explore the inclusion of units specifically targeted to and restricted for ELI
         households.
Homeless. The County of San Mateo conducts a homeless street count every other year. The count is
required by the Department of Housing and Urban Development which provides funding for homeless
assistance programs in the County. The last street count was conducted in January 2009, which
determined that, in Daly City, there were 42 unsheltered homeless individuals (living on streets, in
vehicles, in homeless encampments) and 38 sheltered homeless individuals (living in emergency shelters,
transitional housing, motel voucher programs, residential treatment, jails, and hospitals), for a total of 80
homeless individuals. According to the survey, none of the unsheltered homeless individuals counted
were accompanied by youths under age 18.
Although the survey did not provide detailed statistics specifically for Daly City, the following information
was provided for the homeless population for the County as a whole and can be extrapolated to relate
to Daly City:
        66 percent of the homeless adults in San Mateo County are male while 34 percent are female;
        27 percent of the survey respondents reported having served in the United States Armed Forces;
Daly City 2030 General Plan | Housing Element                                                               69

         13 percent of the survey respondents reported having been in foster care;
         39 percent reported either drug abuse or alcohol abuse or both; and
         35 percent reported having mental illness.
For the purposes of this Housing Element, the City will assume that the above-mentioned 80 individuals
represent the City’s seasonal and year-round homeless population. State law requires that the City
provide sufficiently zoned parcels capable of accommodating its need for emergency shelters. In
response to this requirement, Task 14.1 in this Housing Element mandates that the City amend the Zoning
Ordinance to identify emergency shelters as a permitted land use without the requirement for a use
permit on properties designated for C-R/O Commercial Retail Office in the Sullivan Corridor Specific
Plan. The area encompassed by the plan is approximately 16 acres in size covering a total of 42
individual parcels. A map identifying the area and lots sizes within the area is provided in Figure HE-25.
The identification of this area as the most appropriate in which to allow emergency shelters by-right
depended on several factors, including the following:
Potential for redevelopment. Presuming that the non-profit or non-governmental organization desired
to construct a new building for a homeless shelter, parcels are of a sufficient size in order to be able to
do so in the C-R/O Commercial Retail Office portion of the Sullivan Corridor Specific Plan area. As
identified in Figure HE-25, the area encompassed by the C-R/O Commercial Retail Office designation is
approximately 16 acres, of which approximately seven acres are located on lots that are greater than
½--acre in size (approximately 20,000 square feet). Although the sizes of emergency shelters can vary,
this analysis assumes that one could be built on a ½-acre lot because it has been staff’s experience that
this lot size is one that is capable of supporting most commercial buildings and their associated parking
requirements.
Proximity to public transit. The area is served by SamTrans bus service and is within close proximity
(walking distance) to both the Daly City and Colma BART stations.
Proximity to complimentary and compatible uses. The Sullivan Corridor Specific Plan area in which C-
R/O Commercial Retail Office is located is characterized by a mix of retail, office, auto repair, service
commercial, and mixed-use residential/office buildings, all of which are generally compatible with the
emergency shelters. This area is unlike others zones in Daly City due to its proximity to City and County
agencies that provide
Development standards. The development standards within the existing C-R/O Commercial Retail
Office zone are flexible enough to allow a significantly sized facility if one was to be proposed for
construction. The zone allows a floor area ration up to 5.0, with three-foot setbacks, essentially allowing
significant building reconstruction should a governmental or private organization desire to construct a
shelter. The parking requirement established as part of the Zoning Ordinance update would be based
upon demonstrated need.
70                                                              Daly City 2030 General Plan | Housing Element

Figure HE-25: Emergency Shelter Location Potential – Lot Sizes
Task HE 14.1 is augmented by Task HE 14.2 which provides guidance as to the regulations that will be
established for homeless shelters in the C-R/O Commercial Retail Office zone. These include provisions
that establish parking standards based on demonstrated need and no greater than other commercial
uses in the C-R/O Commercial Retail Office zone, and a limit as to the maximum separation between
individual shelters that the City may impose (300 feet).
Daly City 2030 General Plan | Housing Element                                                       71

In March 2006, the County completed Housing Our People Effectively (HOPE): the Plan to Prevent and
End Homelessness in San Mateo County. The City was an active participant in the formation of this plan
and continues to participate in the plan’s implementation. The County administers and distributes
funding for homeless assistance programs through the County’s Continuum of Care Consortium of
which the City is a member. Daly City has a representative on the Consortium’s Steering Committee
and assists in the review of grant applications for homeless assistance funding.
A family transitional shelter operated by Shelter Network is located in Daly City. The City provides
financial support to this shelter as well as other shelters in the county. It also supports an emergency
food pantry that was set up as a hot food program for the homeless. The City also operates the
Community Service Center which offers case management and makes referrals to emergency shelters.
Persons in need of transitional and supportive housing. Transitional housing is a type of interim housing
used to facilitate the movement of homeless individuals and families into permanent housing. State law
is very specific about what constitutes transitional housing, essentially defining it as “buildings configured
as rental housing developments, but operated under program requirements that call for the termination
of assistance and recirculation of the assisted unit to another eligible program recipient at some
predetermined future point in time, which shall be no less than six months.” Currently, there is a
transitional housing project operated by Shelter Network of San Mateo County at 50 Hillcrest Drive. The
facility has operated since 1988 and serves 12 families.
Every locality must identify zones that will allow the development of transitional housing. In Daly City,
residential structures that could accommodate transitional housing, be they single-family homes,
duplexes, and multi-family structures (containing three or more units), exist in every residential and
commercial zone. For this reason, this Housing Element includes Task 14.3 (page HE-66) which requires
an amendment to the Zoning Ordinance making transitional housing, as defined by State law, allowed
without the requirement for a use permit in any residential zone and subject to no greater zoning
restrictions than residential uses in the same zone.
A similar approach is extended as a new Task 14.4 related to supportive housing, which is another type
of interim housing with no limit on length of stay, that is occupied by certain “target populations”, and
that is linked to on-site or off-site services that assist the supportive housing resident in retaining the
housing, improving his or her health status, and maximizing his or her ability to live and, when possible,
work in the community. According to the State Health and Safety Code, these "target populations"
include adults with low incomes having one or more disabilities, including mental illness, HIV or AIDS,
substance abuse, or other chronic health conditions, or individuals eligible for services provided under
the Lanterman Developmental Disabilities Services Act (Division 4.5 (commencing with Section 4500) of
the Welfare and Institutions Code) and may, among other populations, include families with children,
elderly persons, young adults aging out of the foster care system, individuals exiting from institutional
settings, veterans, or homeless people.
Affordable Housing in the Coastal Zone
In Daly City, the Coastal Zone is generally coterminous with State Highway 35 and extends easterly at
John Daly Boulevard to encompass a small portion of the Westlake neighborhood west of Eastgate
Avenue. Existing neighborhoods within this area are completely built-out with existing single-family
detached homes. There are no apartments, condominiums, or any other kind of multifamily housing in
the Coastal Zone. There are no deed restricted affordable housing developments in the zone either.
Additions to the housing supply in the zone are largely accomplished through the construction of
second units which are allowed in the zone by-right and without the need for Coastal Development
Permit approval.
Pursuant to Government Code Section 65588, the City is required to provide the following information
about the City’s affordable housing stock in the Coastal Zone:
72                                                               Daly City 2030 General Plan | Housing Element

    1. The City has approved no housing units within the Coastal Zone since January 1982, the
        reporting date identified by State statute.
    2. Seventeen on the 22 housing sites on the Potential Housing Sites Inventory List are located within
        three miles of the Coastal Zone. Table HE-27 has been amended to identify these sites, all of
        which are planned to provide housing opportunities for inclusion of low- and moderate-income
        households.
    3. While the City has issued demolition permits for residential units in threat of landslide and for
        illegal second unit construction, the City has not kept statistics on the income of individuals or
        households who have occupied these units. There have been no known conversions of
        residential uses to other non-residential uses within the timeframe beginning in 1982, nor have
        there been any conversion of rental housing units to condominiums within this timeframe.
    4. The City has required no units for replacement in the Coastal Zone.
Constraints to Housing Production
Constraints to the maintenance, improvement, and construction of housing can generally be divided
into two categories - governmental and non-governmental. State law requires analysis of actual and
potential constraints and identification of ways to reduce or overcome the constraints, where possible,
to meet the identified housing needs. In many instances constraints represent a balance between the
need for housing and other desirable goals. Where this is the case, the consideration of these other
goals should be examined to make certain the constraint is not unnecessarily severe.
Governmental Constraints
Actions by local governments may impede housing construction, maintenance, and improvement in a
variety of ways. For example, excessive fees or improvement requirements may discourage housing
activity or possibly price housing above the level some groups can afford. Environmental impact reports
(EIRs) can be costly and create delays, although by state Statute such analyses are mandatory. In
some instances the lack of available water and/or sewer facilities may temporarily diminish housing
construction activity. The governmental constraints to housing development include land use controls in
the form of the General Plan, specific plans, and zoning; building codes; fees and dedications; site
improvements; permit processing procedures; and infrastructure constraints. Each of these potential
constraints is discussed below.
General Plan Land Use Designations. Daly City’s 1987 General Plan contains five residential land use
designations that communicate the City’s policies related to residential development densities. These
designations and their respective densities are identified in Table HE-15.
                 Table HE-15:   General Plan Land Use Designations
                  Land Use Designation               Density Limitations
                  Open Space Residential             0 to 2 dwelling units per acre
                  Low Density Residential            2 to 14.5 dwelling units per acre
                  Medium-Low Density Residential     14.6 to 20 dwelling units per acre
                  Medium Density Residential         20 to 35 dwelling units per acre
                  High Density Residential           35 to 50 dwelling units per acre
                  Very High Density Residential      50 dwelling units per acre and over
In addition to the residential land use designation described above, several newer high-density mixed-
use developments have been constructed or approved for construction along the Mission Street and
Daly City 2030 General Plan | Housing Element                                                           73

Geneva Avenue corridors. These corridors are designated Retail and Office by the General Plan land
use map and do not restrict residential densities, which are instead limited only by parking and building
envelop regulations set forth by the Zoning Ordinance.
Specific Plan Designations. Subsequent to the adoption of the 1987 General Plan the City adopted to
the BART Station Area (1993) Specific Plan and Sullivan Corridor Specific Plan (1998). Both of these
specific plans contain land use designations and development regulations that replaced the land use
designations and zoning regulation in place within these areas prior to their adoption. Below is short
synopsis of each plan and the relevant residential designations that are contained within each.
BART Station Area Specific Plan. Prepared in conjunction with the San Mateo County Transit District, the
BART Station Specific Plan was prepared in anticipation of the construction of the Colma BART Station
(construction completed in 1996). The primary purpose of the Specific Plan was to identify a physical
development plan for the area immediately adjacent to the new station in support of the
transportation/transit role that the area was contemplated to fulfill within Daly City at the time. Table
HE-16 identifies the land use designations identified by the Specific Plan as allowing residential uses:
Table HE-16:    BART Station Area Specific Plan Land Use Designations
 Land Use Designation                   Density Limitations
 Low Density Residential                6 to 12 dwelling units per acre
 Medium Density                         12 to 25 dwelling units per acre
 High Density Residential               25 to 55 dwelling units per acre
 Mixed-Use Commercial/Office            Function of height/coverage limitations and parking regulations
 Neighborhood commercial                Function of height/coverage limitations and parking regulations
Several significant high-density residential projects have been constructed since its inception or are
under construction within the BART Station Specific Plan Area. Most recently, the City Council approved
a 36-unit (47 du/ac) Habitat for Humanity condominium project at 7555 Mission Street. Additional
development potential exists at an underutilized SamTrans park and ride lot located adjacent to the
Colma BART Station. Although this site is presently designated Office/Convenience Retail, the potential
does exist for a mixed-use project containing higher density residential uses.
Sullivan Corridor Specific Plan. The Sullivan Corridor Specific Plan was adopted as means to guide the
revitalization of properties within the Sullivan Corridor, which is the area in the general proximity of City
Hall, west of Interstate 280. The Plan’s land use designations were prepared to compliment the
construction of new public and commercial developments occurring in the area at the time, including
the North County Health Center and the Colma BART Station. Table HE-17 identifies the land use
designations identified by the Specific Plan as allowing residential uses.
Developers of larger projects located within the Sullivan Corridor Specific Plan Area can elect to have
their projects reviewed by the Sullivan Corridor Committee, which is comprised of two City Council
members. Although review by the Steering Committee does add time to the development review
process, developers are able to obtain valuable input from Councilmembers very early in the process.
The estimated time for Sullivan Corridor Committee review is three to four weeks.
                Table HE-17:     Sullivan Corridor Specific Plan Land Use Designations
                 Land Use Designation               Density Limitations
                 Residential Low Density            0 to 14.5 dwelling units per acre
                 Residential High Density           None identified
                 Residential Retail Commercial      Maximum FAR of 1.0
                 Service Commercial                 Maximum FAR of 3.0
                 Retail and Office Commercial       Maximum FAR of 5.0
74                                                                   Daly City 2030 General Plan | Housing Element

The most significant residential construction project in this area has been a 208-unit (65 du/ac) mixed-
use senior apartment complex at 165 Pierce Street. As an urban infill site, the project provides an
example of the potential for the Sullivan Corridor Area to provide additional housing opportunities are
vacant and underutilized sites in the area are developed or redeveloped. Construction of the project
commenced in fall 2008.
Inclusionary Zoning Ordinance (DCMC Chapter 17.47). In recognition of the fact that neither Federal or
state funding for affordable housing construction will be sufficient to fully address Daly City’s affordable
housing problem, nor will the private housing market likely provide affordable housing opportunities to
low-income households, the Daly City City Council adopted an Inclusionary Zoning Ordinance in 2007.
The Ordinance requires that, in residential developments consisting of five or more units, at least 10
percent of the total units be restricted for occupancy by moderate-, low- or very low-income
households. More specifically, the Ordinance requires the following levels of affordability for non-
governmental projects:
1. Rental developments require at least 20 percent affordable units for households whose income does
     not exceed 60 percent of the area median, or 10 percent affordable units for Very Low-income
     households (household income does not exceed 50 percent of the area median.
2. Ownership developments require at least 20 percent affordable units for households whose income
     does not exceed 100 percent of the area median) or 10 percent affordable units for Low-income
     households (household income does not exceed 60 percent of the area median).
For small residential development projects (10 or less rental units, 20 or less for-sale units), the
requirements of the Ordinance may be satisfied by paying an in-lieu fee to the Affordable Housing Trust
Fund, as established annually by the Daly City City Council. The fee is the equivalent to the City’s
estimated average cost to create one unit of affordable housing. The Ordinance is not applicable to
reconstruction due to fire, flood, or other natural acts.
In addition to the potential for a developer to pay the in-lieu fee, the ordinance authorizes the City
Manager to accept a variety of alternative compliance measures proposed by developers to gain
compliance with the ordinance. Examples identified by the ordinance include off-site construction,
land dedication in lieu of building inclusionary units, or any combination of on-site construction, offsite
construction, in-lieu fees, and/or land dedication. Task HE 11.7 has been added to the RDHE affirming
the continued existence of these alternative compliance measures.
Inclusionary zoning ordinances like Daly City’s are sometimes perceived as adding to the cost of
housing by requiring market-rate units in the particular project to subsidize the affordable units in that
same project. Because no projects have been subject to the requirements of the City’s inclusionary
zoning ordinance, it is not possible to systematically evaluate whether or not this has been the case in
Daly City. Furthermore, because all development projects have unique financial circumstances (many
include complex public financing mechanisms and/or land transactions), any discussion of this subject
as it relates to the Daly City housing market would be purely hypothetical.
While there are several studies in existence which provide some insight on this subject in a broad sense,
there are essentially three plausible scenarios that explain who ultimately pays the subsidy cost of
inclusionary units. Each of these scenarios relates to the purchase of the property on which a project
subject to the inclusionary ordinance was completed and all are applicable regardless of the ultimate
project tenure (substitute “rent” for “purchase price”):
1.       The first scenario is that the developer purchased the property on which the residential project
         was to be built before the inclusionary zoning ordinance was adopted. Because the developer
         can only sell market rate units at prices dictated by the local housing market and the land and
         construction costs to build the project are all assumed to be fixed, the cost to subsidize the
         inclusionary units is subsidized by developer profits.
Daly City 2030 General Plan | Housing Element                                                             75

2.       The second scenario is that the developer purchased the property on which the residential
         project was to be built after adoption of the inclusionary ordinance and he/she had full
         knowledge of the ordinance’s requirements and the financial implications of these requirements
         to the development project. In this instance, only the land cost remains not fixed. Unable to
         increase the purchase price for units due to competitive housing market limitations and unwilling
         to decrease his or her profit margin, the developer will most likely pass the subsidy cost to the
         land owner, who will either agree to the discounted land price or choose not sell. While it would
         appear that this scenario could result in non-production of housing should the land owner
         choose not to sell, this is probably unlikely as willing sellers realize that the long-term carrying
         costs of vacant or underutilized land will ultimately exceed the cost of accepting the discounted
         land price before these carrying costs are incurred.
3.       The third scenario is that the developer purchased the property on which the residential project
         was to be built after adoption of the inclusionary ordinance, and, to maintain his or her profit
         margin, passes the subsidy cost of the inclusionary units to the purchasers of the market rate units
         in the same project instead of paying a discounted land price to the land owner. In this
         scenario, the developer would have actually adjusted the market price for the unit upward in
         the amount of the subsidy cost. While the inelasticity of the Bay Area housing market would
         seemingly allow for such an adjustment to occur, this scenario is not likely because if the
         developer had the ability to adjust the price upward, he or she would most likely have done so
         with or without the existence of an inclusionary zoning ordinance.
In reviewing the Potential Housing Sites Inventory List on page 112, it is likely that most, if not all, of the
sites on this list will be developed by persons other than the current property owners. Hypothetically,
because developers of these sites will be unable to raise the market price for the non-inclusionary
(market rate) units beyond that allowed by the housing market, developers will be required to pay less
for land or reduce their profits.
Notwithstanding this hypothetical analysis, Daly City’s inclusionary zoning ordinance recognizes that
there could be instances when the inclusionary housing requirements make market-rate housing more
expensive. However, the City has made a conscious decision that the community’s interests are best
served by the adoption of the ordinance to address the environmental and job-housing balance
inequities that would result if the City took no action to ensure that all income groups maintain access to
the marketplace for new rental and for-sale homes.
To ensure the most effective implementation of the City’s inclusionary zoning ordinance, two tasks have
been added to the Objectives, Policies, and Tasks section of this Housing Element. Task HE 11.5 requires
that, through staff training, the City will ensure effective dissemination about the Inclusionary Zoning
Ordinance to prospective property purchasers and developers, and prepare paper and electronic
brochures to assist these individuals to better understand and determine their obligation under the
ordinance. Task HE 11.6 mandates that the City adopt a disclosure requirement about the existence of
an inclusionary zoning ordinance in Daly City and that directs property purchasers to the City for
additional details. This disclosure would be required for transaction of properties over a certain size and
valuation that could be subject to the City’s inclusionary zoning ordinance.
Development regulations. The Zoning Ordinance contains eight residential districts and four non-
residential districts in which residential development is allowed. The minimum lot area per unit and
resulting densities of these districts are presented in Table HE-18 below. It is important to note that there
is no land currently zoned R-4 in Daly City.
76                                                                Daly City 2030 General Plan | Housing Element

         Table HE-18:     Zoning District Designations and Densities
          Zoning Designation                       Lot Area per D.U. (sq. ft.)   Resulting Density
          MHP Mobile Home Park                     1/200 min. (avg. 1/2500)        17.4 du/ac
          R-1 Single Family                                1/3,000                 14.5 du/ac
          R-1A Single Family/Duplex                        1/1,250                 34.8 du/ac
          R-2 Duplex                                       1/1,500                 29.4 du/ac
          R-2A Two Family Design                           1/1,250                 34.8 du/ac
          R-3 Multiple Family                               1/500                  87.1 du/ac
          BRM BART Multiple Family                         1/1,750                   25 du/ac
          R-4 Multi-family/Professional                     1/300                   145 du/ac
          C-1 Light Commercial District                     1/300                   145 du/ac
          C-2 Heavy Commercial District                     1/300                   145 du/ac
          PD Planned Unit Development                      Flexible               Not applicable
          Pre-PD Pre-Planned Unit Dev.                     Flexible               Not applicable
As identified in Table HE-18, residential development is allowed within several commercial zones, most
notably within the C-1 Light Commercial District. The C-1 zone encompasses all properties fronting
Mission Street, for its full length, and almost all of Geneva Avenue in the Bayshore neighborhood. Sites
likely to yield large numbers of affordable housing units are located within these two commercial
corridors. In fact, several larger projects identified in the Potential Housing Sites Inventory List are
located on Mission Street or Geneva Avenue.
Table HE-19 on the subsequent page identifies the development regulations for each of the above
zones, as contained in the Daly City Zoning Ordinance. As shown in the table, the minimum lot sizes for
both the R-3 Multiple Family and C-1 Light Commercial zones are 2,500 square feet in most instances.
Both zones also allow the construction of single-family homes. In combination, these regulations allow
owners of larger parcels to subdivide their parcels for single-family residential development or small
commercial uses. This effectively allows scarce larger parcels that could be used for higher density
mixed-use development to be underutilized. Similarly, the building heights for both the R-3 and C-1
zones are only six feet higher than that allowed in the R-1 zone (30 feet maximum versus 36 feet
maximum), where the R-3 and C-1 zones allow sixth times the density allowed by the R-1 zone (87 du/ac
versus 14.5 du/ac).
Because a 36-foot height limit may be appropriate for the C-1 Light Commercial zone in other parts of
Daly City, the policy section of this Housing Element sets forth a requirement that the Zoning Ordinance
be amended to establish a new Commercial Mixed-Use (C-MU) zone for areas encompassing Mission
Street and Geneva Avenue, and establish development regulations in the Zoning Ordinance specifically
for higher-density mixed-use development. To preserve larger commercial and residential sites, this
Housing Element also requires that the Zoning Ordinance increase the minimum parcel sizes for all
commercial and R-3 Multiple Family zones be increased as determined necessary to promote the
construction of higher density and/or mixed-use development. Likewise, the Housing Element commits
the City to exploring increased building height within the C-MU zone, as determined sufficient to
promote the construction of higher density mixed-use development within the zone. Further study of
increased height along Mission Street and Geneva Avenue would be undertaken as part of the Zoning
Ordinance update, which will commence at the conclusion of the General Plan update.
Daly City 2030 General Plan | Housing Element                                                         77
Table HE-19:                Daly City Regulations for Residential Zones
                                                  Max.
    Zoning                        Use Permit                     Min. Lot      Floor Area    Min. Lot       Max. Lot      Min. Front    Min. Side  Min. Rear  Lot Area Per
                Permitted Uses                  Building
    District                        Req'd                         Area            Ratio        Width       Coverage           Yard        Yard       Yard          D.U.
                                                 Height
                                                                3000 s.f.                       33 ft.        50%                                               3000 s.f.
       R-1       Single-family        No          30 ft.                                                                      15 ft.      None       10 ft.
                                                                2500* s.f.                     25* ft.        55%*                                              2500* s.f.
                 Single-family.       No
     R-1/A                                        30 ft.        2500 s.f.                       25 ft.        55%             15 ft.      None       10 ft.
                    Duplexes         Yes
                        R-1                                                 All uses permitted in this zoning classification (see above)
                    One two-
       R-2                                                                                                                                                   1500 s.f. 1250
                      family                                    3000 s.f.                       33 ft.
                                      No          36 ft.                                                                                                            s.f.
                    dwelling                                    2500* s.f.                     25* ft.
                 Single-family,                                                                               60%             15 ft.      None       10 ft.
     R-2/A         two-family                     30 ft.
                                      No                        2500 s.f.                       25 ft.
                    Duplexes         Yes
                     R-1, R-2                                              All uses permitted in these zoning classifications (see above)
       R-3                                                       3000 ft.                       33 ft.
                  Multi- family       No          36 ft.                                                      75%             15 ft.      None       10 ft.      500 s.f.
                                                                3500* ft.                      25* ft.
                   Sm. Apt’s.,
                    twnhms,           No                                                                                5 ft.        10              15 ft.
      BRM                                         45 ft.        5000 s.f.                       50 ft.        60%                         None
                      flats…                                                                                                ft. max
                     R-1, R-2        Yes
                  R-1, R-2, R-3                                            All uses permitted in these zoning classifications (see above)
       R-4                                         FAR                                                                                    None         10
                  Multi-family        No                       10000 s.f.        3.5 - 1.0     100 ft.        70%             15 ft.                             300 s.f.
                                                3.5 : 1.0                                                                                20 ft. **  20 ft.**
     MHP        Mobile homes          No          30 ft.        2500 s.f.                      30 ft.         75%              5 ft.       3 ft.      3 ft.
                        R-3                               All uses permitted in this zoning classifications (see above), except use permit is required
      C-1                                                       2,500 sf –                      33 ft.
                        R-4           No          36 ft.                                                      70%            None         None      None         300 s.f.
                                                                 3,000 sf                      25* ft.
                        C-1                    All uses permitted in this zoning classifications (see above), except use permit is required and 7.0 – 1.0 FAR
      C-2                                                       2,500 sf –                      33 ft.
                        R-3          Yes                                        7.0 – 1.0                     70%            None         None      None         300 s.f.
                                                                 3,000 sf                      25* ft.
       PD            A variety of uses or combination of uses are allowed in this zoning classification pending City approval of an applicant’s planning application
    Pre-PD                                        Serves as a transitional zoning classification for PD (see description of PD uses above)
 * for lots or subdivisions recorded prior to 1/1/49
 ** for buildings in excess of 3 stories
 Other exceptions may apply
Parking regulations. Parking requirements for new residential development are contained within the
Zoning Ordinance as identified in Table HE-20. Because parking is a significant factor in multifamily and
affordable housing construction costs, the constraints to housing production caused by parking
regulations must be closely examined.
Currently, Daly City’s Zoning Ordinance requires two parking spaces for each condominium unit
(irrespective of number of bedrooms) or any apartment with two or more bedrooms. This is the same
parking requirement for single family units. Reductions to the parking requirements are permitted by the
Zoning Ordinance for development proposals that are determined to be exclusively for low-income
households or individuals. Projects that are partially low-income are not allowed reduced parking unless
the project is rezoned to Planned Development. In addition to parking reductions for low-income
projects, residential projects for low-income elderly persons are required to provide only one fourth of
the parking indicated above.
78                                                                                                          Daly City 2030 General Plan | Housing Element

                 Table HE-20:             Daly City Parking Regulations
                  Residential Type                         Required Parking Spaces
                  Single-family                            2 spaces per unit
                  Two-family (Duplex)                      2 spaces per unit; 4 per structure
                  Multiple-family                          1 space per studio
                                                           1.5 spaces per one bedroom
                                                           2 spaces per two-bedroom unit or larger
                  Condominium                              2 spaces, irrespective of bedroom count
                  Mobilehome Park                          1 space per mobilehome,
                                                           plus 1 guest space each grouped in common area
                  Boardinghouse                            1 space per rentable room, plus one space per
                                                           every 200 sq. ft. kitchen and administrative office area
                  Secondary Unit                           2 spaces, plus 2 per principal dwelling (4 total)
                  Note: Single family includes all condominiums irrespective of size
Generally, the City’s residential development standards are consistent with the requirements of
neighboring jurisdictions and accepted planning practice. There is anecdotal evidence, given high
land costs in Daly City and throughout the region, that parking requirements could constrain the
development of new and/or affordable housing.
Parcel sizes. In the future, construction of higher-density housing projects will rely on the redevelopment
of sites and adaptive re-use of existing buildings (retrofitting and re-using a building for a use other than
its original construction). The lack of larger parcels that can accommodate high-density residential
development presents a severe constraint to large-scale housing production.                                       However, as identified
in Figure HE-26, only 24 multi-family zoned parcels larger than one acre exist throughout Daly City.
Similarly, only 53 commercially-zoned parcels (where higher-density residential development is also
allowed) are larger than one acre. Conversely, the vast majority of parcels are less than ¼ acre in size.
         Figure HE-26: Multifamily and Commercial Parcel Sizes (2009)
                                 Multifamily Parcels                                                  Commercial Parcels
                                                1 acre or more;                                 1 acre or more,
                        1/2 to 1 acre; 38;
                                                     24; 2%                                         53, 8%
                                4%
                 1/4 to 1/2 acre;                                                    1/2 to 1 acre, 47,
                    115; 12%                                                                  7%
                                                                                   1/4 to 1/2 acre,
                                                                                        84, 13%
                                        1/4 acre or less;
                                                                                                             1/4 acre or less,
                                            823; 82%
                                                                                                                 485, 72%
Since almost all of the larger parcels in Daly City are already developed (see Vacant Land Survey for
vacant parcels), further subdivision of these parcels or development of non-residential uses on them will
Daly City 2030 General Plan | Housing Element                                                                                         79

very likely constrain housing production. Under the current zoning regulations, property owners are
allowed to subdivide existing larger parcels into lots as small as 2,500 square feet, the minimum lots size
in both the C-1 Limited Commercial and R-3 Multiple-Family Residential zones. The City does not
presently have any legal mechanism to merge lots.
Condominium regulations. Although not considered detrimental to any specific affordable housing
development proposal, an existing provision of Zoning Code currently prohibits condominiums less than
20 units, severely impacting the potential for the construction of small for-sale condominium projects
within Daly City. This Housing Element identifies the reduction of the 20-unit minimum as a specific task
of the Zoning Ordinance update that will commence upon adoption of the General Plan.
Building Codes. The 2008 International Building Code, as amended by the City, has also established
construction standards which add to the cost of housing development. Local code amendments have
been significantly reduced in an effort to allow greater uniformity of construction standards throughout
the county. The remaining local amendments are minor and do not add significantly to the cost of
housing, but significantly increase the long-term safety of residents, prevent fire spreading to adjoining
homes, and improve insurance rates.
Fees and Dedications. Site improvements and exactions by the City, such as traffic signals or park in-lieu
fees increase the cost of development in Daly City. To better assure equity in the application of fees
related to new development, the City analyzed the needed public facilities associated solely with new
development and established a fee that allocates a ‘fair share’ of cost to new residential and
commercial development. Most off-site improvements needed to serve future growth are funded
through the City’s Public Facilities Fees.
All Bay Area cities charge fees in order to pay the costs to process, regulate and mitigate the impacts of
new development on City services and infrastructure. If fees are inordinately high, they can lead to
higher costs and/or discourage housing development within the community.
Table HE-21 shows the prototypical typical planning impact fees charged by the City of Daly City for the
following projects:
       One single-family home: three-bedroom, 2,400 square foot in size on 10,000 square foot lot with
        a 400 square foot garage at a density of four units per acre and construction cost of $500,000,
        estimated sale price $800,000.
       Ten-unit condominium building: each unit is two bedroom, 1,200 square feet in size. Project is
        situated on 0.5-acre lot with a construction cost of $400,000 per unit, to be sold at an average of
        $500,000 per unit.
The fees identified in Table HE-21 have been developed based on the costs of providing public facilities
to new development and reflect the AB 1600 fee program developed by the City intended to mitigate
the impacts of new development on public facilities. Public facilities funded through the AB1600 fee
include police, library, fire, administrative facilities, roadways, water and wastewater. The fees are
charged on the basis of geographic benefit zones, each with differing cost bases.
80                                                               Daly City 2030 General Plan | Housing Element

                 Table HE-21: Daly City Fees for Prototypical Residential Developments (2008)
                                                                Single      10-unit
                                                               Family    Condominium
             Planning and Building Fees …                      Home        Building
                                          Building Permit    $     2,963 $       16,773
                                              Plan Check     $     3,503 $       10,902
                                            Plan Storage     $       148 $          839
                                     Title 24 Energy Fee     $       593 $        3,355
                                              Seismic Tax    $        50 $          939
                              Engineering Plan Check         $       593 $        3,355
                                  Planning Plan Check        $       593 $        3,355
                                                Plumbing     $       194 $          578
                                                 Electrical  $       326 $        1,733
               Mechanical (incl. fire sprinklers/ alarms) $          110 $          192
                              General Plan Surcharge $             2,500 $       22,360
               Sewer connection fee (not impact fee) $             2,700 $           -
                                Other (please specify) $           5,000 $           -
                   Planning and Building Fees Subtotal $          19,273 $      64,381
             Impact Fees …
                                                     Roads   $     1,464 $       18,360
                                                     Water   $       428 $        4,283
                                             Storm Water     $     1,065 $       14,210
                                                      Parks  $       768 $     107,687
                                                        Fire $       140 $        1,398
                                                     Police  $       580 $        5,804
                                                    Library  $       576 $        5,765
                                                    School   $     6,312 $       31,560
                                                     Other   $       224 $        2,243
                                   Impact Fee Subtotal $          11,557 $     191,310
                                       Grand Total Fees $         30,830 $     255,691
        Source: Daly City Building Division; compiled by 21 Elements
Figures HE-27 and HE-28 provide a comparison of Daly City’s fees to others jurisdictions within San Mateo
County for each of the aforementioned development prototypes. Among these jurisdictions, the
median fee for the single-family and 10-unit condo prototypes are $27,908 and $176,663, respectively.
As identified in Table HE-21, Daly City’s total fees for these two prototypes are $30,830 and $255,691,
respectively.
Daly City 2030 General Plan | Housing Element                                                          81

         Figure HE-27: Comparative Fee Analysis for Prototypical Developments – Single-family home
         (2008)
      Redwood City              $10,966                                         $34,406
             Millbrae                      $21,764                                 $15,884
             Pacifica          $9,634                             $24,466
        Hillsborough                         $22,879                           $8,830
            Daly City                    $19,273                         $11,557
          San Carlos                   $17,316                        $12,236
      Half Moon Bay               $12,361                       $16,770
             Belmont                       $21,237                      $5,449
  San Mateo County                     $17,456                     $8,476
             Atherton             $12,429                $10,058
             Brisbane      $5,808                $15,361
         Burlingame                $13,120               $7,924                     Planning and Building Fees
                                                                                    Impact Fees
           Foster City           $11,615            $6,312
      Portola Valley             $11,531            $6,312
         Source: 21 Elements Development Fees Survey (2008)
         Figure HE-28: Comparative Fee Analysis for Prototypical Developments – 10-Unit Condo (2008)
          Redwood City         $45,772                                          $310,525
                 Pacifica       $53,233                              $218,436
                 Daly City        $64,381                           $191,310
                 Brisbane      $45,156                    $157,059
              San Carlos                    $146,263                  $34,509
                 Millbrae       $51,324                $121,230
             Burlingame          $60,598         $58,960
     San Mateo County             $66,992       $38,058
                                                                                       Planning and Building Fees
                 Belmont         $59,379    $25,927                                    Impact Fees
               Foster City    $40,082   $31,560
         Source: 21 Elements Development Fees Survey (2008)
While Daly City’s fees are generally similar to those of adjacent jurisdictions for the single-family home
prototype (in the $30,000 range), the City’s fees for the 10-unit condominium prototype are further from
the County-wide median. A large portion of the fees for this development prototype is attributable to
impacts fees, specifically park impacts. As identified in Table HE-20, more than 50 percent of the impact
fee collected by the City is for park impacts. To address this issue, the City has committed to review the
82                                                                                   Daly City 2030 General Plan | Housing Element

park impact fees collected by the City ensure that they are justifiable given the impacts equitable
among various classes of development projects. For example, the City currently does not collect park
in-lieu fees for multifamily development that consists of rental housing. The result of this is that increased
burden is placed upon other classes of projects notwithstanding the actual demand for parks created
by each project class.
Although fees imposed by the City on new residential development add to the cost of housing, these
fees are necessary to offset the impact to the City’s infrastructure directly caused by new development.
As identified in Table HE-21, the City collects such fees to pay for non-operational impacts to facilities
such as police and fire department buildings, stormwater treatment plants, and libraries. School impact
fees, which account for over 50 percent of the impact fee amount, are established by State law and
not influenced by the City. Although impact fees may seem to be a significant cost factor in residential
development, their cost is often folded into the permanent financing of a residential development
project, which is then paid over the term of home mortgage. In the context of a mortgage, the total of
City fees for a single-family detached homes equates to about 1.6 percent of the total mortgage
payments for a typical new home in Daly City over 30 years. This is a significantly lower cost factor than
cost proportions devoted to private profit, such as interest charges, mortgage insurance, and realtor
fees.
Site Improvement requirements. In addition to permit processing and impact fees charged by the City,
a new subdivision may be required to install improvements off-site, dedicate land for parks (or pay an in-
lieu fee), or contribute to the cost for services provided to the project. These are typical costs
associated with mitigating environmental impacts associated with a development and they vary on a
case by case basis depending upon the anticipated impacts. While these costs are necessarily a part
of new development in the City, the charges are carefully analyzed in each case in order to avoid
unnecessary requirements being placed on new residential development.
While new subdivisions typically require the construction of expensive infrastructure such as new roads,
sewer trunk lines, and stormwater catchment systems, most new residential development in Daly City will
continue to occur as denser buildings situated adjacent to existing infrastructure, either replacing
existing older buildings or vacant in-fill lots. This type of development is therefore able to forgo much of
the expense typically associated with improvement of the public right-of-way. There are instances
where utility upsizing may be required to accommodate a significant increase in the utility demand over
a previously existing less-intensive use. However, these costs are much lower on a per-dwelling-unit
basis than the costs associated with acquiring land and constructing new utilities for a new subdivision.
Permit processing procedures. The Zoning Ordinance identifies the residential types permitted,
permitted with a use permit, or not allowed in each zone allowing residential uses. Permitted uses are
those uses allowed without discretionary review and require only a building permit as long as the project
complies with all development standards and design guidelines.
Daly City 2030 General Plan | Housing Element                                                               83

     Table HE-22: Existing Entitlement Requirements by Zoning District
                                                                          Zoning Designations Allowing Residential Uses
      Building Type                                      R-1     R-1/A     R-2      R-2A    R-3     R-4     BRM      MH  C-1      C-2
      Single family home (one unit)                       BP       BP      BP        BP     BP       BP      BP      NA   UP      UP
      Second unit in existing single-family home          BP       BP      BP        BP     BP       BP      BP      BP   BP      BP
      Duplex (two units)                                 NA        UP      BP        BP     BP       BP      BP      NA   UP      UP
      Triplex (three units)                              NA        NA      NA        NA     BP       BP      BP      NA   UP      UP
      Multiple family (four or more units)               NA        NA      NA        NA     DR       DR      DR      NA   UP      UP
      Mixed Use (Retail/Office/Residential)              NA        NA      NA        NA     NA      NA       NA      NA   UP      UP
      Residential Care Facility ≤ 6 persons               NP       NP      NP        NP     NP       NP      NP      NP   NP      NP
      Residential Care Facility > 6 persons               UP       UP      UP        UP     UP       UP      UP      UP   UP      UP
      Emergency Shelter                                  NA        NA      NA        NA     NA      NA       NA      NA   UP      UP
      Single-Room Occupancy                              NA        NA      BP        BP     BP       BP      BP      NA   UP      UP
      Manufactured Homes                                  BP       BP      BP        BP     BP       BP      BP      NA   UP      UP
      Mobile Homes                                        BP       BP      BP        BP     BP       BP      BP      BP   UP      UP
      Transitional Housing                               NA        NA      UP        UP     UP       UP      UP      UP   UP      UP
      Supportive Housing                                 NA        NA      UP        UP     UP       UP      UP      UP   UP      UP
      Farmworker Housing                                                      This land use currently not regulated.
                                                    Most Signifcant Entitlement Required:
            "NP" = No permit req'd, "NA" = Not allowed, "BP" = Building Permit, "DR" = Design Review Committee, "UP" = Use Permit
     Source: City of Daly City Planning Division
The permit requirements for each housing type allowed in each zoning district are identified in Table HE-
22. As identified in the table, the development review process is very expedient for new residential
development proposed in a residential zone. Most approvals may be made at the staff level and
Design Review Committee (DRC) approval is required only for those projects where four or more units
are proposed, and for which an entitlement necessitating a public hearing is required. The DRC, which
consists of the two City Council members appointed by the Mayor, has the ability to approve non-
discretionary projects or discretionary projects that are exempt from the requirements of the California
Environment Quality Act. Otherwise, City Council certification of either a Mitigated Negative
Declaration (MND) or Environmental Impact Report (EIR) is required.
Despite the expediency of constructing new residential projects on residentially-zoned land, the most
significant additions to the housing supply in Daly City has occurred in multiple-family apartment and
condominium buildings exceeding 50 dwelling units per acre (see Table HE-27 on page 60). Due to
permit requirements in place at the time of their construction, these types of buildings have typically
been subject to a use permit (due to their location in the C-1 zone on Mission Street or Geneva
Avenue), a subdivision map (because they involve a condominium), or both. In certain cases, typically
involving projects outside the Mission Street/Geneva Avenue corridors, a rezoning may have also been
required. In rare circumstances, an amendment to the General Plan Land Use Map may also be
required as a part of project approval.
All subdivisions (including condominium maps) and use permits must be approved by the City Council
with a recommendation from the Planning Commission. Typical findings of a residential subdivision
include that the project is consistent with the General Plan, that the site on which the subdivision is to be
located is physically suitable for the number of lots proposed, and that adequate infrastructure exists to
serve the proposed subdivision. The findings for a use permit are similar, adding that the use is
compatible with surrounding uses and the neighborhood character and that the project would not
84                                                                                         Daly City 2030 General Plan | Housing Element

jeopardize the public health, safety, and welfare. Rezonings and General Plan amendments are
legislative acts and are therefore not subject to written findings.
Staff has completed an analysis as to whether any of the findings identified in the preceding paragraph
have been detrimental to project approvals, in terms of additional processing time, cost, and developer
certainty. In a review of approximately 35 planning entitlement applications, including rezonings, and
major and minor subdivisions, that the City Council has considered since the adoption of the current
Housing Element in 2004, in no instance did mandated findings present an obstacle to the Council
granting these approvals. In fact, the City Council approved all 35 applications, adopting the required
findings in each instance.
Table HE-23: Typical Processing Time by Type of Approval
                                                                Typical
   Type of Approval or Permit
                                                                Processing Time    Approval Body
   Zoning Entitlements
   Building Permit (ministerial projects)                       1 to 4 weeks       Staff
   Design Review                                                4 to 6 weeks       Design Review Committee †
   Use Permit                                                   8 to 10 weeks      City Council
   Variance                                                     8 to 10 weeks      City Council
   Coastal Development Permit (coastal zone only)               8 to 10 weeks      City Council ††
   Parcel Maps                                                  10 to 12 weeks     City Council
   Subdivision Maps                                             10 to 12 weeks     City Council
   Zone Change (to traditional zones)                           10 to 12 weeks     City Council
   Zone Change (to planned development zoning)                  12 to 16 weeks     City Council
   General Plan Amendment                                       12 to 16 weeks     City Council
    † Processed concurrently for items approved by City Council    †† May be appealed to Coastal Commission
   Environmental Review
   Mitigated Negative Declaration                               10 to 12 weeks     City Council
   Environmental Impact Report                                  24 to 36 weeks     City Council
Source: City of Daly City Planning Division
The time it takes for developers to secure any of the above entitlements varies depending upon many
factors such as the nature, size, location, and complexity of the project, including the involvement of
other agencies. Table HE-23 identifies the typical processing time most common in the entitlement
process. It should be noted that, for projects requiring more than one entitlement, the City processes
these entitlements concurrently. For example, the condominium map and environmental review for a
new mixed-use project could be processed concurrently with the City Council’s consideration of the
subdivision map for the project. In 2008, the City Council adopted revisions to the Zoning Ordinance to
allow concurrent processing of design review and other discretionary approvals that required Planning
Commission and City Council approval. This change removed the requirement for projects which had
been approved by the City Council to return to the Design Review Committee for additional review.
As identified in Table HE-23, typical permit processing times range from one week for simple projects
where only a building permit is required to several months for more complicated projects involving
substantial environmental review.            Projects that require the preparation and adoption of an
Environmental Impact Report (EIR) are subject to the greatest processing time, often exceeding six
months. The requirement for an EIR preparation is however extremely rare as the City has in most
instances determined that a Mitigated Negative Declaration is sufficient for most residential
development projects.
Of the sites identified on Table HE-26 on page HE-59, only two required the preparation of the EIR. The
remaining projects were either processed through the adoption of either a Mitigated Negative
Daly City 2030 General Plan | Housing Element                                                                85

Declaration or a determination that the project is exempt from CEQA. The Act grants exemptions to
projects to urban in-fill sites that are five-acres or less in size, have adequate infrastructure in place to
accommodate the number of units proposed, and do not require rezoning or General Plan
amendment.
To assist in streamlining the development review process, the City has established design guidelines for
both new single-family homes and mixed-use development. In anticipation that the City will receive
more applications for larger mixed-use buildings, especially along Geneva Avenue and Mission Street,
Task HE-3.2 on page 68 has been added to this Housing Element which commits the City to reviewing
the existing mixed-use design guidelines to ensure that the guidelines address instances where higher-
density development is proposed adjacent to lower-density neighborhoods. Also, in an effort to
increase developer certainty, a new task amending the automatic expiration for all discretionary land
use approvals has been added as Task 2.3.
In addition to design guidelines, the City offers developers an opportunity to receive feedback from a
two-member ad hoc City Council Committee prior to committing to the entitlement process. These
Committee meetings are particularly useful to developers of affordable housing projects, where
potential issues can be scoped in the initial stages and resolved to minimize or avoid the creation of
conflicts or controversy that could derail an affordable housing project.
Policies relating specifically to removing the requirements for use permit approvals for residential
projects in commercial zones, transitional/supportive housing, and homeless shelters have been added
to this Housing Element (see Tasks HE-14.1 and HE-14.2). A complete discussion of the emergency
homeless shelters and transitional/supportive housing can be found on pages 33 through 36.
In terms of entitlement processing for emergency shelters and transitional housing, the City of Daly City
has historically deferred to the San Mateo County Office of Housing, which has taken the lead role in
San Mateo County to evaluate and provide for homeless population needs, facilities and services. This
County Office has concluded, based on the most recent study (Summer 2001), that homeless needs for
Daly City in addition to other neighboring communities are being served and met by the year-round
operation of Safe Harbor in South San Francisco. Safe Harbor is an emergency shelter closest to Daly
City and most likely to serve Daly City residents needs for homeless facilities. Homeless counts and
needs assessment by the County occurs annually and biennial, respectively. No requests have been
received for added emergency shelters.
Emergency shelter for special needs populations is accommodated by the organizations that serve
those particular populations and needs. When approached by these organizations the City has
historically provided appropriate assistance as needed. Regarding transitional housing, the City has
worked with non-profit organizations and governmental agencies to assess needs, evaluate sites, and
determine operational and acquisition costs. Otherwise, the City has not received nor expects to
receive within the term of this Housing Element Update a request for new construction of these facilities.
More commonly, existing buildings are being adapted for reuse to accommodate these needs rather
than new buildings being constructed, typically without requiring any discretionary permits.
The City currently has no special review process for emergency shelter or transitional housing facilities.
However, this Housing Element mandates amendments to the Daly City Zoning Ordinance to allow
emergency shelters as a permitted land use within the Zoning Ordinance and without the requirement
for a use permit in the C-MU (Commercial Mixed-use) zone district. These amendments are anticipated
to be adopted at the conclusion of the General Plan update process in 2010.
Infrastructure Limitations. Since the vacant, residentially zoned properties are either small or moderate in
size and are scattered throughout the City, it is unlikely that any development will create a serious,
additional demand on existing services and infrastructure (i.e., water, distribution lines, sewer collection
system, etc.).
86                                                                   Daly City 2030 General Plan | Housing Element
The North San Mateo County Sanitation District completed a $23 million modification to its treatment
facility, increasing capacity from 8 million gallons per day to 10.3 million gallons per day. This expansion,
completed in 1990, was in response to a serious lack of capacity that resulted in a sewer connection
moratorium during 1986-87. The expanded capacity will easily serve all projected new growth.
Daly City’s water system should also be adequate to serve future needs. Portions of the system,
including the Bayshore neighborhood, will need expanded storage capacity to meet future fire flow
requirement for residential development. In addition, Daly City is working with the San Francisco Public
Utilities Commission to address integrated resource management issues associated with conjunctive use
of supplemental surface water to recharge groundwater supplies, and development of tertiary recycled
water as an irrigation source to local golf courses. These strategies are intended to extend available
resources to meet projected water needs, but none of these improvements are perceived to pose a
significant limitation to long-term residential growth
Constraints on Housing for Persons with Disabilities. Under SB 520 passed in 2001, State Housing Element
law was amended to require localities to “analyze potential and actual constraints upon the
development, maintenance and improvement of housing for persons with disabilities and demonstrate
local efforts to remove governmental constraints that hinder the locality from meeting the need for
housing for persons with disabilities.”
With regard to fulfilling this requirement, the City has existing procedures and policies that enhance
accessibility in its residential housing. The City enforces the accessibility provisions under Title 24 of the
California Codes that apply to new construction of multifamily development with three or more dwelling
units. The City staff also accepted individual requests for special accommodations (e.g. allowing
second units on the first floor of a house without meeting minimum parking requirements in order to help
a physically disabled family member who cannot climb stairs) and works with the property owner to
have them implemented.
The City has also supported programs over the years to enable lower income households, including
those with persons with disabilities, an opportunity to maintain and improve their housing, while
providing them with needed financial relief. The City’s Residential Rehabilitation Program, which offers
grants and low interest loans, and the nonprofits, North Peninsula Neighborhood Services and Rebuilding
Together, both of whom provide grants to low-income households as well, allow accessibility
modifications as eligible activities. Another nonprofit, Center for the Independence of the Disabled
(CID), solely undertakes accessibility improvements to housing for a person with disabilities. All four
programs are funded annually with City CDBG funds.
Notwithstanding these efforts, some constraints on housing for persons with disabilities remain. One
impediment is the City’s outdated definition of “family,” which the Zoning Ordinance presently defines
as “a person or group of persons related by blood, marriage or adoption living together as a single
housekeeping unit …”. To address this issue, Task HE 16.2 in this Housing Element mandates that the City
amend the Zoning Ordinance to revise the definition of family to comply with State and federal fair
housing laws, and that the new definition shall not distinguish between related and unrelated persons,
nor shall it impose limitations on the number of persons that may constitute a family.
 With respect to ensuring that residential development regulations contain flexibility to accommodate
the special needs of the physically disabled, Task HE 15.3 mandates that the City establish a reasonable
accommodation procedure that provides ministerial (administrative) relief from the various land-use,
zoning, or building regulations that may constrain housing opportunities for persons of disabilities.
Additionally, Task HE 15.4 amends the City’s second unit regulations to establish clear procedures for
providing administrative relief from the second unit parking requirement in circumstances where the
parking requirement would otherwise prevent the construction of a second unit for a disabled person.
Daly City 2030 General Plan | Housing Element                                                               87

Non-Governmental Constraints
Constraints attributable to the private market that affect the improvement, maintenance and
production of housing are generally categorized as non-governmental constraints. The imbalance
between housing supply and demand makes housing costs in the Bay Area among the nation’s highest.
The high costs of development, financing, and land are the greatest barriers to the provision of
affordable housing.
Land Costs. Daly City’s proximity to the San Francisco employment center and the rapidly increasing
job opportunities there have created an environment which makes Daly City a desirable place to live.
Market forces continue to push land costs upward resulting in an increase in housing costs. As the cost
of housing rises at a much greater rate than income, there is a decreasing opportunity for home
ownership to a growing proportion of Daly City residents. Additionally, there is an increasing number of
households who can barely afford the home they purchased and, as a result, cannot afford
expenditures on routine maintenance and repair.
Market Conditions. Another potential constraint to housing rehabilitation in some portions of Daly City is
the uncertainty some property owners may feel toward the long-term prospects for upgrading a
neighborhood. Areas where this could be a constraint are generally the older neighborhoods east of
Interstate 280.
Many of the current building condition problems stem from the inability of some Daly City residents to
pay for well-maintained, standard housing. In this regard, the housing problem is basically a problem of
poverty. A low-income family cannot pay prevailing rents for decent housing without imposing a severe
strain on the family budget. They have two choices: spend an inordinately high percentage of income
to get a standard unit or spend a more reasonable amount and accept substandard housing.
Landlords may face a similar dilemma. Revenues received from a building must match the operating
cost, including mortgage payments, taxes, insurance and basic upkeep. If there are no tenants willing
or able to pay the amount needed to maintain the building in good condition, costs are usually
reduced by cutting back on maintenance and repair. Ignoring needed repairs causes the building to
deteriorate and with it the neighborhood.
Construction Costs. Based on building cost estimator guides, the cost of constructing a wood-frame,
single-family residence in the Bay Area has increased significantly since 1980 with lumber, concrete and
labor constituting the most rapidly rising components. The construction cost, without considering land
costs, financing, etc., for an average single-family home in Daly City is approximately $200,000. The cost
of a single-family lot that can be built on varies depending on the characteristics of the property (e.g.
sloped) and location. A 2,500 square foot lot will cost from $300,000 to $400,000.
Availability of Financing. Financing costs reached an all-time high in the first part of this decade. The
lack of affordable financing has led to a proliferation of creative financing packages including variable
rate mortgages, balloon payments, interest-only loans, equity participation and other techniques. The
long-term outlook for interest rates is highly uncertain, and will be influenced by such factors as deficit
spending by the federal government, federal housing policy, borrowing needs of businesses and
individuals, and the monetary policy of the Federal Reserve Board. These are all factors over which Daly
City has little or no influence. In the spirit of the overall Housing Goal, the City must recognize the
constraints in establishing realistic policies. The City has and should continue to sponsor and/or
administer interest rate reducing programs (e.g. Housing Revenue Bond and Residential Rehabilitation
Programs that benefit specific groups like low and moderate income households, first-time home buyers,
and groups with special needs).
88                                                              Daly City 2030 General Plan | Housing Element

Regional Housing Needs Assessment
State law requires that a local Housing Element include a projection of the housing units by income
category for the forthcoming planning period and that the Association of Bay Area Governments
(ABAG) determine the existing and projected regional housing needs of the Bay Area as well as each
city’s share of that regional need. The Government Code states that, “…a locality’s share of the
regional housing need includes that share of the housing need of persons at all income levels within the
area significantly affected by the jurisdiction’s general plan.” Within San Mateo County, ABAG
acknowledged the formation of the subregion for the purpose of developing the Regional Housing
Need Allocation (RHNA) in 2006. Daly City, together with 20 other jurisdictions within the County,
participated in the development of the RHNA identified within this section.
Income Definitions (Federal)
The United States Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) identifies the five income
categories below for the development of the Consolidated Plan and Strategy for Housing and
Community Development, which is prepared every five years by City of Daly City as required by federal
mandate.       Through each of these categories, the Federal Government sets the maximum dollar
amount that a household should pay for housing. By the current standard, the amount that a
household pays for housing should not exceed 30 percent of their gross income for rent or mortgage
payments including utility costs. Households that pay more than 30 percent of gross income for housing
are considered to have a cost burden, while households paying 50% or more for housing are considered
to have an extreme cost burden.
Extremely Low-income:           A household earning 30 percent or less of the area median income. In
                                2009, a family of four earning $33,950 or less in San Mateo County is
                                considered to fall within the extremely low-income category.
Very Low-income:                A household earning between 31 and 50 percent of area median
                                income. In 2009, a family of four earning between $33,950 and $56,550 in
                                San Mateo County is considered within the very low-income category.
Lower-Income:                   A household earning between 51 and 80 percent of the area median
                                income. In 2009, a family of four earning between $56,550 and $90,500 in
                                San Mateo County is considered within the lower-income category.
Moderate Income:                A household earning between 81 and 120 percent of the area median
                                income. In 2009, a family of four earning between $90,500 and $116,150 in
                                San Mateo County is considered within the moderate-income category.
Median Income:                  The point at which 50 percent of all households earn more and 50 percent
                                earn less than the area median income. In 2009, the median income for a
                                family of four in San Mateo County is $96,600.
Income Definitions (State)
The State of California Department of Housing and Community Development (HCD) uses federally
defined income categories as a basis to administer their housing programs. The Association of Bay Area
Governments (ABAG) calculates future housing needs using the five income categories of:
       Very low (50 percent or less of the area median income)
       Low (51 to 80 percent of the area median income)
       Moderate (81 to 120 percent of the area median income) and
       Above moderate (greater than 120 percent of the area median income)
Daly City 2030 General Plan | Housing Element                                                         89

However, ABAG incorporates the federal definitions of income in their existing need since the existing
need estimates are derived from HUD calculations.
Regional Housing Needs Allocation (RHNA)
Housing Element law requires a quantification of Daly City’s share of the regional housing need as
established by the Association of Bay Area Governments (ABAG) in its Regional Housing Need Plan
(RHNP). The Regional Housing Need Allocation (RHNA) for Daly City represents the minimum projection
of additional housing units needed to accommodate household growth of all income levels by the end
of the housing element’s statutory planning period (June 30, 2014). As shown in Table HE-24, the City
must demonstrate that it can accommodate a total of 1,207 new dwelling units distributed among five
income categories by 2014.
                 Table HE-24: Regional Housing Need Allocation ("RHNA") 2009 to 2014
                                                              Annual
                                               RHNA       Construction            Maximum
                   Income Category          2009-2014     Requirement          Income (2009)
                  Extremely Low                 120              24            $        33,950
                  Very Low                      121              24            $        56,550
                  Low                           121              24            $        90,500
                  Moderate                      338              68            $       114,000
                  Above Moderate                507             101
                                                 1,207          241
                 Source: Association of Bay Area Governments (ABAG); HUD
                 Notes: Maximum sales price assumes 30 percent GAI devoted to PITI, 10 percent down on 6.25%, 30yr fixed
                         loan, $350 HOA dues; maximum rental price for three-bedroom unit, assuming maximum 30 percent
                         GAI devoted to rent; The RHNA projects a housing need of 241 total very low-income units, of which
                         50 percent is estimated here to be extremely low-income. Maximum incomes are for a four-person
                         household.
Adequate Sites Inventory and Analysis
This section will demonstrate that existing zoning, together with tasks identified in this Housing Element to
amend the zoning regulations affecting several parcels identified on Table HE-27, that the City of Daly
City provides a sufficiently zoned number of parcels capable of accommodating the 1,207 dwelling
units allocated to Daly City by the Regional Housing Need Allocation between the years 2009 and 2014.
Units Approved, Under Construction, or Built
According to State guidelines, Daly City may count housing units approved, under construction, or built
since January 1, 2007 toward satisfying its RHNA goals for this planning period. Table HE-26 on page
[insert page] identifies the total number of built, approved, or under construction in Daly City since
January 1, 2007. Of these units, 38 are affordable for extremely low-, 30 are affordable for very low-, 46
for low-, 33 for moderate-, and 366 above-moderate income households. Units affordable to extremely
low-, very low-, low- and moderate-income households shown in Table HE-26 are deed restricted
affordable units produced through the affordable housing agreements between the City and
developers, disposition and development agreements (when Redevelopment Agency funding or
property had been utilized in the construction), or through project conditions of approval.
90                                                                      Daly City 2030 General Plan | Housing Element

Remaining Housing Need
In addition, Table HE-25 identifies Daly City’s remaining housing need for the planning period. This
calculation is achieved by subtracting the number of housing units built, approved, or under
construction since January 1, 2007 from Daly City’s current 1,207-unit RHNA within each income
affordability category. As shown in the table, 513 units have been built, approved, or under
construction within this planning period, resulting in a remaining housing need of 694 units. This
remaining need is allocated among 82 units for extremely low-, 91 units for very low-, 75 units for low-,
305 units for moderate-, and 141 units for above-moderate income households.
The City of Daly City is obligated by State law to ensure that appropriately zoned land exists in the city
that would allow construction of all of these 694 units. To address this requirement, Table HE-16 contains
a list of those vacant and underutilized sites in Daly City that have the potential, if developed, to
address the 694-unit remaining housing need identified in Table HE-26. Like Table HE-26, Table HE-27 on
page 60 identifies the remaining need by income affordability category.
A summary of the information provided in Tables HE-26 and Table HE-27 is as follows:
Table HE-25: Summary of Regional Housing Need Allocation Compliance
                                                                       Extremely                        Above
                                                                                 Very Low Low Moderate          Total
                                                                          Low                          Moderate
            Regional Housing Needs Allocation (RHNA) 1999-2007 [A]         120     121    121   338      507    1207
        Units Build, Approved, or Under Construction Since 1/1/07 [B]       38      30     46    33      366     513
                                Remaining Housing Need [A minus B]          82      91     75   305      141     694
                                   Total DU Potential from Table HE-X       38     115     76   305      229     763
                                   Total Affordable DU Surplus/Deficit     -44      24     1     0        88     69
               Total Affordable DU Potential from Table HE-X On Sites
                             Designated for Residential Uses Only [D]       28      85     56   226      169     565
      Percent of Affordable Units On Sites Designated for Residential
                                                      Uses Only [D/C]     74%      74%    74%   74%      74%    74%
                            Affordability/RHNA Requirement Satisfied      No†      Yes    Yes   Yes      Yes     Yes
Tasks Necessary to Address Shortfall of Adequate Housing Sites
As identified in Table HE-25, the sites identified in Table HE-27 are sufficient to address both the Regional
Housing Need Allocation for all income affordability categories except the Extremely Low-Income
category where a deficit of 44 units is present. To address this deficit, the City has developed tasks to
increase the number of second units in Daly City and, in particular, smaller second units which are those
most likely to be affordable to households of extremely low-income, i.e., less than $33,950 for a four-
person household. They are as follows:
        Remove an existing 16 dwelling unit per acre cap presently imposed in Daly City’s older
         neighborhood and instead align the density applicable to second unit to be consistent with the
Daly City 2030 General Plan | Housing Element                                                                         91

         General Plan density. The requirement to complete this amendment to the Zoning Ordinance is
         identified as Task HE-5.1 on page 69;
        Remove the parking requirement for small units inside small homes that conform to the City’s
         parking regulations. The requirement to complete this amendment to the Zoning Ordinance is
         identified as Task HE-5.2 on page 69; and
        Eliminate the requirement for owner-occupancy for second units where the applicant for a non-
         owner occupied second unit can demonstrate that the entire property is subject to professional
         property management by means of a written contract supplied to the City. The requirement to
         complete this amendment to the Zoning Ordinance is identified as Task HE-5.3 on page 70.
         On average, there are about ten applications for second units approved each year. While
         there are many inquiries from homeowners about potentially adding a second unit to their
         home, many homeowners are disallowed from doing so either because their property is of
         insufficient size to support the amount of parking required for a second unit, the neighborhood
         density will not support additional units, or the home is not occupied by the homeowner. The
         changes identified above are targeted toward broadening the City’s existing second unit
         program in a way that would allow smaller second units in Daly City’s older neighborhoods
         which are within walking distance to transit and retail/eating establishments on Mission Street.
         Staff estimates that these modifications could double the number of permissible second units
         each year dispersed throughout the City, effectively addressing the 44-unit City extremely low-
         income housing supply deficit identified in Table HE-27. Evaluations of second unit affordability in
         Daly City have historically shown that the sub-$800 rental market is provided almost entirely in the
         city’s existing second unit housing stock. As part of the program to expand the amount of the
         smaller, more affordable second units in Daly City, this Housing Element also commits the City to
         monitoring second unit construction and rental activity on an annual basis and reporting this
         information in the City’s General Plan Annual Report in Task HE-5.5.
In order to fully comply with the State’s “by right” requirement, which mandates that sites necessary to
satisfy the City’s RHNA not be subject to conditional use permit or other discretionary approvals, it will be
necessary for the City to complete the following amendments to the Zoning Ordinance:
        Remove the use permit requirement for mixed-use projects located in the (future) C-MU
         Commercial Mixed Use zone that provide a residential component resulting in an overall net
         density of at least 30 dwelling units per acre and which also contain a first-floor commercial
         component that occupies a proportion of the total building area identified by the Zoning
         Ordinance. The requirement to complete this amendment is identified as Task HE-6.1 on page
         106;
        Amend the Sullivan Corridor Specific Plan to allow the density designation and floor area ratio
         sufficient to permit the dwelling unit count identified on Table HE-15 for the 1.38-acre site located
         at the northwest corner of Bryant Street and Pierce Street. The requirement to complete this
         amendment is identified as Task HE-6.2 on page 107; and
        Rezone the one-acre site located at 169 First Avenue to a residential zone capable of permitting
         at least 20 dwelling units per acre. The requirement to complete this rezoning is identified as Task
         HE-6.3 on page 107.
        Amend the planned development zoning (PD #46) for the 2.49-acre 1050 St. Francis Boulevard
         site identified in Table HE-27 to remove the 36 dwelling unit maximum presently imposed by the
         zoning. The maximum density shall instead reflect the permitted General Plan Medium Density
         designation currently attributable to the site, i.e., 35 dwelling units per acre. The requirement to
         amend the planned development zoning is identified as Task HE-6.4 on page 107.
92                                                                 Daly City 2030 General Plan | Housing Element

       Amend the BART Station Area Specific Plan to redesignate the three-parcel site totaling 1.73
        acres situated north of East Market Street between Mission Street and First Street to the
        Neighborhood Commercial Residential Above specific plan designation, modify the
        development parameters (e.g., maximum number of stories) to ensure that the development
        allowance is consistent with other parcels in the (new) C-MU Commercial Mixed-Use zone, and
        rezone the site concurrent with the establishment of the C-MU zone for all other Mission Street
        parcels. The site is currently designated Neighborhood Commercial in the BART Station Specific
        Plan. The requirement to amend the specific plan is identified as Task HE-6.5 on page 107.
Affordability Assumptions
Table HE-27 allocates units by income level using “default density” standards established by the
California Department of Housing and Community Development (HCD). The default density standard
for Daly City is 30 dwelling units per acre. This means that if a site permits residential densities of 30
dwelling units per acre or more, HCD must accept housing capacity on the site as appropriate for
accommodating Daly City’s housing need for “lower-income” households. If a site does not allow a
residential density of 30 dwelling units per acre or more, housing capacity on the site must be assumed
to be affordable only for above moderate-income levels.
For sites that meet the default density standard, State law is silent on specific affordability level
assumptions (e.g. extremely low, very low, low or moderate). Based on historic affordability levels and
new policies and actions in the Housing Element, Daly City has assumed approximate affordability levels
of ten percent for extremely low-, seven percent for very low-, ten percent for low-, 15 percent for
moderate- and the remainder for above moderate-income households. The unit allocation among
income categories in Table HE-27 reflects these assumptions.
Realistic Development Capacity Assumptions
This Housing Element utilizes the following assumptions regarding the realistic development capacity of
sites identified on Table HE-27, which have been segmented to sites which are anticipated to be
exclusively residential and sites that are anticipated to be mixed-use in nature.
Sites zoned exclusively for residential uses. Of the 22 housing sites on the Potential Housing Sites
Inventory List, 15 sites are subject to zoning regulations which allow exclusively residential uses. The
anticipated density on these sites ranges from 15 dwelling units per acre to 50 dwelling units per acre,
largely reflecting the maximum permissible General Plan density currently attributable to each of these
sites. The City has assumed that development will occur at or near the maximum permissible density
because development trends in Daly City have historically supported this assumption. Of the 16
residential housing projects proposed over the past 20 years in traditional residential zones (exclusive of
new projects in planned development zones), all multi-family housing development has maximized the
density allowed by the General Plan Land Use Map and all single-family proposals have utilized the
smallest permissible lot size allowed by the zoning.
Sites not zoned exclusively for residential uses. The remaining seven sites on the Potential Housing Sites
Inventory List are not zoned exclusively for residential uses and are characterized as “underutilized” sites
located in either the Mission Street or Geneva Avenue corridors, meaning that property owners have
either expressed an interest in redeveloping their properties or have previously obtained land use
entitlements to do so. These corridors are more urban in nature than other areas in Daly City and
development within them has historically exceeded 50 dwelling units per acre. Examples of recent
projects built at similar densities include: Hillcrest Gardens – 35 Hillcrest Drive (100 du/ac), Vista Grande –
6730 Mission Street (63 du/ac), Schoolhouse Station – 99 School Street (67 du/ac), The Geneva
Condominiums (57 units per acre), and Landmark Daly City (56 units per acre). Each of these projects
replaced previously existing uses and all, except for Hillcrest Gardens, contains a mixed-use ground level
retail component.
Daly City 2030 General Plan | Housing Element                                                                93

Both the Mission Street and Geneva Avenue corridors are presently zoned C-1 Light Commercial and
are identified for rezoning to C-MU Commercial Mixed Use in Task HE-3.1 primarily as a means to
promote housing construction with ground floor retail uses through a more streamlined development
review process than currently exists. Neither the existing General Plan Land Use Element nor the Zoning
Ordinance identifies a maximum residential density in the Retail and Office General Plan designation or
C-1 Light Commercial zone designation for these areas. The new land use element C-MU zoning which
replaces the existing C-1 zoning will also likely not impose density limitations. Parking and ground level
retail proportions to be introduced as part of the new C-MU zoning will provide unit limits on individual
development projects.
Given the recent downturn in the housing market, it has been the City’s experience that developers will
more likely pause the development review process than reduce the number of units to allow the project
to advance. The reasons for this are complex, but most likely related to the fact that many developers
purchased property for residential or mixed-use projects during the last period of economic growth
when land values on the San Francisco Peninsula reached historical highs.
Non-Vacant Housing Sites
Of the 22 sites identified in Table HE-27, 12 sites are occupied by existing structures or parking lots. Of
these 12 sites, six sites are occupied by existing greenhouses, nurseries, and other agricultural land uses
which have an improvement-to-land value ratio of less than 1.0, supporting the notion that
redevelopment of these properties is feasible and even likely, given the history of sites with agricultural
uses being converted to residential uses in Daly City. For example, the site at 89 Second Avenue (.46
acres), which is currently for sale, is presently occupied by both a greenhouse and a single-family home.
The real estate listing for the property identifies the site as a potential multi-family housing site.
Of the remaining six sites intended to meet the RHNA, only five sites have significant existing buildings
(one site is occupied by a church parking lot that is not necessary to provide required parking by the
church which owns it). A complete analysis of these sites is as follows:
6800 Mission Street. This 0.42-acre privately-owned site was approved by the City Council in November
2006 for a mixed-use building encompassing 36 condominium units and approximately 6,000 square feet
of ground-level retail. The site, which is presently occupied by a non-operational automobile dealership,
is presently for sale. The condition of the building, constructed in the 1950s, is poor and the land-to-
property value ratio for this is 0.008. The real estate listing for the property identifies the site as a potential
multi-family housing site.
6824 Mission Street. This 0.36-acre publicly-owned site is presently occupied by a non-operational 800-
square foot auto sales office. The site was acquired by the Daly City Redevelopment Agency (now a
Successor Agency) in 2007 and is intended for redevelopment as a mixed-use building encompassing
ground level retail with residential uses above. The condition of the building, constructed in the 1940s, is
also poor, and the land-to-property value ratio for this is 0.38. This site is immediately adjacent to the
mixed-use building at 6800 Mission Street described above and, for this reason the Total Development
Capacity assumption in Table HE-27 reflects the same density that was proposed and approved as part
of the 6800 Mission Street project.
6031/6041 Mission Street. This 0.13-acre privately owned site is currently occupied by an operational
auto repair garage that the current property owner intends to tear down and build an 11-unit mixed-use
building, as reflected in the owner’s development application. The condition of the building,
constructed in the 1940s, is poor, and the land-to-property value ratio for this is 0.70. The development
capacity identified in Table HE-27 reflects both the number of units identified at this location and a City
staff assessment that the 11 units on the site could be built upon the property subject to the parking
reductions proposed in this Housing Element.
East Market Street between Mission Street and First Street. This 1.73-acre privately owned site consists of
three parcels owned by a single entity which has expressed interest in redeveloping all or a portion of
94                                                                    Daly City 2030 General Plan | Housing Element

the site. A roughly 0.37-acre portion of the site is vacant, with the balance of the site occupied by
existing operational retail buildings, an operational bank and the parking and drive aisles associated
with these uses. The combined land-to-property value ratio for the entire site is 0.69, although the ratio
for the parcel which contains the bank is 2.7. Because of the high land-to-property value ratio
associated with the bank, the 0.74-acre figure identified in Table HE-27 omits the bank portion of the
property together with a 0.78-acre portion of the site associated with the bank parking lot.
The development capacity identified in Table HE-27 for this site reflects a modest estimate of the
potential density of the site at 40 dwelling units per acre, roughly half the density approved at 6800
Mission Street and three-quarters the density constructed at Landmark Daly City (6501 Mission Street). To
allow a mixed-use development containing residential uses and to ensure the most comprehensive
development project, it will be necessary to amend the BART Station Specific Plan to redesignate the
three-parcel site totaling 1.73 acres situated north of East Market Street between Mission Street and First
Street to the Neighborhood Commercial Residential Above specific plan designation, modify the
development parameters (e.g., maximum number of stories, site coverage, etc.) to ensure that the
development allowance is consistent with other parcels in the (new) C-MU Commercial Mixed-Use zone,
and rezone the site concurrent with the establishment the C-MU zone for all other Mission Street parcels.
The site is currently designated Neighborhood Commercial in the BART Station Specific Plan. The
requirement to complete this rezoning is identified as Task HE-6.5 on page 107.
1698 Bryant Street. This 1.38-acre privately owned site is currently occupied by an operational auto
repair garage that has previously been considered by a non-profit housing developer for the
construction of 48 apartments. The condition of the building, constructed in the 1950s, is average, and
the land-to-property value ratio for this site exceeds 3.0, due in large part to an extremely low ($22,000)
land value attributable to the site per the San Mateo Tax Collector. The development capacity
identified in Table HE-27 reflects the density advanced as a part this developer’s proposal and a City
staff assessment that 48 apartments could be built upon the property subject to both the parking
reductions proposed in this Housing Element and an amendment to the Sullivan Corridor Specific Plan
which would allow the density designation and floor area ratio sufficient to permit at least 48 dwelling
units on the site. The overall site density with this number of units would be 35 dwelling units per acre.
Monarch Village, with a density of 65 dwelling units per acre, is under construction immediately across
Pierce Street from the subject parcel. The requirement to complete the Sullivan Corridor Specific Plan
Amendment is identified as Task HE-6.2 on page 107.
Daly City 2030 General Plan | Housing Element                                                            95

Table HE-26: Units Built, Approved, and/or Under Construction, January 1, 2007 to July 1, 2009
                                                                                Permitted                                          Extremely                               Above
  Project                                  Location                 Site Size                  Status          Funding Source                 Very Low   Low   Moderate             Total
                                                                                  Density                                             Low                                 Moderate
                                                                                                           ABHOW, HOME, CDBG,
  Hillcrest Gardens Senior Apartments      35 Hillcrest Boulevard   0.40 ac     100 du/ac       Built                                   38        1        1       0          0        40
                                                                                                             HEART, DCRA, HUD
  Monarch Village Senior Apartments        165 Pierce Street        3.18 ac      65 du/ac   Construction      Private financing          0        0       16       16       176       208
  The Geneva Condominiums (Mixed Use)      2665 Geneva Avenue       1.26 ac      57 du/ac       Built         Private financing          0        0       11        0        61        72
  Landmark Daly City Condominiums (Mixed-
                                           6501 Mission Street      1.70 ac      56 du/ac       Built         Private financing         0        0        0       14         81       95
  Use)
  Habitat for Humanity Multifamily         7555 Mission Street      0.69 ac      52 du/ac    Approved       DCRA, HOME, HCD              0       18       18       0          0       36
  Annie Street Duplexes                    1626-1636 Annie Street   0.22 ac      27 du/ac       Built         Private financing          0        0        0        0         6         6
  Edgeworth Duplexes                       1645 Edgeworth Ave       0.18 ac      22 du/ac    Approved         Private financing          0        0        0        0         4         4
  Kauai Estates                            900 Crocker Avenue       0.40 ac      18 du/ac       Built         Private financing          0        0        0        0         7         7
  Accacia/Velasco Single Family Homes      Accacia/Velasco          0.69 ac      17 du/ac    Approved         Private financing         0        0        0        0         12       12
  Zita/Eastmoor Townhomes                  211 Eastmoor Avenue      1.00 ac      17 du/ac    Approved         Private financing          0        0        0        3        14        17
  Annie Street Single Family Homes         1616-1624 Annie Street   0.34 ac      15 du/ac       Built         Private financing          0        0        0        0         5         5
  Habitat for Humanity Single Family Homes 301 - 313 Habitat Way    0.49 ac      14 du/ac       Built            PHH, HOME               0        7        0        0         0         7
  Habitat for Humanity Single Family Homes 523 - 539 De Long Street 0.29 ac      14 du/ac       Built        PHH, HOME, DCRA            0        4        0        0          0        4
                                                                    Units Constructed, Approved, or Proposed Since January 1, 2007      38       30       46      33        366      513
                                                                              Regional Housing Needs Allocation (RHNA) 1999-2007       120      121      121      338       507      1207
                                                                                                         Remaining Housing Need         82       91       75      305       141       694
96                                                                                                                                           Daly City 2030 General Plan | Housing Element
Table HE-27: Potential Housing Sites Inventory List
                                                                                                                                                                 Permitted                                                                   Total
                                                                                    General Plan                                                          Site                  Extremely                                      Above
 Map #   Reference Name (owner name)                         Location                                            Zoning                Existing Use                Density                  Very Low      Low      Moderate              Development                     Notes
                                                                                     Designation                                                          Size                     Low                                        Moderate
                                                                                                                                                                  (du/ac)                                                                  Capacity
                                                        6824 Mission Street          Retail/Office                                                                                                                                                         Zone text amendment required
  1      Gigli (former) properties (DCRA)
                                                        (APN 003 172 170)           Commercial†
                                                                                                        C-1 Light Commercial      Mixed-Use Building      0.36       86              2          5           3         12           9           31
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   (see Policy HE X.X)
         Mission Street Mixed Use (Alpha                                             Retail/Office                              Auto dealership (non-                                                                                                        Approved prior to 1/1/2007;
   2     Group)
                                                        6800 Mission Street
                                                                                    Commercial†
                                                                                                        C-1 Light Commercial
                                                                                                                                       operational)
                                                                                                                                                          0.42       86              2          5           4         14          11           36
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   all approvals valid
                                                        6031 Mission Street          Retail/Office                                                                                                                                                         Zone text amendment required
   3     6031/6041 Mission Street (Britton)
                                                      (004-154-340 and 350)         Commercial†
                                                                                                        C-1 Light Commercial         Retail building      0.13       83              1          2           1          4           3           11
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   (see Policy HE 6.1)
         Geneva Avenue bet.                          2321 and 2333 Geneva
                                                                                     Retail/Office
   4     Pasadena/Castillo                          Avenue (APN 005 061 010
                                                                                    Commercial†
                                                                                                        C-1 Light Commercial          Vacant land         0.37       57              1          3           2          8           6           21                        None
         (Schembri/Waldman)                                  thru 070)
                                                 [no assigned address] (APNs
                                                                                     Retail/Office
   5     Geneva/Rio Verde NE Corner (Patel)        005 065 120, 130, 140, and
                                                                 190)
                                                                                    Commercial†
                                                                                                        C-1 Light Commercial          Vacant land         0.35       57              1          3           2          8           6           20                        None
                                                           89 Third Street                                R-3 Multiple-Family       Greenhouse and
   6     Castle/Third Greenhouse Site
                                                        (APN 006 234 030)
                                                                               Residential High Density
                                                                                                              Residential            existing home
                                                                                                                                                          0.46       50              1          3           2          9           7           23                        None
                                                      [no assigned address]
  7      Serramonte Condominiums
                                                        (APN 091 247 080)
                                                                               Residential High Density Planned Development           Vacant land         4.00       50             10         30          20         80         60           200                        None
                                                                                                          R-3 Multiple-Family
   8     130 Station Avenue (Uniacke)                  130 Station Avenue      Residential High Density
                                                                                                              Residential
                                                                                                                                      Vacant land         0.23       50              1          2           1          5           3           12                        None
         Brunswick Street across from Chelsea         [no assigned address]    Commercial Retail and          C-2 Heavy
  9      Court (Mormon Church)                          (APN 003 210 260)               Office               Commercial
                                                                                                                                      Vacant land         1.15       43              3          8           5         20          15           50                        None
                                                      [no assigned address]
         E. Market between Mission Street and                                        Retail/Office                                Office building and                                                                                                      Zone text amendment required
  10     First Street (Garibaldi)
                                                  (APNs 006 251 210, 220, and
                                                                                    Commercial†
                                                                                                        C-1 Light Commercial
                                                                                                                                       vacant land
                                                                                                                                                          0.74       40              1          4           3         12           9           30
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   (see Policy HE 6.5)
                                                                 230)
                                                      [no assigned address]                                                       Closed high school
  11     Serramonte Del Rey (JUHSD)
                                                        (APN 091 211 230)
                                                                                 Office Commercial      Planned Development
                                                                                                                                 site (vacant portion)
                                                                                                                                                          4.97       35              9         26          18         70          53          175                        None
                                                      [no assigned address]      Residential Medium         R-2 Two-Family
  12     Samoan Church Property
                                                   (APN 005 067 210 and 220)           Density                Residential
                                                                                                                                        Parking lot       0.57       35              1          3           2          8           6           20                        None
  13     St. Francis Court Condominiums
         (Skyline Heights Partners)
                                                    1050 St. Francis Boulevard
                                                        (APN 091 211 340)
                                                                                 Residential Medium
                                                                                       Density
                                                                                                        Planned Development           Vacant land         2.49       35              4         13           9         35          26           87
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Zone text amendment required
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   (see Policy HE 6.4)
                                                        1698 Bryant Street       Commercial Retail         Residential Retail          Auto repair                                                                                                         Zone text amendment required
  14     Bryant Street Apartments
                                                        (APN 006 346 140)        and Office (C-R/O)      Commercial (C-R/R)           (operational)
                                                                                                                                                          1.38       35              2          7           5         19          14           48
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   (see Policy HE 6.2)
                                                          169 First Avenue      Residential Medium-                                                                                                                                                       Zone map and text amendment
  15     First Avenue Greenhouses (Alioto)
                                                        (APN 006 252 080)            Low Density
                                                                                                            Interim District          Greenhouses         1.00       20              0          0           0          0          20           20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            required (see Policy HE 6.3)
                                                      [no assigned address]       Residential Retail       Residential Retail            Nursery
  16     Washington/Bryant Greenhouse Site
                                                        (APN 006 345 070)       Commercial (C-R/R)       Commercial (C-R/R)          (no structures)
                                                                                                                                                          0.34       15              0          0           0          0           5           5                         None
         Edgeworth Greenhouse Site                     No address assigned        Residential Retail       Residential Retail
  17     (Shimamoto)                                    (APN 006 346 170)       Commercial (C-R/R)       Commercial (C-R/R)
                                                                                                                                       Greenhouse         0.17       15              0          0           0          0           3           3                         None
         Edgeworth/Washington Greenhouse              [no assigned address]       Residential Retail       Residential Retail       Greenhouse and
  18     Site                                     (APNs 006 344 020 and 160)    Commercial (C-R/R)       Commercial (C-R/R)              nursery
                                                                                                                                                          1.02       15              0          0           0          0          15           24                        None
         Calgary Street/Rio Verde single family          55 Calgary Street           Retail/Office
 19      (Baldini)                                (APNs 005 064 260 and 280)        Commercial†
                                                                                                        Planned Development           Vacant land         0.34       23              0          0           0          0           8           8                         None
                                                      [no assigned address]     Residential Medium-        R-1 Single-Family
 20      Rio Verde greenhouses (Perlite)
                                                        (APN 005 064 210)            Low Density              Residential
                                                                                                                                      Greenhouses         0.40       20              0          0           0          0           7           7                         None
         Lisbon Street Greenhouse Site                   640 Lisbon Street      Residential Medium-        R-1 Single-Family
  21     (Podesta)                                      (APN 006 453 020)            Low Density              Residential
                                                                                                                                       Greenhouse         0.27       15              0          0           0          0           4           4                         None
                                                      [no assigned address]                               R-3 Multiple-Family
  22     Smith Property
                                                        (APN 003 211 310)
                                                                               Residential Low Density
                                                                                                              Residential
                                                                                                                                      Vacant land         5.12       15              0          0           0          0          74           74                        None
                                                                                                                                                                    Total           38        115          76        305         365          908
                                                                                                                                                                  Balance           -44        24           1          0         224          214
       † Properties within the Retail/Office Commercial General Plan Land Use designation are not subject to density limitations; project densities for the properties reflect recent development trends for proposed and/or completed mixed-use projects within the same zone.
Daly City 2030 General Plan | Housing Element                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            97

Quantified Objectives
Based on the objectives outlined in this Housing Element, the City has established the quantified
objectives shown in Table HE-28 to meet its housing needs over the 2009-2014 planning period. A more
detailed discussion follows.
     Table HE-28: Quantified Objectives by Income Category
                               Extremely                                         Above
       Income Category            Low     Very-Low        Low      Moderate     Moderate         Total
       Vacant Sites                 4          12           8          31          40              94
       Underutilized Sites          4          11           7          30          33              86
       New Second Units             9           2           2           0           0              13
       Conservation                 3           3           0           0           0               6
       Rehabilitated Units          2           1           0           0           0               3
       Preserved Units             12          12           0           0           0              24
       Total                       33          42          17          61          73             226
Construction Objective
As identified in the Population and Employment Characteristics section, the population of Daly City can
expect to grow by 13,700 residents between 2010 and 2030. This figure represents an addition of about
685 new residents per year or an annual population growth rate of 0.64 percent. Based on the current
household size (3.37 persons per household), this population increase will create an annual need for
about 200 housing units each year between 2010 and 2030.
Taking into account existing housing units under construction, this long-term 200 unit-per-year target
roughly correlates to the five-year 1,207 unit construction target established as part of the Regional
Housing Need Allocation (RHNA) (see Regional Housing Needs Assessment section for discussion).
According to the Potential Housing Sites Inventory List, there are a 22 development sites on which
housing a which significant housing developments could be constructed. These sites range in size from
.13 acres to 5.12 acres, and range in approved or allowed density from 15 units per acre to 86 units per
acre. Combined, the sites could provide as many as 908 dwelling units, or enough housing for about
3,060 new residents.
Although the Potential Housing Sites Inventory List satisfies Daly City’s RHNA until the year 2014, it does
not identify which sites will be available for housing development beyond this timeframe. For this
reason, the City has developed a comprehensive set of housing policies targeted toward maximizing
the use of both vacant and previously development properties not reflected in the Potential Housing
Sites Inventory List.
Rehabilitation Objective
In order to upgrade deteriorated dwelling units found throughout Da1y City, the City will work to
complete the rehabilitation of 31 dwelling units per year for the years 2009 through 2014. While it is not
possible to specify precisely which units will be rehabilitated, the quantified objective is, within the next
seven years, to correct 90 percent of the residential buildings with major or critical deficiencies identified
in the Housing Conditions Survey. While the City’s Residential Rehabilitation Program is not targeted to a
specific area and property owners throughout the City may avail themselves of the Program, the
neighborhoods east of Interstate 280 have the highest concentration of dilapidated units and may likely
require a greater proportion of the residential rehabilitation resources.
98                                                                Daly City 2030 General Plan | Housing Element

This category also includes rehabilitation loans or grants to provide access for handicapped persons.
Eligible homes can be retrofitted with such modifications as ramps, grab bars, lowered sinks and
widened doorways. The City implemented the Senior Minor Home Repair Program in July 1990 that
offers grants to seniors to make necessary repairs to their homes, often deferring the cost of repair until
the dwelling is sold. Also, the City has annually allocated CDBG funds to a nonprofit, Center for the
Independence of the Disabled, to provide free home modifications for eligible households with disabled
members.
Replacement Objective
The City will seek to remove by appropriate means all buildings identified as not suitable for
rehabilitation. A substandard building is considered not suitable for rehabilitation if improvement costs
to make it into decent, safe and sanitary housing exceeds the cost of replacing it with a newly
constructed building. Such units are, by definition, considered to be in such a state of disrepair that
rehabilitation is not feasible, and occupancy of these units on a long-term basis poses a significant
threat to health and safety of the occupants.
Recognizing the guidelines for replacement, it is nearly impossible to determine the precise number of
units not suitable for rehabilitation. In a few extreme cases, dilapidated and structurally unsound
buildings will require major work (e.g., new foundations, structural modifications, new heating and
plumbing) to the extent that demolition and complete new construction would be more cost effective.
The structural problems associated with these properties usually go undetected in a windshield survey of
building conditions like the one completed in July of 2001 and updated in 2008. However, based on
previous demolition permits issued by Daly City a total of three such units per year is anticipated. The
Replacement Objective for the current planning period from 2009-2014 is, therefore, 15 units.
Preservation Objective
In order to conserve the existing housing stock, the City should avoid actions that would adversely
affect existing, sound dwellings, such as rezoning to non-residential uses and approving major
demolition projects without adequate replacement housing.              The preservation objective also
contributes to the provision of a balanced housing supply by discouraging the demolition of lower cost
housing that would be replaced with more expensive housing, unless that housing complies with the
previously cited housing construction objectives. The San Mateo County Housing Authority, along with
the City, is presently monitoring the one at-risk rental property, Villa Fontana Apartments with 120
affordable units), in Daly City to ensure its long-term affordability.
Second Unit Construction Objective
As identified in the Remaining Housing Need section on Table HE-54, the sites identified in Table HE-27
are insufficient to address the Extremely Low-Income category where a deficit of 44 units is present. The
section describes a number of steps the City will take as part of the Zoning Ordinance update to
increase the number of second units in Daly City and, in particular, smaller second units which are those
most likely to be affordable to households of extremely low-income. The changes to the Zoning
Ordinance outlined in the section will effectively introduce the potential for new smaller second units in
neighborhoods where these units are presently not allowed due to density limits and parking restrictions.
Staff estimates that these modifications could double the number of permissible second units each year
dispersed throughout the City, effectively addressing the 44-unit City extremely low-income housing
supply deficit identified in Table HE-27.
Daly City 2030 General Plan | Housing Element                                                          99
Preservation of Affordable At-Risk Housing Units
California Government Code Section 65583 requires jurisdictions to evaluate the potential for low-
income housing projects to convert to non-low-income housing and to propose activities to preserve or
replace the converted units. The following information is required:
       An inventory of restricted low-income housing projects in the City and their potential for
        conversion;
       An analysis of costs for preserving and/or replacing the units at risk;
       An analysis of the organizational and financial resources available for preserving and/or
        replacing the units at risk;
       Quantified objectives for the number of at-risk units to be preserved;
       Programs for preserving the at-risk units
The State requires that the analysis include projects that are at-risk of converting during the next two five
year planning periods under the Housing Element.
Inventory of At-Risk Units
This section identifies in Daly City the low-income units at-risk of converting to market rate units during
the next ten years and evaluates the likelihood of conversion.
This inventory includes all multiple-family units which are assisted under a variety of federal, State, and
local programs, including HUD programs, State and local bond programs, redevelopment programs
and local in-lieu fees, inclusionary housing polices, density bonuses, and direct assistance programs. The
inventoried units should be those eligible to change to market rate housing uses due to termination of
subsidy contract, mortgage prepayment, or expiring use restrictions. Within Daly City, there is only one
government assisted low-income housing project (see description below) at-risk of converting to market
rate housing use during the next ten years.
Apartment Name:          Villa Fontana
Owner:                   G&K Management Co., Inc.
                         5150 Overland Ave.
                         Culver City, CA 90230
Total Unit Count:        120 (of which all are targeted to elderly and/or disabled and 112 are Section 8
units)
Mortgage Type:           HUD Section 236 Mortgage and Section 8 Agreement. While the Section 236
                         Mortgage contract does not expire until September 2016, the owner executed a
                         HUD Mark Up-to-Market agreement on October 1, 1999 that prevents it from
                         opting out of its project-based Section 8 contract until September 30, 2004.
Amberwood Apartments in Daly City is no longer on the at-risk inventory for Daly City because it opted
out in July 1999. Amberwood contains 123 elderly units. This project was originally funded with a HUD
221(d)(4) loan. All tenants in the complex now receive Section 8 vouchers from the San Mateo County
Housing Authority. Presently, the owner of Amberwood Apartments is voluntarily participating in the
Section 8 Voucher Program and has not indicated any intentions to discontinue program participation
in the near future.
100                                                               Daly City 2030 General Plan | Housing Element

If owners of at-risk housing complexes wish to prepay the HUD loan or terminate their HUD contract, they
must notify affected tenants and public agencies at least one year prior to sale or termination under
federal and State law. In addition, State law requires that owners of at-risk multifamily buildings seeking
to sell or end their HUD contract provides qualified organizations interested in maintaining the
affordability of the units first right of refusal.
With the current state of high cost housing market in San Mateo County, it is difficult to assess whether
the City’s at-risk units will convert to market housing or not. However, the Villa Fontana ownership
appears to find its HUD subsidies satisfactory as evident from its recently re-negotiated Mark Up-to-
Market agreement for project-based Section 8. Meanwhile, Amberwood Apartments, which opted out
in July 1999, continues using HUD assistance by accepting tenant-based Section 8 vouchers. There has
been no noticeable discontent with HUD assistance from either Villa Fontana or Amberwood
Apartments. The San Mateo County Housing Authority and HUD, not Daly City, have purview over Villa
Fontana’s HUD mortgage. The City will monitor its at-risk units on its own initiative and work with and
support the County Housing Authority and HUD to make sure these units remain affordable (see Program
16 on Page 118).
Cost Analysis of Preservation and Replacement
The following analysis examines the cost of preserving the units at-risk and the cost of producing
replacement rental housing comparable in size and rent levels to the units which might convert to
market rate prices. In addition, this analysis will compare the costs between preservation and
replacement.
Preservation costs. In the Bay Area, including Daly City, housing prices have undergone dramatic
increases in recent years. A comparable apartment building in size and rents to Villa Fontana
Apartments was recently listed for sale at $11.2 million, or $112,000 per unit. Applying this per unit
estimate to Villa Fontana, with its 120 units, would result in a market value of approximately $13.4 million.
The costs of preserving units discussed above factor in purchase, rehabilitation, and maintenance costs.
Maintenance costs are assumed to be low for Villa Fontana given its age and excellent condition.
Replacement costs. The cost of developing new housing depends on a variety of factors such as
density, size of units, location and related land costs, and type of construction. Land costs in the Bay
Area are among the highest in the nation. The cost to replace Villa Fontana Apartments has been
estimated using average costs for land and construction in Daly City. The per unit replacement cost is
estimated to be between $100,000 to $125,000 per unit. Consequently, the replacement cost for the
120-unit Villa Fontana Apartments would range from $12 million to $15 million. Based on the present day
housing market and its inflated prices, the replacement cost for Villa Fontana is likely nearer the higher
end of the range.
Under the earlier analysis of preservation costs, it was assumed that HUD Section 8 subsidies would be
available annually for existing and future owners of Villa Fontana Apartments. If Congress significantly
cuts Section 8 appropriations in the near future, the estimated preservation costs for Villa Fontana would
increase significantly. Based on the assessment of preservation and replacement costs, preserving the
City’s at-risk units appears to be the most cost-effective option.
Resources for Preservation
The types of resources available to preserve the at-risk low-income housing units in Daly City fall into two
categories: 1) entities, such as public agencies or non-profits, with the interest and capacity to purchase
and/or manage at-risk units, and 2) financial resources available to purchase existing units or develop
replacement units.
Public and nonprofit agencies. As part of the research for this section, local and regional private, non-
profit housing organizations were contacted. They could not make a commitment to purchase the at-
Daly City 2030 General Plan | Housing Element                                                             101

risk units in the future because the need to assume ownership and management of these units is
speculative at this stage. They did state, though, that they were interested and would be willing to work
with Daly City to preserve the long-term affordability of these units if necessary. The organizations
contacted were Mid-Peninsula Housing Coalition, Citizens Housing Corporation and Mercy Charities
Housing.
The State Housing and Community Development Department (HCD) also maintains a list of qualified
organizations, including nonprofit housing developers, who are interested in being given first right of
refusal on any upcoming sale of federally-subsidized at-risk rental units in order to keep the units
affordable.
Public financing and subsidies. As a result of the high cost of purchasing and developing housing,
intense competition for available funding, and restrictions on the use of funds, financing for the
preservation and/or replacement of at-risk units will likely come from multiple sources. The following
funding sources have been identified for use in purchasing at-risk units in Daly City. Because new
funding sources may become available in the future, the list below should not be viewed as
comprehensive.
1)       Redevelopment Set-Aside Funds
         State law required redevelopment agencies to set-aside at least 20 percent of tax increment
         revenues for increasing and improving the City’s supply of low and moderate income housing.
         As of February 1, 2012, the City’s Redevelopment Agency was dissolved.
2)       State Programs
         The State provides several financial resources for housing development activities, including the
         preservation or replacement of at-risk units, through its various agencies. Since many of the State
         housing programs have a competitive funding cycle, Daly City would, if the situation arose,
         identify the amount of funding needed to preserve or replace at-risk units and apply to the
         appropriate programs.
         a. State Housing and Community Development Funds: State HCD offers a variety of loans and
             grants for housing development. One current program is the Multifamily Housing Program,
             which awards deferred loans for acquisition, rehabilitation and new construction.
         b. CalHFA Funds: The California Housing Finance Agency (CalHFA) operates several programs
             targeting both multifamily and single family housing.                CHFA's multifamily housing
             development programs offer a range of loans to assist in the acquisition and development of
             affordable rental units.
         c. Tax Credits: The California Tax Credit Allocation Committee, under the State Treasurer’s
             Office, implements the federal and State low-income housing tax credit programs, which are
             available to eligible acquisition, rehabilitation and/or new construction projects annually
             through a competitive application cycle. State tax credits can only be received upon
             approval for federal tax credits. Because of the highly competitive nature of the funding
             process, projects awarded tax credits are targeted to very low-income renters. Public or
             private developers are eligible to apply.
3)       CDBG Funds
         Through the federal Community Development Block Grant (CDBG) program, the City provides
         grants and loans to a wide range of housing and neighborhood development activities. As an
         entitlement grantee, Daly City receives CDBG funds directly from HUD each year. The City has
         been averaging about $1.6 million in annual CDBG funding from HUD over the last four years
102                                                                Daly City 2030 General Plan | Housing Element

        which is allocated to five funding categories: general administration, housing, economic
        development, capital improvements and public services.
        Over the last four fiscal years, an average of $500,000 has been allocated annually towards
        housing activities. However, the City commits the majority of its annual CDBG funds for housing
        activities towards residential rehabilitation. Under the City’s Residential Rehabilitation Program,
        grants and low interests loans are available to eligible single family and multifamily property
        owners.
4)      HOME Funds
        Daly City, in conjunction with several local jurisdictions in San Mateo County and the County
        itself, form a consortium to receive Home Investment Partnership Program (HOME) funds from
        HUD. Being a consortium enables the participating jurisdictions to take a regional approach to
        meeting housing needs, have consensus on prioritizing proposed projects and allocations, and
        pool funds and human resources. The County administers the HOME funds.
        Jurisdictions in the consortium apply to the County each year for HOME dollars. Each jurisdiction
        within the consortium has an opportunity to review and comment on all proposed applications.
        Daly City has focused its HOME applications and received HOME funds in the last few years for
        proposed acquisition and rehabilitation of multifamily units and for homebuyer assistance to
        households with emergency needs. The City became HOME in FY 2003-04.
5)      Other HUD Funds
        Subject to annual Congressional appropriations, HUD will provide most – and in some cases all –
        of the financial incentives necessary for acquisition or maintenance of federally subsidized at-risk
        projects with existing owners or other public or private entities like non-profit organizations. Some
        HUD funding sources include the following:
        - Restructured and/or renewed Section 8 contracts between existing owners and HUD to
        maintain or extend affordability of at-risk units. Villa Fontana Apartments chose this option by
        participating in HUD’s Mark Up to Market Program and delaying any possibility of an opt out for
        five years.
        - Section 8 Vouchers are available to tenants in at-risk multifamily units whose owners terminate
        their project-based Section 8 contracts to prevent any displacements. These owners can then
        voluntarily accept Section 8 tenant-based vouchers or else the tenants can seek out another
        rental unit since the vouchers are portable. If the tenants move, the vouchers will only pay up to
        the difference of the HUD rent standard and 30 percent of the tenant's monthly income.
Daly City 2030 General Plan | Housing Element                                                              103

Housing Goal, Policies, and Tasks
The information, analyses, recommendations and programs offered in this Housing Element are aimed
at the accomplishment of a single housing goal, which was developed as part of the Envision Daly City
process:
        “Daly City will include well-designed housing choices for a variety of household
        incomes, life stages and its diverse population with a good balance between
        ownership and rental units. Mission Street and Geneva Avenue will be urban corridors
        with unique mixed-use developments and public improvement projects that add to
        vibrancy to these streets.”
This goal seeks to allow a wider range of choices for those who have few, if any choices. The housing
goal promotes opportunities to choose a location where they want to live, select a dwelling that meets
their needs, both physically and financially, and improve their living environment. An underlying theme
in Daly City's General Plan, which is especially true in the Housing Element, is that as each individual is
better off with more choices in any decision, so are we all.
The following section provides specific housing policies and the tasks necessary to implement the
housing goal. Appendix A provides a summary of each of these policies and identifies the specific
department charged with implementing each policy, the estimated completion date for each task,
and the funding source that the City will use to implement each task. In many instances, task
implementation will occur as part of the City’s upcoming update of the Daly City Zoning which is
expected to be complete by 2013.
Housing Supply
Policy HE-1:    Maintain and, where possible, create larger housing development sites throughout the
                City
                Task HE-1.1:    Increase the minimum property sizes in all commercial zones and R-3
                Multiple-Family Residential zone and restrict the ability of existing sites within this zone to
                subdivide below the established minimum lot size. The minimum parcel shall be
                established at the time of the Zoning Ordinance update and shall be such that it
                promotes the construction of mixed-use and/or higher density multifamily development,
                as determined by the respective zone to which it applies. [note: this change would only
                be instituted if an amendment to the minimum number of units required for new
                condominium project is decreased].
                Task HE-1.2:    Incorporate a lot merger incentive allowance into the Zoning Ordinance
                whereby property owners electing to merge two or more adjacent lots for the purpose of
                development are provided specific incentives to do so. The incentive program shall
                establish incentives that are significant enough to promote voluntary lot mergers and
                shall be commensurate with the size of the parcels being merged and/or created (see
                also Land Use Element Task LU 1.2).
Policy HE-2:    Support infill housing in existing neighborhoods by offering streamlined planning
                and environmental reviews
                Task HE-2.1:    Develop a Permit Streamlining Program that identifies specific ways to
                reduce the processing times of projects that increase the supply of housing. These
                projects shall include minor subdivisions involving the creation of four or fewer parcels
                and the construction of duplexes in the R-1/A Single Family/Duplex Residential Zone. The
                Program shall identify criteria for inclusion in the Zoning Ordinance that establish which
104                                                               Daly City 2030 General Plan | Housing Element

                project characteristics will qualify a project for streamlining and what method of
                streamlining will be utilized.
                Task HE-2.2:     Continue to exempt infill housing development proposals (including minor
                subdivisions) from the requirements of the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) if
                the proposal meets all of the requirements of CEQA Guidelines Section 15332.
                Task HE 2.3:     Amend the automatic expiration for all discretionary land use approvals
                (including design review approval) from one year to two years, and amend the
                expiration provision to indicate that an applicant need only apply for a building permit
                within the specified two-year timeframe.
Policy HE-3:    Provide regulatory incentives for developers to construct higher-density mixed-use
                development along Mission Street, Geneva Avenue, and any other locations within close
                proximity to public transit
                Task HE-3.1:     Within one year, of the Housing Element adoption, the City shall establish
                a Commercial Mixed-Use (C-MU) zone for areas targeted for mixed-use development,
                including, but not limited to the boundaries of the existing C-1 Light Commercial zone
                presently encompassing Mission Street and Geneva Avenue (approximately 65 acres),
                and establish development regulations in the Zoning Ordinance specifically for higher-
                density mixed-use development. The City shall, as a part of this task, explore increased
                building height within the C-MU zone, as determined sufficient to promote the
                construction of higher density mixed-use development within the zone.
                Task HE-3.2:    Review the existing design guidelines for mixed-use development to
                ensure the guidelines adequately address pertinent issues related to the construction of
                the mixed-use development both within existing neighborhoods and when higher-density
                development is proposed adjacent to lower-density neighborhoods. Amend these
                guidelines and augment with development regulations identified in Task HE 3.1 above to
                incorporate methods for repositioning mixed-use building mass away from lower-density
                neighborhoods.
                Task HE-3.3:    Amend the parking regulations to allow for a 30 percent parking
                reduction for all mixed-use development projects and clarify that the mixed-use parking
                reduction is allowed for buildings containing residential and retail components and
                parking available to both uses (same as Task CE-10.2).
                Task HE-3.4:    For larger projects (e.g., 50 units or more), allow further parking reductions
                for all development projects that provide permanently-funded HOA/POA amenities (e.g.,
                van pools or car sharing programs) to building occupants, are within 0.25 miles of any
                public bus hub, or are within 0.5 mile distance of a BART station. For the purpose of this
                task, a bus hub shall be defined as a location where significant numbers of passengers
                are exchanged from one mechanized mode of transport to another (e.g., bus transfer
                points, bus “park-n-rides”, etc.) (same as Task CE-10.3).
                Task HE-3.5:    Amend the parking regulations to remove differentiation between single-
                family, multiple-family, and condominium uses for the purpose of parking regulations, and
                establish such regulations based on total bedroom count. This requirement shall also
                apply to residential additions and the provision of additional bedrooms within any
                existing dwelling (same as Task CE-10.4).
                Task HE-3.6:    Clarify that no parking reduction incentive (other than incentives allowed
                for senior affordable units) shall result in less than one parking space per unit. Any
                housing development that is willing to deed-restrict at least 20 percent of units for
Daly City 2030 General Plan | Housing Element                                                              105

             extremely low-income households shall be however be exempt from the minimum
             parking requirement identified by this task and instead a be subject to providing at least
             0.5 parking spaces per unit (same as Task CE-10.5).
Policy HE-4: Assure that standards for new housing construction comply with appropriate aircraft noise
             abatement requirements
             Task HE-4.1:      All new housing development within the 65dB CNEL aircraft contour, as
             shown on the most recent FAA accepted San Francisco International Airport Noise
             Exposure Map, shall be constructed to achieve an interior noise level of 45 dB CNEL or
             less based on aircraft noise events.
             Task HE-4.2:      For all development proposals with the 65dB CNEL noise contour, the City
             shall require a noise study that identifies the proposed project’s compliance with
             requirement of Task 4.1 above. If the project qualifies for review under the California
             Environmental Quality Act (CEQA), the City shall incorporate the noise study and any
             mitigation measures into the CEQA document and shall adopt findings that the project,
             as conditioned, complies with the interior noise level requirement.
             Task HE-4.3:      The City shall incorporate compliance with this policy into adopted CEQA
             compliance guidelines. The guidelines shall identify detailed compliance requirements,
             such as the methods of acceptable noise mitigation (insulation, windows, etc.).
Housing Affordability
Policy HE-5: Allow the construction of additional second units throughout the City
             Task HE-5.1:      Align the maximum neighborhood density applicable to second units to
             be consistent with the maximum neighborhood density allowed by the General Plan.
             Task HE-5.2:      Eliminate the required parking for small second units where the second
             unit is no larger than 400 square feet, the size of the home in which the unit is proposed is
             no greater than 1,600 square feet including the garage, and the existing home provides
             two legal, i.e., full-sized, parking spaces.
             Task HE-5.3:      Eliminate the requirement for owner-occupancy for second units where
             the applicant for a non-owner occupied second unit can demonstrate that the entire
             property is subject to professional property management by means of a written contract
             supplied to the City.
             Task HE-5.4:      Continue to offer same-day, express plan check permitting for all second
             units (see also Land Use Element Task LU-14.4).
             Task HE-5.5:      Monitor second unit construction and rental activity on an annual basis
             and report this information in the City’s General Plan Annual Report.
Vacant and Underutilized Sites
Policy HE-6: Assure that adequate development sites exist on the Potential Housing Sites Inventory List
             to ensure compliance with the City’s Regional Housing Need Allocation
             Task HE-6.1:      Remove the use permit requirement for mixed-use projects located in the
             (future) C-MU Commercial Mixed Use zone that provide a residential component
106                                                            Daly City 2030 General Plan | Housing Element

                resulting in an overall net density of at least 30 dwelling units per acre and which also
                contain a first-floor commercial component that occupies a proportion of the total
                building area identified by the Zoning Ordinance.
                Task HE-6.2:     Amend the Sullivan Corridor Specific Plan to allow the density designation
                and floor area ratio sufficient to permit the dwelling unit count identified on Table HE-27
                for the 1.38-acre site located at the northwest corner of Bryant Street and Pierce Street.
                Task HE-6.3:     Rezone the one-acre site located at 169 First Avenue to a residential zone
                capable of permitting at least 20 dwelling units per acre.
                Task HE-6.4:     Amend the planned development zoning (PD #46) for the 2.49-acre 1050
                St. Francis Boulevard site identified in Table HE-27 to remove the 36 dwelling unit
                maximum presently imposed by the zoning. The maximum density shall instead reflect
                the permitted General Plan Medium Density designation currently attributable to the site,
                i.e., 35 dwelling units per acre.
                Task HE-6.5:     Amend the BART Station Area Specific Plan to redesignate the three-
                parcel site totaling 1.73 acres situated north of East Market Street between Mission Street
                and First Avenue to the Neighborhood Commercial Residential Above specific plan
                designation and modify the development parameters (e.g., maximum number of stories)
                to ensure that the development allowance is consistent with other parcels in the (new)
                C-MU Commercial Mixed-Use zone and rezone the site concurrent with the establishment
                the C-MU zone for all other Mission Street parcels.
                Task HE-6.6:     Amend the Zoning Ordinance to require that, if after adopting the
                General Plan Land Use Map and Zoning Map, the City redesignates and/or rezones any
                site(s) included on the Potential Housing Sites Inventory List to a non-residential use or a
                residential use of less intensity than has been identified on the Potential Housing Sites
                Inventory List, the City shall replace the redesignated/rezoned site(s) with another site(s).
                The new site(s) shall allow the same or greater development intensity as the rezoned
                site(s) and shall be physically capable to providing the development intensity of rezoned
                sites(s) in terms of environmental restraints, infrastructure capacity, and similar constraints.
                The Ordinance shall specify that this requirement shall apply only to sites that are
                necessary to satisfy the City’s Regional Housing Need Allocation.
Policy HE-7:    Allow development density on all residentially-zones properties consistent with the
                General Plan Land Use Map
                Task HE-7.1:     Review and amend the Zoning Ordinance, if necessary, to ensure that
                residential densities identified on the General Plan Land Use Map can be reasonably
                constructed given property size, accessibility, and topography. For the purpose of
                calculating densities, the Ordinance shall be amended to describe a method for
                calculating residential density that is site specific, meaning that the land area calculated
                as part of the density prescription shall include the site only and no portion of adjacent
                right-of-way or adjacent public or private property.
Policy HE-8:    Avoid rezoning properties that are presently designated or zoned for residential uses for
                non-residential uses
                Task HE-8.1:     Amend the Zoning Ordinance to identify specific findings for adoption by
                the Planning Commission and City Council when approving any rezoning or
                redesignation involving a residentially-zoned or residentially-designated property to any
                zone or designation other than residential. For the purpose of this policy, the C-MU
                (Commercial Mixed-use) zone shall be considered a residential zone. The findings
Daly City 2030 General Plan | Housing Element                                                               107

              identified by the Zoning Ordinance shall relate to finding that the rezoning or
              redesignation is necessary to ensure that the City will not be economically impaired, that
              the City has, since the Housing Element adoption, met its housing construction target,
              and that the rezoning or redesignation does not involve a property identified by the
              Potential Housing Sites Inventory List for which a replacement site has not been identified
              (see Policy HE-6.6 above).
Housing Types and Tenures
Policy HE-9:  Expand homeownership opportunities by facilitating condominium construction, while
              protecting renters from condominium conversions
              Task HE-9.1:    Amend the condominium regulations to reduce the number of units
              necessary for a new condominium building and increase the minimum number of units
              necessary to qualify an apartment building for condominium conversion.
              Task HE-9.2:    Amend the condominium regulations to include specific standards for a
              relocation program necessitated by condominium conversion that include requirements
              for the following: 1) an on-site relocation assistance office, 2) the return of all deposits
              and fees, 3) benefits for voluntary relocation after conversion approval, 4) benefits for
              forced relocation, 5) first right of refusal for tenants wishing to purchase and 6) rent
              stabilization during the entire conversion process.
Policy HE-10: Use the financial and other resources available to the City to reduce the cost and
              increase the amount of affordable housing
              Task HE-10.1: Use and leverage Federal, State and local funds, tax credits, tax-exempt
              bonds, and private sources such as foundations to encourage the production of
              affordable housing.
              Task HE-10.2: Offer technical assistance to landowners and prospective developers
              regarding, for instance, regulatory guidelines, development potential, design solutions,
              and marketing data.
              Task HE-10.3: Continue to routinely monitor, investigate and utilize available new
              funding sources.
Policy HE-11: Continue to require affordable units in all new housing development and in new
              condominium conversions
              Task HE-11.1: Enforce the requirements of the Inclusionary Zoning Ordinance to the
              extent that Task HE-11.2 below is addressed.
              Task HE-11.2: Provide as part of the General Plan Annual Report an analysis of the
              effectiveness of the Inclusionary Zoning Ordinance in creating long-term affordable
              renter- and owner-occupied housing units.              The analysis shall identify housing
              developments subject to the Ordinance for which construction has been completed in
              the previous year, and shall qualitatively and quantitatively describe the extent to which
              the ordinance impacted the construction cost of market-rate units within these
              developments.
              Task HE-11.3: Amend the Inclusionary Zoning Ordinance and the condominium
              regulations to clarify that condominium conversions are subject to the Ordinance.
108                                                             Daly City 2030 General Plan | Housing Element
                Task HE-11.4: Through staff training, ensure effective dissemination about the
                Inclusionary Zoning Ordinance to prospective property purchasers and developers, and
                prepare paper and electronic brochures to assist these individuals to better understand
                and determine their obligation under the ordinance.
                Task HE-11.5: Adopt disclosure requirement about the existence of an inclusionary
                zoning ordinance in Daly City and that directs property purchasers to the City for
                additional details. This disclosure would be required for transaction of properties over a
                certain size and valuation that could be subject to the City’s inclusionary zoning
                ordinance.
                Task HE 11.7: Continue to offer developers alternative compliance measures to the
                Inclusionary Housing Ordinance and work with developers to identify any other potential
                alternatives that address mutual needs of the City and developer with respect to
                including deed restricted units in residential development.
Policy HE-12:   Provide regulatory incentives and streamline the permit process for development
                projects that contain deed-restricted affordable units
                Task HE-12.1: Reduce delays in project approval and issuance of building permits by
                developing a plan check prioritization system that reduces the time required to
                complete the plan check review process for affordable housing projects, especially
                those projects which exceed the City’s inclusionary zoning ordinance requirements.
                Task HE-12.2: Continue to offer parking reductions offered in the current Zoning
                Ordinance that serve as an incentive to developers of low-income elderly housing
                provided a minimum age for residency of such units is established by the Ordinance
                (e.g., 62 years of age).
                Task HE-12.3: Establish regulations that allow parking reductions for all multiple-family
                housing developments containing low-income units, commensurate to the proportion of
                the project devoted to such units (currently a project must be 100 percent affordable to
                qualify for a parking reduction).
                Task HE-12.4: Develop a Density Bonus Ordinance consistent with the State Density
                Bonus law that identifies additional regulatory incentives for constructing higher-density
                affordable development projects.
                Task HE-12.5: Continue to offer streamlined environmental review for affordable housing
                development where authorized by the California Environmental Quality Act (Public
                Resources Code Sections 21159.20 through 21159.27 – Special Review of Housing
                Projects).
Policy HE-13:   Consider financial incentives to increase the supply of rental housing for all household
                income groups including extremely low-income households
                Task HE-13.1: Give priority expenditure of City housing funds to projects that will provide
                deed restricted affordable rental housing.
                Task HE-13.2: Apply for and/or co-sponsor funding opportunities for the construction of
                rental housing.
                Task HE-13.3: Give priority expenditure of City housing funds to projects that will occupy
                sites that have been previously developed.
Daly City 2030 General Plan | Housing Element                                                           109

Policy HE-14: Assure access to services in Daly City for homeless individuals and families, and address
              the special needs and circumstances of these individuals
              Task HE-14.1: Within one year of Housing Element adoption, amend the Zoning
              Ordinance to identify emergency shelters as a permitted land use, i.e., without the
              requirement for a use permit, in the C-R/O Commercial Retail Office zone district.
              Task HE-14.2: Upon establishing emergency shelters a permitted land use in the C-R/O
              Commercial Retail Office zone district, the City shall establish regulations for such facilities
              limited to the following:
              1. The occupancy limit for any building proposed for occupation by an emergency
                   shelter shall be no less or greater than that normally required. The maximum number
                   of beds or persons permitted to be served nightly by the facility.
              2. The parking requirement for emergency shelters shall be quantified within the Zoning
                   Ordinance and shall be based upon demonstrated need. The parking requirement
                   for emergency shelters shall be no greater than the requirement for other residential
                   or commercial uses within the C-R/O Commercial Retail Office zone.
              3. The size and location of exterior and interior onsite waiting and client intake areas.
              4. The requirement for continuous on-site management and the submission of a
                   management plan to the City that identifies security mechanisms in place during
                   hours that the emergency shelter is in operation.
              5. The proximity to other emergency shelters provided that emergency shelters are not
                   required to be more than 300 feet apart.
              6. Regulations for the maximum length of stay by any individual within a calendar year
                   within an emergency shelter.
              Task HE-14.3: Amend the Zoning Ordinance to ensure that transitional housing, as
              defined by State law, is allowed in any residential zone without the requirement for a use
              permit and subject to no greater zoning restrictions than residential uses in the same
              zone.
              Task HE-14.4: Amend the Zoning Ordinance to ensure that supportive housing, as
              defined by State law, is allowed in any residential without the requirement for a use
              permit and subject to no greater zoning restrictions than residential uses in the same
              zone.
Policy HE-15: Require adaptability and accessibility of residential units for disabled occupants, and
              ensure that the Zoning Ordinance provides regulations that are sensitive to the needs of
              disabled occupants.
              Task HE-15.1: Maintain an active role in expanding accessibility and require all State
              and local accessibility codes to be met.
              Task HE-15.2: Regularly monitor the implementation of the jurisdiction’s ordinances,
              codes, policies, and procedures to ensure they comply with the “reasonable
              accommodation” for disabled provisions and all fair housing laws.
              Task HE-15.3: Amend the Zoning Ordinance to establish clear procedures and
              regulations that ensure that residential development regulations contain flexibility to
              accommodate the special needs of the physically disabled. Where warranted and
110                                                              Daly City 2030 General Plan | Housing Element

                directly related to the physical disability of the applicant, flexibility in development
                regulations shall be ministerial and shall include but not be limited to identifying who may
                request a reasonable accommodation (i.e., persons with disabilities, family-members,
                landlords, etc.), timeframes for decision-making, and provision for relief from the various
                land-use, zoning, or building regulations that may constrain housing opportunities for
                persons of disabilities.
                Task HE-15.4: Amend the City’s second unit regulations to establish clear procedures for
                providing administrative relief from second unit requirements in circumstances where
                these requirements would otherwise prevent the construction of a second unit for a
                disabled person.
                Task HE-15.5: Continue to fund (as funding permits) and support home repair programs
                that assist residents in paying for various handicapped modifications in and around their
                homes.
Policy HE-16:   Prevent housing discrimination based on age, race, religion, sex, ethnic background, or
                familial status.
                Task HE-16.1: The City shall assist in the implementation and enforcement of State and
                federal fair housing and civil rights laws, and shall make use of opportunities in its
                interaction with real estate offices, businesses, and other groups or agencies to eliminate
                housing discrimination. Where discrimination is suspected, the City shall work with the
                appropriate public interest agencies to vigorously pursue the matter and where
                discrimination is found, the City shall assist the relevant entity in prosecuting the matter.
                Task HE-16.2: Amend the Zoning Ordinance to revise the definition of family to comply
                with State and federal fair housing laws. The new definition shall not distinguish between
                related and unrelated persons, and shall not impose limitations on the number of persons
                that may constitute a family.
                Task HE-16.3: The City will continue to contract to provide fair housing services to its
                residents and property owners. Services will include:
                1.       Distributing educational materials to property owners, apartment managers, and
                         tenants every two years;
                2.       Making public service announcements (PSAs) via different media (e.g.,
                         newspaper ads and public service announcements at local radio and television
                         channels) at least two times a year;
                3.       Conducting public presentations with different community groups;
                4.       Responding to complaints of discrimination (i.e., in-taking, investigation of
                         complaints, and resolution); and
                5.       Referring services to appropriate agencies.
Policy HE-17:   Provide financial assistance to lower income households in emergency situations
                Task HE-17.1: Continue to operate and support (as funding permits) the Housing
                Assistance Program that grants eligible lower income families, seniors and persons with
                disabilities money to cover housing related emergencies (e.g., security deposits,
                temporary difficulty meeting rent payments).
Daly City 2030 General Plan | Housing Element                                                               111

Policy HE-18: Support a balanced distribution of quality residential care facilities
              Task HE-18.1: Develop location regulations for larger residential care facilities that are
              not exempt from local zoning restrictions to provide objective standards to persons
              desiring to establish such facilities, while at the same time dispersing such facilities
              throughout the City.
Policy HE-19: Address the range of needs and encourage the production of additional housing
              opportunities for extremely low-income (ELI) households.
              Task HE-19.1: Provide an exception to the proposed zoning regulation identified in Task
              HE 3.6, whereby any housing development that is willing to deed-restrict at least 20
              percent of units for extremely low-income households would be exempt from the
              minimum one parking space per unit rule identified by this task (applies to projects
              qualifying for transit-proximate parking reductions) and instead be subject to providing at
              least 0.5 parking spaces per unit.
              Task HE-19.2: Revise the Zoning Ordinance to waive the parking requirements
              altogether for ELI deed-restricted second units that are transit proximate, as described in
              Task HE 3.4.
              Task HE-19.3: For any new housing development utilizing public funding or publicly-
              owned land, the City and project developer shall explore the inclusion of units
              specifically targeted to and restricted for ELI households.
Housing Maintenance
Policy HE-20: Encourage voluntary housing rehabilitation and reconstruction
              Task HE-20.1: Amend the Zoning Ordinance non-conforming building regulations to
              allow the voluntary reconstruction, restoration, or rebuilding of any multifamily residential
              building with three or more units. Examples of non-conformity may include unit count,
              parking provision, and building setback and height. Such reconstruction, restoration, or
              rebuilding shall be limited for both single-family and multiple-family buildings in the ways
              described by California Government Code Section 65852.25.
Policy HE-21: Encourage housing reconstruction after fire or other natural disaster
              Task HE-21.1: Amend the Zoning Ordinance non-conforming building regulations to
              allow reconstruction of non-conforming buildings affected by fire or natural disaster
              subject to the land use regulations in place at the time of the original building
              construction, if the present development regulations are determined by the Director of
              Economic and Community Development to allow fewer total units than were originally
              permitted. This amendment shall allow such reconstruction provided the total unit count
              does not increase and the size of each replacement unit is substantially similar to the size
              of the original unit being replaced. The amendment shall not apply where the General
              Plan Land Use Map requires a higher minimum density than was provided in the building
              prior to the fire or natural disaster.
Policy HE-22: Preserve existing low-income housing units that are at risk of being converted to market-
              rate housing
              Task HE-22.1: Monitor existing at-risk low-income housing units to determine if the owners
              plan to file a notice of interest to prepay the mortgage obligation. The prepayment
              would terminate the requirement that the units be rented to low-income individuals. The
112                                                             Daly City 2030 General Plan | Housing Element
                City should maintain an up-to-date list of public and private non-profit housing entities
                who can and will be able to purchase the at risk units should the necessity arise. The City
                should also maintain a current list of available financial resources to fund the potential
                purchase of these units.
Energy Efficiency
Policy HE-23:   Gradually increase energy and water efficiency standards for all new and existing
                housing while minimizing the costs of such standards.
                Task HE-23.1: Develop enhanced residential energy efficiency standards (Title 24,
                California Administrative Code) in all new residential construction which exceeds State-
                mandated requirements by five percent in 2015, ten percent in 2020, and twenty percent
                in 2030.
                Task HE-23.2: Establish energy and water efficiency upgrade programs that promote
                energy and water efficiency upgrades in all existing residential buildings. Energy
                efficiency upgrades promoted as part of this program could include upgrades such as
                attic insulation, programmable thermostats, heating duct insulation, and water heater
                insulation. Water efficiency upgrades could include the installation of low-flow shower
                heads, where feasible, and retrofit of existing toilets to meet low-flush requirements as
                established by the City. Examples of programs developed as a part of this task could
                provide financial incentives (e.g., rebates, appliance buy-back, and similar programs)
                aimed at providing strong incentives to residential building owners to use the programs.
Policy HE-24:   Mandate the inclusion of green building techniques into most new construction.
                Task HE-24.1: Amend the building code to require the inclusion of mandatory green
                building standards for all new construction and remodels that exceed a certain valuation
                (to be determined at the time of the building code amendment).
                Task HE-24.2: Amend the building code to require all City-funded affordable housing
                projects reach a Home Energy Rating System (HERS) score above 86 (the minimum
                Energy Star rating), or equivalent.
Policy HE-25:   Provide a greater number of street trees throughout Daly City’s neighborhoods.
                Task HE-25.1: Amend the Zoning Ordinance to require street tree planting as part of the
                construction of any new home and any remodel to any residential structure exceeding
                50 percent valuation of the structure being remodeled. The Ordinance shall require
                uniform street tree spacing within new neighborhoods of one tree per each 25 linear feet
                of curb, to the maximum extent practical. All new street trees shall receive irrigation.
                Task HE-25.2: Amend the plan check process to ensure compliance with amended
                Zoning Ordinance provisions related to street tree planting. At a minimum, applicants
                and developers shall identify street tree placement on all utility plans submitted for City of
                public utility review and approval.
Policy HE-26:   Through the development of a Stormwater Management Program, ensure that all new
                development complies with applicable municipal stormwater National Pollutant
                Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permits by incorporating controls that reduce
                water quality impacts over the life of the project.
Daly City 2030 General Plan | Housing Element                                                             113

              Task HE-26.1: Appoint a stormwater control manager within either the Department of
              Public Works or Department of Water/Wastewater charged with implementing the City’s
              Stormwater Management Program. The manager shall be responsible for reviewing
              public and private stormwater control mechanism proposals, requiring amendments to
              such controls as part of the development review process, and ensuring their proper
              construction.
              Task HE-26.2: Evaluate acceptable development standards for stormwater treatment
              mechanisms and publish such standards for distribution to developers. Such standards
              shall be based on a thorough evaluation of modern stormwater control mechanisms and
              shall, to the extent feasible, consider soil conditions in various parts of Daly City.
              Task HE-26.3: In locations where high density residential development is prevalent (e.g.,
              east of Interstate 280), consider the use of the public right of way as an appropriate
              location for privately maintained stormwater treatment mechanisms.
Policy HE-27: Revise land use policies to meet or exceed the greenhouse gas reduction goals
              established in Assembly Bill 32 (reducing California’s greenhouse gas emissions to 1990
              levels by 2020).
              Task HE-27.1: Create and adopt a Climate Action Strategy Plan that establishes a
              greenhouse gas reduction goal, based on the baseline established in the respective
              Plan.
              Task HE-27.2: Adopt progressive energy efficiency strategies similar to those adopted by
              the California Public Utilities Commission:
              1. All new residential construction in California will be zero net energy by 2020;
              2. All new commercial construction in California will be zero net energy by 2030;
              3. Heating, Ventilation and Air Conditioning (HVAC) will be transformed to ensure that
                  its energy performance is optimal for California’s climate; and
              4. All eligible low-income customers will be given the opportunity to participate in the
                  low-income energy efficiency program by 2020
Policy HE-28: Promote alternative sources of energy in all homes.
              Task HE-28.1: Reduce or eliminate permit fees for installations involving solar electric,
              wind and solar hot water systems.
              Task HE-28.2: Encourage, incentivize, or require all new major construction projects to
              pre-plumb for solar hot water and pre-wire for solar electric systems.
              Task HE-28.3: Develop a funding source to offer loans to residents and developers that
              invest in solar electric, solar hot water, wind, and/or other clean energy systems.
              Task HE-28.4: Amend the Zoning Ordinance to include development standards for the
              installation of alternative energy generating systems on residential properties.
114                                                              Daly City 2030 General Plan | Housing Element

Neighborhood Preservation and Character
Policy HE-29:   Ensure that additions of habitable space within existing dwellings are completed safely
                and in a manner consistent with the City’s building and zoning regulations
                Task HE-29.1: Establish an expanded code enforcement program targeting the
                abatement of garage-level habitable rooms and additions that have been constructed
                without permits in residential structures containing between one and two dwelling units.
                This task could explore a number of potential programs to effectively dissuade non-
                permitted room construction, including, but not limited to:
                1.      Increased code enforcement efforts;
                2.      Strengthening noticing requirements to buyers on permitted work;
                3.      Exploring the feasibility and effectiveness of a program aimed at abating non-
                        permitted habitable living space; and
                4.      Exploring the potential for a new amnesty program.
Policy HE-30:   Require property owners to provide relocation assistance to renters displaced where
                rental units in which they live were constructed or are maintained in violation of the Daly
                City Municipal Code.
                Task HE-30.1: The City requires that property owners who place renters in units that
                violate the Municipal Code provide relocation assistance when the tenant must vacate
                the premises due to code enforcement activity. This policy will serve to protect
                particularly residents living in substandard illegal secondary units.
Policy HE-31:   Ensure that, in instances where higher density mixed-use development is permitted
                adjacent to existing neighborhoods, the impacts of building height are decreased to the
                maximum extent feasible without reducing permitted General Plan density
                Task HE-31.1: Review the Mixed-Use Design Guidelines and Zoning Ordinance to ensure
                that the guidelines address impacts created by larger mixed-use buildings proposed
                adjacent to smaller buildings and amend the Guidelines and Ordinance as needed.
Housing Programs
Several of the policies and tasks identified in the previous section require the continued implementation
of existing housing programs by the City of Daly City. Although the City funds and administers many of
the housing programs below, funding deficiencies for municipal housing and community development
programs require creative combinations among and between the public and private sectors (e.g.,
cities working with other cities or other levels of government, cities uniting with the private sector, or
cities sponsoring nonprofits) to help cities meet their housing needs. Some of the programs described
below are administered by other agencies and are made possible by support from the City.
Residential Rehabilitation Program
The City administers a residential rehabilitation program that offers a variety of grants and loans. Grants
are available to replace existing security bars on bedroom windows and exit doors. Seniors are eligible
Daly City 2030 General Plan | Housing Element                                                           115

for grants of up to $1,000 for minor home repairs. The program offers low interest rate loans to low-
income homeowners for roof replacement, window installation, or exterior painting. There is also the
complete rehab loan of up to $75,000 for homeowners. This loan includes a complete home inspection,
termite report, cost estimate, work write-up, assistance with contractor selection, and a final inspection.
Loans are also available to rehabilitate rental units.
This program is primarily funded with Community Development Block Grant (CDBG) funds, and as a
result, is targeted to low-income households. The City is an entitlement jurisdiction and receives CDBG
funds directly from the Department of Housing and Urban Development.
Community Development Block Grant Program (CDBG)
In addition to funding the City’s Residential Rehabilitation Program, CDBG funds are used to support and
fund several housing and housing-related programs carried out by various nonprofit agencies. More
detailed descriptions of the programs administered by the nonprofit agencies can be found in the City’s
annual HUD Consolidated Plans. CDBG-supported programs serve low to moderate income persons.
Minor Home Repair
The City provides funding for minor home repair and installation of ramps, smoke detectors and/or grab
bars. Minor home repair includes repair of windows, doors and plumbing fixtures. The City provides
funding to three nonprofit agencies that assist Daly City residents with minor home repairs.
Homelessness Assistance
The City provides funding to four agencies that operate homeless shelters in the County. Shelter
Network operates Family Crossroads, a transitional shelter for families located in Daly City; and Maple
Street, an emergency and transitional shelter for individuals that is located in Redwood City. Samaritan
House operates Safe Harbor, an emergency shelter located in South San Francisco and serves
individuals. The Mental Health Association of San Mateo County operates Spring Street, a shelter
located in Redwood City and serves homeless individuals with mental health issues. Community
Overcoming Relationship Abuse (CORA) operates a shelter for women with abusive partners. All these
shelters also provide supportive services to help connect their clients to other services that they may
need.
Shared Housing
Shared housing is an alternative affordable rental housing option for low-income renters in small
households. These renters are matched with homeowners seeking boarders. Often times, the
homeowners are low-income themselves and can use the additional income provided by the rental
payments. The City provides funding to help match renters with homeowners in Daly City.
Fair Housing
In recognition that housing discrimination is a wide-ranging problem, Daly City provides funding to a fair
housing agency that responds to and investigates housing discrimination complaints. The agency has
staff experience and expertise in dealing with housing discrimination complaints and is an invaluable
asset towards the City’s efforts to affirmatively further fair housing. The City has partnered with other
jurisdictions and the fair housing agency in producing brochures to better educate and inform the
public about fair housing issues and resources.
Housing Legal Assistance
The City contracts with a legal service provider to provide free housing legal assistance to low-income
residents. The program primarily assists residents with tenant/landlord conflict and habitability issues.
The program helps prevent homelessness by invalidating illegal evictions, negotiating more time for
116                                                              Daly City 2030 General Plan | Housing Element

tenants to find and move into a new apartment, or having landlords make contractually required
habitability improvements. Office hours are offered once a week at the Daly City Community Service
Center.
Housing Assistance for Residents with Special Needs
Many of the programs mentioned above also serve residents with special needs, particularly seniors and
the disabled. The minor home repair program, for example, provides assistance to help residents with
mobility limitations stay in their homes by installing ramps and/or grab bars.
Daly City Community Service Center
Established in 1974, the Daly City Community Service Center serves as one of the core, or primary entry,
social service agencies in the County. The Center’s mission is to promote and improve the quality of life
for the residents of Daly City, Colma and Broadmoor through the provision of quality crisis intervention
services, either directly or by referral to the appropriate provider. A vital housing-related service through
the Center is the distribution of motel vouchers to families and individuals who need temporary
emergency shelter. Also, the Center offers a comprehensive needs assessment and is able to provide
housing-related information and referrals. The Center is funded by the City’s General Fund and grants.
Home and Low-Income Housing Fund Program
The City, as a Participating Jurisdiction, receives a direct HOME allocation from HUD to support
affordable housing projects and programs. The City also has two redevelopment project areas that
provide a source of funds to be used for affordable housing. Both HOME and the Low-income Housing
Fund enable the City to subsidize affordable housing projects that would otherwise not go forward
without the subsidies. In the past, the City has worked with nonprofit developers such as Mercy Housing,
Habitat for Humanity and American Baptist Homes of the West to develop housing affordable for low-
income Daly City residents. The City will continue to work with developers, evaluate development
proposals for affordable housing, and fund those projects that most effectively and efficiently meet the
affordable housing needs of Daly City. Housing development includes new construction as well as
acquisition/rehab projects.
The City, in order to leverage the funds it has available for affordable housing development, will seek
out other sources of funding. In the past, the City has applied and received funds from the State
directly and collaborated with developers in applying for funds.
Inclusionary Housing Programs
In October 2007, the City passed an inclusionary housing ordinance that requires all projects consisting
of five or more units, to provide that at least ten percent of the units be affordable to lower income
households. The ordinance provides for flexibility, requiring ten to 20 percent affordable units
depending on the tenure and income levels targeted.
The City will be working with a BMR Administrator to help administer the program. The ordinance can be
found at http://www.dalycity.org/city_services/depts/ecd/inclusionary/index.htm.
Homebuyer Assistance and Education Program
As a complement to its Below Market Rate/Inclusionary Housing Program, the City will require
homebuyer education for all its BMR participants in ownership projects. The homebuyer education
workshops will also be made available to the general public. The City will work with its BMR
Administrator to offer relevant and important information to first-time homebuyers. In some cases the
City may provide financial assistance to homebuyers, as necessary, to make the units affordable.
Daly City 2030 General Plan | Housing Element                                                              117

In the current economic climate, Daly City has not been immune to the foreclosure crisis. In fact, the
City has the most number of foreclosures in San Mateo County. Working in collaboration with agencies
such as Project Sentinel and EPACANDO, Daly City has offered foreclosure prevention and information
workshops. Most recently, the workshop in November 2008 had 58 households in attendance. The City
plans to continue working with community agencies to help educate households facing foreclosure.
HUD Section 8 Housing Assistance Program
The San Mateo County Housing Authority administers the Public Housing Program throughout San Mateo
County. There is one public housing complex in Daly City, Midway Village. Midway Village is located in
the Bayshore neighborhood and has 150 rental units, all of which are restricted for low and very low-
income households.
The Housing Authority administers the HUD Section 8 Housing Choice Voucher Program which provides
eligible very low-income renters with rental assistance subsidies.        Tenant-based Section 8 housing
vouchers are portable, which means tenants can continue using them when they move, while project-
based Section 8 stays with the multifamily building as a development or operating cost subsidy. The City
strongly supports the Section 8 Program’s efforts to preserve affordable rental units in the County and will
continue to maintain a cooperative working relationship with the County Housing Authority to preserve
the program. In July 2007, the City worked with the County to advertise the opening of the Section 8
waitlist. Information on the vouchers used in Daly City is always included in the City’s Annual HUD
Consolidated Action Plan. Although the City does not control or influence the number of housing
vouchers, it does monitor the program in Daly City by collecting this information.
                 Table HE-28: San Mateo County Housing Authority Section 8 Voucher Program
                                            FY03-04     FY04-05   FY05-06     FY06-07     FY07-08
                     Number of Housing          766        766        729        670         639
                   Vouchers in Daly City
                 Source: Consolidated Annual Performance and Evaluation Reports
Second Dwelling Unit Program
In May 1983, Daly City established one of the first ordinances in California to allow second dwelling units
(“second units”) within existing single-family residential dwellings. The Ordinance allows attached
second units subject to size, neighborhood density, parking, and owner-occupancy regulations. The
Ordinance has resulted in the construction of over 1,400 second units over the past 25 years, although
the pace of second units has decreased dramatically in recent years.
To address this decrease, tasks have been included in this Housing Element to continue the expansion of
the second unit program by removing barriers to second unit construction. Examples of these policies
include reducing the parking requirement for very small units as well as removing the requirement for
owner-occupancy of second units. The Element also proposes aligning the maximum neighborhood
density applicable to second units to be consistent with the maximum neighborhood density allowed by
the General Plan.
Although not rent restricted, secondary units have proven to be more affordable than other rental units
on the market.      The City regularly conducts a survey of rental postings on www.craigslist.com to
ascertain how the secondary units compare to other multifamily rental units. The surveys support the
claim that secondary units are affordable to low-income households.
118                                                             Daly City 2030 General Plan | Housing Element

Also falling under this program is an ordinance requiring property owners who have placed renters in
units that violate City municipal code (e.g., building and safety) to provide relocation assistance to
tenants who must vacate the premises due to code enforcement activity. This program provides some
protection to tenants and discourages property owners from renting out units that are unsafe and
unhealthy.
At-Risk Housing Preservation Program
The City will monitor the status of the affordable housing stock that is at risk for conversion to market rate
or substantially higher rents. The 2004 Housing Element cited the goal of preserving the affordability of
Franciscan Mobile Home Park. The City was successful in doing this by working with LINC, a nonprofit
housing developer, and helping to facilitate the transfer of the park to nonprofit ownership.
Villa Fontana Apartments is a 120-unit apartment complex in Daly City that was originally financed with
a HUD Section 236 mortgage. In the interest of preserving affordability, City staff contacts the Villa
Fontana property owners at least once a year to discuss any changes in property ownership. In
addition, the City is in ongoing discussions with local non-profit housing developers regarding the
possibility of a Villa Fontana acquisition. At present, the owners of Villa Fontana do not intend to sell the
property or to prepay the Section 236 mortgage.
The San Mateo County Housing Authority and HUD have purview over Villa Fontana. However, the City
will continue maintaining regular contact with the both of them in order to keep apprised of Villa
Fontana’s status and coordinate efforts to maintain the affordability of these units. If the opportunity
arises for Villa Fontana to be transferred to non-profit ownership, the City may evaluate the benefits of
providing local jurisdiction funds or tax-exempt financing to facilitate the transfer.
Funding for Housing
There are a variety of public and private financial resources available for financing housing activities in
Daly City. Potential sources of subsidy financing include federal HOME Investment Partnerships Program
and Community Development Block Grant (CDBG) funds, tax credits, and private sources such as
foundations.
Generally, the housing developer takes the primary role for securing financing for affordable housing
development. Daly City, though, directly controls three key sources of subsidy financing. These are
federal HOME and CDBG funds and. Each of these is discussed in the sections below.
HOME Funds
Daly City is a participating jurisdiction in the Federal HOME program and receives approximately
$500,000 in federal HOME fund annually for the purpose of expanding and improving the supply of
affordable housing in Daly City. The proposed use of HOME funds is described in the City’s HUD
Consolidated Plan. In recent years, the City has chosen to accumulate funds over two or three years in
order to finance projects of a significant size.
Since 2004, the City has provided over $3 million in HOME funds for the development of new affordable
housing including 11 units developed by Habitat for Humanity and 39 units of senior housing developed
in cooperation with American Baptist Homes of the West.
Daly City 2030 General Plan | Housing Element                                                              119

CDBG Funds
In recent years, Daly City has received about $1.2 million annually through the Community
Development Block Grant Program. The primary objective of the CDBG Program is the provision of
decent housing, a suitable living environment and economic opportunity. The CDBG Program has been
a critical component of several City projects including housing rehabilitation, economic development,
ADA accessibility projects, street beautification and a wide variety of public services. Since FY92-94 the
City has provided $721,500 in CDBG funds for the development and preservation of affordable housing
including Vista Grande (24 units), School House Station (47 units), and Hillside Terrace (18 units).
Consistency With Other General Plan Elements
The Housing Element is consistent with all other elements of the Daly City General Plan which are being
updated simultaneously with the Housing Element. The General Plan Land Use Element implements
specific policies of the Housing Element such as encouraging mixed use development and parcel
assembly, and also includes the following overall policy:
Policy LU-25:   Facilitate housing production by carrying out the goals and policies in the Housing
                Element.
The Circulation Element includes an analysis of future traffic and the identification of improvements
necessary to implement the volume of traffic associated with the eventual development of planned
housing sites. These traffic projections are based in part on anticipated residential development
projects identified in Table HE-27.
To further ensure that the Housing Element remains internally consistent, the City will perform an internal
consistency review as a part of the Annual General Plan Implementation Report required under
Government Code Section 65400.
120                                                             Daly City 2030 General Plan | Housing Element
                                         Appendix A: Housing Element Task Implementation Timeframe and Responsibility
                                   Objective HE-1: Accommodate growing population by promoting housing construction …
                                                                                                                              Z.O.  Completion
             Policy           Task                             Task Summary                                Responsibility                      Funding Source
                                                                                                                             Update   Date
                                   Increase the minimum property sizes in all commercial zones and R-
                                   3 Multiple-Family Residential zone and restrict the ability of existing
                                   sites within this zone to subdivide below the established minimum
                                   lot size. The minimum parcel shall be established at the time of the
                               1.1                                                                         Planning Division   X       2013      General Fund
                                   Zoning Ordinance update and shall be such that it promotes the
                                   construction of mixed-use and/or higher density multifamily
 Maintain and, where               development, as determined by the respective zone to which it
 possible, create larger           applies.
 housing development sites
 throughout the City.              Incorporate a lot merger incentive allowance into the Zoning
                                   Ordinance whereby property owners electing to merge two or
                                   more adjacent lots for the purpose of development are provided
                               1.2 specific incentives to do so. The incentive program shall establish     Planning Division   X       2013      General Fund
                                   incentives that are significant enough to promote voluntary lot
                                   mergers and shall be commensurate with the size of the parcels
                                   being merged and/or created.
                                   Develop a Permit Streamlining Program that identifies specific
                                   ways to reduce the processing times of projects that increase the
                                   supply of housing. These projects shall include minor subdivisions
                                   involving the creation of four or fewer parcels and the construction
                               2.1                                                                         Planning Division   X       2013      General Fund
 Support infill housing in         of duplexes in the R-1/A Single Family/Duplex Residential Zone. The
 existing neighborhoods by         Program shall identify criteria for inclusion in the Zoning Ordinance
 offering streamlined              that establish which project characteristics will qualify a project for
 planning and environmental        streamlining and what method of streamlining will be utilized.
 reviews.
                                   Continue to exempt infill housing development proposals from the
                               2.2 California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) if the proposal meets       Planning Division         On-going   None required
                                   all of the requirements of CEQA Guidelines Section 15332.
                                   Within one year, of the Housing Element adoption, the City shall
                                   establish a Commercial Mixed-Use (C-MU) zone for areas targeted
                                   for mixed-use development, including, but not limited to the
                                   boundaries of the existing C-1 Light Commercial zone presently
                                   encompassing Mission Street and Geneva Avenue (approximately
                               3.1 65 acres), and establish development regulations in the Zoning          Planning Division   X       2013      General Fund
                                   Ordinance specifically for higher-density mixed-use development.
                                   The City shall, as a part of this task, explore increased building
                                   height within the C-MU zone, as determined sufficient to promote
                                   the construction of higher density mixed-use development within
                                   the zone.
                                   Review the existing design guidelines for mixed-use development
                                   to ensure the guidelines adequately address pertinent issues
 Provide regulatory                related to the construction of the mixed-use development both
 incentives for developers to      within existing neighborhoods and when higher-density
 construct higher-density      3.2 development is proposed adjacent to lower-density                       Planning Division           2015      General Fund
 mixed-use development             neighborhoods. Amend these guidelines and augment with
 along Mission Street,             development regulations identified in Task HE 3.1 above to
 Geneva Avenue, and any            incorporate methods for repositioning mixed-use building mass
 other locations within close      away from lower-density neighborhoods.
 proximity to public transit.
                                   Amend the parking regulations to allow for a 30 percent parking
                                   reduction for all mixed-use development projects and clarify that
                               3.3 the mixed-use parking reduction is allowed for buildings containing     Planning Division   X       2013      General Fund
                                   residential and retail components and parking available to both
                                   uses.
                                   For larger projects (e.g., 50 units or more), allow further parking
                                   reductions for all development projects that provide permanently-
                                   funded HOA/POA amenities (e.g., van pools or car sharing
                                   programs) to building occupants, are within 0.25 miles of any
                               3.4 public bus hub, or are within 0.5 mile distance of a BART station.      Planning Division   X       2013      General Fund
                                   For the purpose of this task, a bus hub shall be defined as a
                                   location where significant numbers of passengers are exchanged
                                   from one mechanized mode of transport to another (e.g., bus
                                   transfer points, bus “park-n-rides”, etc.)
Daly City 2030 General Plan | Housing Element                                                                                                              121

                                   Appendix A (continued): Housing Element Task Implementation Timeframe and Responsibility
                                                                                                                                Z.O.  Completion
             Policy           Task                                Task Summary                               Responsibility                      Funding Source
                                                                                                                               Update   Date
                                     Amend the parking regulations to remove differentiation between
                                     single-family, multiple-family, and condominium uses for the
                                     purpose of parking regulations, and establish such regulations
                               3.5                                                                           Planning Division   X       2013      General Fund
                                     based on total bedroom count. This requirement shall also apply
 Provide regulatory
                                     to residential additions and the provision of additional bedrooms
 incentives for developers to
                                     within any existing dwelling.
 construct higher-density
 mixed-use development
 along Mission Street,               Clarify that no parking reduction incentive (other than incentives
 Geneva Avenue, and any              allowed for senior affordable units) shall result in less than one
 other locations within close        parking space per unit. Any housing development that is willing to
 proximity to public transit.  3.6   deed-restrict at least 20 percent of units for extremely low-income     Planning Division   X       2013      General Fund
                                     households shall be however be exempt from the minimum
                                     parking requirement identified by this task and instead a be
                                     subject to providing at least 0.5 parking spaces per unit.
                                     All new housing development within the 65dB CNEL aircraft
                                     contour, as shown on the most recent FAA accepted San
                               4.1   Francisco International Airport Noise Exposure Map, shall be            Planning Division         On-going    General Fund
                                     constructed to achieve an interior noise level of 45 dB CNEL or less
                                     based on aircraft noise events.
                                     For all development proposals with the 65dB CNEL noise contour,
                                     the City shall require a noise study that identifies the proposed
 Assure that standards for
                                     project’s compliance with requirement of Task 4.1 above. If the
 new housing construction
                                     project qualifies for review under the California Environmental
 comply with appropriate       4.2                                                                           Planning Division         On-going    General Fund
                                     Quality Act (CEQA), the City shall incorporate the noise study and
 aircraft noise abatement
                                     any mitigation measures into the CEQA document and shall adopt
 requirements.
                                     findings that the project, as conditioned, complies with the interior
                                     noise level requirement.
                                     The City shall incorporate compliance with this policy into adopted
                                     CEQA compliance guidelines. The guidelines shall identify
                               4.3                                                                           Planning Division           2015      General Fund
                                     detailed compliance requirements, such as the methods of
                                     acceptable noise mitigation (insulation, windows, etc).
                                   Objective HE-2: Explore a variety of alternative mechanisms to increase housing affordability.
                                     Align the maximum neighborhood density applicable to second
                               5.1   units to be consistent with the maximum neighborhood density            Planning Division   X       2013      General Fund
                                     allowed by the General Plan.
                                     Eliminate the required parking for small second units where the
                                     second unit is no larger than 400 square feet, the size of the home
                               5.2   in which the unit is proposed is no greater than 1,600 square feet      Planning Division   X       2013      General Fund
                                     including the garage, and the existing home provides two legal,
                                     i.e., full-sized, parking spaces.
 Allow the construction of
                                     Eliminate the requirement for owner-occupancy for second units
 additional second units
                                     where the applicant for a non-owner occupied second unit can
 throughout the City.
                               5.3   demonstrate that the entire property is subject to professional         Planning Division   X       2013      General Fund
                                     property management by means of a written contract supplied to
                                     the City.
                                     Continue to offer same-day, express plan check permitting for all
                               5.4                                                                           Planning Division         On-going    General Fund
                                     second units.
                                     Monitor second unit construction and rental activity on an annual
                               5.5   basis and report this information in the City’s General Plan Annual     Planning Division         On-going    General Fund
                                     Report.
                                    Objective HE-3: Use vacant and underutilized sites to provide future housing opportunities.
                                     Remove the use permit requirement for mixed-use projects
                                     located in the (future) C-MU Commercial Mixed Use zone that
 Assure that adequate                provide a residential component resulting in an overall net density
                               6.1                                                                           Planning Division   X       2013      General Fund
 development sites exist on          of at least 30 dwelling units per acre and which also contain a first-
 the Potential Housing Sites         floor commercial component that occupies a proportion of the
 Inventory List to ensure            total building area identified by the Zoning Ordinance.
 compliance with the City’s
 Regional Housing Need               Amend the Sullivan Corridor Specific Plan to allow the density
 Allocation                          designation and floor area ratio sufficient to permit the dwelling
                               6.2                                                                           Planning Division           2013      General Fund
                                     unit count identified on Table HE-27 for the 1.38-acre site located
                                     at the northwest corner of Bryant Street and Pierce Street.
122                                                                                                         Daly City 2030 General Plan | Housing Element

                                     Appendix A (continued): Housing Element Task Implementation Timeframe and Responsibility
                                                                                                                                   Z.O.  Completion
              Policy            Task                                Task Summary                                Responsibility                      Funding Source
                                                                                                                                  Update   Date
                                       Rezone the one-acre site located at 169 First Avenue to a
                                 6.3   residential zone capable of permitting at least 20 dwelling units per    Planning Division           2013      General Fund
                                       acre.
                                       Amend the planned development zoning (PD #46) for the 2.49-
                                       acre 1050 St. Francis Boulevard site identified in Table HE-27 to
                                       remove the 36 dwelling unit maximum presently imposed by the
                                 6.4                                                                            Planning Division           2013      General Fund
                                       zoning. The maximum density shall instead reflect the permitted
                                       General Plan Medium Density designation currently attributable to
                                       the site, i.e., 35 dwelling units per acre.
                                       Amend the BART Station Specific Plan to redesignate the three-
                                       parcel site totaling 1.73 acres situated north of East Market Street
                                       between Mission Street and First Avenue to the Neighborhood
                                       Commercial Residential Above specific plan designation and
  Assure that adequate           6.5   modify the development parameters (e.g., maximum number of               Planning Division           2013      General Fund
  development sites exist on           stories) to ensure that the development allowance is consistent
  the Potential Housing Sites          with other parcels in the (new) C-MU Commercial Mixed-Use zone
  Inventory List to ensure             and rezone the site concurrent with the establishment the C-MU
  compliance with the City’s           zone for all other Mission Street parcels.
  Regional Housing Need
  Allocation
                                       Amend the Zoning Ordinance to require that, if after adopting the
                                       General Plan Land Use Map and Zoning Map, the City
                                       redesignates and/or rezones any site(s) included on the Potential
                                       Housing Sites Inventory List to a non-residential use or a residential
                                       use of less intensity than has been identified on the Potential
                                       Housing Sites Inventory List, the City shall replace the
                                       redesignated/rezoned site(s) with another site(s). The new site(s)
                                 6.6                                                                            Planning Division   X       2013      General Fund
                                       shall allow the same or greater development intensity as the
                                       rezoned site(s) and shall be physically capable to providing the
                                       development intensity of rezoned sites(s) in terms of environmental
                                       restraints, infrastructure capacity, and similar constraints. The
                                       Ordinance shall specify that this requirement shall apply only to
                                       sites that are necessary to satisfy the City’s Regional Housing Need
                                       Allocation.
                                       Review and amend the Zoning Ordinance, if necessary, to ensure
                                       that residential densities identified on the General Plan Land Use
  Allow development density            Map can be reasonably constructed given property size,
  on all residentially-zones           accessibility, and topography. For the purpose of calculating
  properties consistent with     7.1   densities, the Ordinance shall be amended to describe a method           Planning Division   X       2013      General Fund
  the General Plan Land Use            for calculating residential density that is site specific, meaning that
  Map                                  the land area calculated as part of the density prescription shall
                                       include the site only and no portion of adjacent right-of-way or
                                       adjacent public or private property.
                                       Amend the Zoning Ordinance to identify specific findings for
                                       adoption by the Planning Commission and City Council when
                                       approving any rezoning or redesignation involving a residentially-
                                       zoned or residentially-designated property to any zone or
                                       designation other than residential. For the purpose of this policy,
  Avoid rezoning properties
                                       the C-MU (Commercial Mixed-use) zone shall be considered a
  that are presently
                                       residential zone. The findings identified by the Zoning Ordinance
  designated or zoned for        8.1                                                                            Planning Division   X       2013      General Fund
                                       shall relate to finding that the rezoning or redesignation is
  residential uses for non-
                                       necessary to ensure that the City will not be economically
  residential uses
                                       impaired, that the City has, since the Housing Element adoption,
                                       met its housing construction target, and that the rezoning or
                                       redesignation does not involve a property identified by the
                                       Potential Housing Sites Inventory List for which a replacement site
                                       has not been identified (see Policy HE-X above).
                                        Objective HE-4: Encourage a variety of housing types and tenures for all income levels,
                                                            and assure access to housing by all groups of individuals.
.
                                       Encourage a variety of housing types and tenures for all income
                                 9.1                                                                            Planning Division   X       2013      General Fund
                                       levels, and assure access to housing by all groups of individuals.
  Expand homeownership                 Amend the condominium regulations to include specific standards
  opportunities by facilitating        for a relocation program necessitated by condominium
  condominium construction,            conversion that include requirements for the following: 1) an on-
  while protecting renters from        site relocation assistance office, 2) the return of all deposits and
  condominium conversions        9.2                                                                            Planning Division   X       2013      General Fund
                                       fees, 3) benefits for voluntary relocation after conversion approval,
                                       4) benefits for forced relocation, 5) first right of refusal for tenants
                                       wishing to purchase and 6) rent stabilization during the entire
                                       conversion process.
Daly City 2030 General Plan | Housing Element                                                                                                                   123

                                   Appendix A (continued): Housing Element Task Implementation Timeframe and Responsibility
                                                                                                                                      Z.O.    Completion
            Policy           Task                                Task Summary                                 Responsibility                                  Funding Source
                                                                                                                                     Update       Date
                                     The City shall use and leverage Federal, State and local funds                                                             Federal, State,
                                     (including Redevelopment Agency set-aside finds), tax credits, tax-      Planning Division,                                  local, and
                              10.1                                                                                                             On-going
                                     exempt bonds, and private sources such as foundations to                  Housing Division                                Redevelopment
                                     encourage the production of affordable housing.                                                                            Agency Funds
 Use the financial and other
 resources available to the
 City to reduce the cost and         Offer technical assistance to landowners and prospective
 increase the amount of       10.2   developers regarding, for instance, regulatory guidelines,                Planning Division               On-going         General Fund
 affordable housing                  development potential, design solutions, and marketing data.
                                     Continue to routinely monitor, investigate, and utilize available        Planning Division,
                              10.3                                                                                                             On-going         General Fund
                                     new funding sources.                                                      Housing Division
                                     Enforce the requirements of the Inclusionary Zoning Ordinance to
                              11.1                                                                             Planning Division               On-going         General Fund
                                     the extent that Task HE 11.2 below is addressed.
                                     Provide as part of the General Plan Annual Report an analysis of
                                     the effectiveness of the Inclusionary Zoning Ordinance in creating
                                     long-term affordable renter- and owner-occupied housing units.
                                     The analysis shall identify housing developments subject to the
                              11.2                                                                             Planning Division                 Annual         General Fund
                                     Ordinance for which construction has been completed in the
                                     previous year, and shall qualitatively and quantitatively describe
                                     the extent to which the ordinance impacted the construction cost
                                     of market-rate units within these developments.
 Continue to require                 Review and evaluate the inclusionary housing policy for all
                              11.3                                                                             Planning Division               On-going         General Fund
 affordable units in all new         Redevelopment Project Areas.
 housing development and             Amend the Inclusionary Zoning Ordinance and the condominium
 in new condominium           11.4   regulations to clarify that condominium conversions are subject to        Planning Division       X           2013         General Fund
 conversions                         the Ordinance.
                                     Through staff training, ensure effective dissemination about the
                                     Inclusionary Zoning Ordinance to prospective property purchasers                                          On-going;
                              11.5   and developers, and prepare paper and electronic brochures to             Planning Division            2012 for brochure   General Fund
                                     assist these individuals to better understand and determine their                                        preparation
                                     obligation under the ordinance.
                                     Adopt disclosure requirement about the existence of an
                                     inclusionary zoning ordinance in Daly City and that directs
                                     property purchasers to the City for additional details. This
                              11.6                                                                             Planning Division       X           2013         General Fund
                                     disclosure would be required for transaction of properties over a
                                     certain size and valuation that could be subject to the City’s
                                     inclusionary zoning ordinance.
                                     Reduce delays in project approval and issuance of building
                                     permits by developing a plan check prioritization system that
                                     reduces the time required to complete the plan check review           Building Division (policy
                              12.1                                                                                                                 2012         General Fund
                                     process for affordable housing projects, especially those projects         development)
                                     which exceed the City’s inclusionary zoning ordinance
                                     requirements.
                                     Continue to offer parking reductions offered in the current Zoning
                                     Ordinance that serve as an incentive to developers of low-income
                              12.2                                                                             Planning Division               On-going         General Fund
                                     elderly housing provided a minimum age for residency of such
 Provide regulatory                  units is established by the Ordinance (e.g., 62 years of age).
 incentives and streamline
                                     Establish regulations that allow parking reductions for all multiple-
 the permit process for
                                     family housing developments containing low-income units,
 development projects that
                              12.3   commensurate to the proportion of the project devoted to such             Planning Division       X           2013         General Fund
 contain deed-restricted
                                     units (currently a project must be 100 percent affordable to qualify
 affordable units.
                                     for a parking reduction).
                                     Develop a Density Bonus Ordinance consistent with the State
                              12.4   Density Bonus law that identifies additional regulatory incentives        Planning Division       X           2013         General Fund
                                     for constructing higher-density affordable development projects.
                                     Continue to offer streamlined environmental review for affordable
                                     housing development where authorized by the California
                              12.5                                                                             Planning Division               On-going         General Fund
                                     Environmental Quality Act (Public Resources Code Sections
                                     21159.20 through 21159.27 – Special Review of Housing Projects).
124                                                                                                        Daly City 2030 General Plan | Housing Element

                                     Appendix A (continued): Housing Element Task Implementation Timeframe and Responsibility
                                                                                                                                Z.O.  Completion
              Policy           Task                                 Task Summary                             Responsibility                       Funding Source
                                                                                                                               Update   Date
                                                                                                                                                    Low Income
                                       Give priority expenditure of City housing funds to projects that will
                                13.1                                                                         Housing Division          On-going   Housing Set Aside
                                       provide deed restricted affordable rental housing.
                                                                                                                                                 Fund, HOME funds
 Consider financial incentives
 to increase the supply of
                                                                                                                                                    Low Income
 rental housing for all                Apply for and/or co-sponsor funding opportunities for the
                                13.2                                                                         Planning Division         On-going   Housing Set Aside
 household income groups               construction of rental housing.
                                                                                                                                                 Fund, HOME funds
 including extremely low-
 income households.
                                                                                                                                                    Low Income
                                       Give priority expenditure of City housing funds to projects that will
                                13.3                                                                         Planning Division         On-going   Housing Set Aside
                                       occupy sites that have been previously developed.
                                                                                                                                                 Fund, HOME funds
                                       Within one year of Housing Element adoption, amend the Zoning
                                       Ordinance to identify emergency shelters as a permitted land use,
                                14.1                                                                         Planning Division   X       2013       General Fund
                                       i.e., without the requirement for a use permit, in the C-R/O
                                       Commercial Retail Office zone district.
                                       Assure housing is provided with adequate public improvements,
                                       services, and amenities.
                                       1. The occupancy limit for any building proposed for occupation
                                       by an emergency shelter shall be no less or greater than that
                                       normally required. The maximum number of beds or persons
                                       permitted to be served nightly by the facility.
                                       2. The parking requirement for emergency shelters shall be
                                       quantified within the Zoning Ordinance and shall be based upon
                                       demonstrated need. The parking requirement for emergency
                                       shelters shall be no greater than the requirement for other
                                14.2   residential or commercial uses within the C-R/O Commercial Retail     Planning Division   X       2013       General Fund
 Assure access to services in          Office zone.
 Daly City for homeless
 individuals and families, and         3. The size and location of exterior and interior onsite waiting and
 address the special needs             client intake areas.
 and circumstances of these
 individuals.                          4. The requirement for continuous onsite management and the
                                       submission of a management plan to the City that identifies security
                                       5. The proximity to other emergency shelters provided that emergen
                                       6. Regulations for the maximum length of stay by any individual with
                                       Amend the Zoning Ordinance to ensure that transitional housing,
                                       as defined by State law, is allowed in any residential zone without
                                14.3                                                                         Planning Division   X       2013       General Fund
                                       the requirement for a use permit and subject to no greater zoning
                                       restrictions than residential uses in the same zone.
                                       Amend the Zoning Ordinance to ensure that supportive housing,
                                       as defined by State law, is allowed in any residential without the
                                14.4                                                                         Planning Division   X       2013       General Fund
                                       requirement for a use permit and subject to no greater zoning
                                       restrictions than residential uses in the same zone.
                                       Maintain an active role in expanding accessibility and require all
                                15.1                                                                         Planning Division         On-going     General Fund
                                       State and local accessibility codes to be met.
                                       Regularly monitor the implementation of the jurisdiction’s
                                       ordinances, codes, policies, and procedures to ensure they
                                15.2                                                                         Planning Division         On-going     General Fund
                                       comply with the “reasonable accommodation” for disabled
                                       provisions and all fair housing laws.
                                       Amend the Zoning Ordinance to establish clear procedures and
                                       regulations that ensure that residential development regulations
                                       contain flexibility to accommodate the special needs of the
 Require adaptability and
                                       physically disabled. Where warranted and directly related to the
 accessibility of residential
                                       physical disability of the applicant, flexibility in development
 units for disabled
                                15.3   regulations shall be ministerial and shall include but not be limited Planning Division   X       2013       General Fund
 occupants, and ensure that
                                       to identifying who may request a reasonable accommodation
 the Zoning Ordinance
                                       (i.e., persons with disabilities, family-members, landlords, etc.),
 provides regulations that are
                                       timeframes for decision-making, and provision for relief from the
 sensitive to the needs of
                                       various land-use, zoning, or building regulations that may constrain
 disabled occupants.
                                       housing opportunities for persons of disabilities.
                                       Amend the City’s second unit regulations to establish clear
                                       procedures for providing administrative relief from second unit
                                15.4   requirements in circumstances where these requirements would          Planning Division   X       2013       General Fund
                                       otherwise prevent the construction of a second unit for a disabled
                                       person.
                                       Continue to fund (as funding permits) and support home repair                                                 Community
                                15.5   programs that assist residents in paying for various handicapped      Planning Division         On-going  Development Block
                                       modifications in and around their homes.                                                                         Grant
Daly City 2030 General Plan | Housing Element                                                                                                                  125

                                     Appendix A (continued): Housing Element Task Implementation Timeframe and Responsibility
                                                                                                                                       Z.O.  Completion
              Policy           Task                                 Task Summary                                 Responsibility                         Funding Source
                                                                                                                                      Update   Date
                                       The City shall assist in the implementation and enforcement of
                                       State and federal fair housing and civil rights laws, and shall make
                                       use of opportunities in its interaction with real estate offices,
                                                                                                                  Housing Division,
                                       businesses, and other groups or agencies to eliminate housing
                                16.1                                                                          Planning Division, City         On-going    General Fund
                                       discrimination. Where discrimination is suspected, the City shall
                                                                                                               Attorney's      Office
                                       work with the appropriate public interest agencies to vigorously
                                       pursue the matter and where discrimination is found, the City shall
                                       assist the relevant entity in prosecuting the matter.
                                       Amend the Zoning Ordinance to revise the definition of family to
                                       comply with State and federal fair housing laws. The new
                                16.2   definition shall not distinguish between related and unrelated            Planning Division      X       2013      General Fund
                                       persons, and shall not impose limitations on the number of persons
                                       that may constitute a family.
  Prevent housing
  discrimination based on
                                       The City will continue to contract to provide fair housing services to
  age, race, religion,
                                       its residents and property owners. Services will include:
  sex,ethnic background, or
  familial status.
                                       1. Distributing educational materials to property owners,
                                       apartment managers, and tenants every two years;
                                       2. Making public service announcements (PSAs) via different
                                       media (e.g., newspaper ads and public service announcements
                                                                                                                  Housing Division,
                                16.3   at local radio and television channels) at least two times a year;                                     On-going    General Fund
                                                                                                                 Planning Division
                                       3. Conducting public presentations with different community
                                       groups;
                                       4. Responding to complaints of discrimination (i.e., in-taking,
                                       investigation of complaints, and resolution); and
                                       5. Referring services to appropriate agencies.
                                       Continue to operate and support (as funding permits) the Housing
  Provide financial assistance         Assistance Program that grants eligible lower income families,
  to lower income households    17.1   seniors and persons with disabilities money to cover housing               Housing Division      X       2013      General Fund
  in emergency situations              related emergencies (e.g., security deposits, temporary difficulty
                                       meeting rent payments).
                                       Develop location regulations for larger residential care facilities
  Support a balanced                   that are not exempt from local zoning restrictions to provide
  distribution of quality       18.1   objective standards to persons desiring to establish such facilities,     Planning Division      X       2013      General Fund
  residential care facilities          while at the same time dispersing such facilities throughout the
                                       City.
                                       Provide an exception to the proposed zoning regulation identified
                                       in Task HE 3.7, whereby any housing development that is willing to
                                       deed-restrict at least 20 percent of units for extremely low-income
                                19.1   households would be exempt from the minimum one parking                   Planning Division      X       2013      General Fund
  Address the range of needs           space per unit rule identified by this task (applies to projects
  and encourage the                    qualifying for transit-proximate parking reductions) and instead be
  production of additional             subject to providing at least 0.5 parking spaces per unit.
  housing opportunities for
  extremely low-income (ELI)           Revise the Zoning Ordinance to waive the parking requirements
  households.                   19.2   altogether for ELI deed-restricted second units that are transit          Planning Division      X       2013      General Fund
                                       proximate, as described in Task HE 3.5.
                                       For any new housing development utilizing public funding or
                                       publicly-owned land, the City and project developer shall explore          Housing Divsion,
                                19.3                                                                                                          On-going    General Fund
                                       the inclusion of units specifically targeted to and restricted for ELI    Planning Division
                                       households.
                                       Objective HE 5: Assure that the quality of housing is continually maintained or upgraded,
                                                and the existing housing supply is not negatively affected by reconstruction.
.
                                       Amend the Zoning Ordinance non-conforming building regulations
                                       to allow the voluntary reconstruction, restoration, or rebuilding of
                                       any multifamily residential building with three or more units.
       Encourage voluntary
                                       Examples of non-conformity may include unit count, parking
    housing rehabilitation and  20.1                                                                             Planning Division      X       2013      General Fund
                                       provision, and building setback and height. Such reconstruction,
          reconstruction
                                       restoration, or rebuilding shall be limited for both single-family and
                                       multiple-family buildings in the ways described by California
                                       Government Code Section 65852.25.
126                                                                                                             Daly City 2030 General Plan | Housing Element
                                         Appnedix A (continued): Housing Element Task Implementation Timeframe and Responsibility
                                                                                                                                        Z.O.  Completion
               Policy              Task                                 Task Summary                               Responsibility                        Funding Source
                                                                                                                                       Update   Date
                                           Amend the Zoning Ordinance non-conforming building regulations
                                           to allow reconstruction of non-conforming buildings affected by
                                           fire or natural disaster subject to the land use regulations in place
                                           at the time of the original building construction, if the present
                                           development regulations are determined by the Director of
  Encourage housing                        Economic and Community Development to allow fewer total units
  reconstruction after fire or      21.1   than were originally permitted. This amendment shall allow such          Planning Division    X       2013      General Fund
  other natural disaster                   reconstruction provided the total unit count does not increase and
                                           the size of each replacement unit is substantially similar to the size
                                           of the original unit being replaced. The amendment shall not
                                           apply where the General Plan Land Use Map requires a higher
                                           minimum density than was provided in the building prior to the fire
                                           or natural disaster.
.
                                           Establish an expanded code enforcement program targeting the
                                           abatement of garage-level habitable rooms and additions that
                                           have been constructed without permits in residential structures
                                           containing between one and two dwelling units. This task could
                                           explore a number of potential programs to effectively dissuade
  Ensure that additions of
                                           non-permitted room construction, including, but not limited to:
  habitable space within
  existing dwellings are
                                           1. Increased code enforcement efforts;                                   Building Division,
  completed safely and in a         22.1                                                                                                       On-going    General Fund
                                                                                                                    Planning Division
  manner consistent with the
                                           2. Strengthening noticing requirements to buyers on permitted
  City’s building and zoning
                                           work;
  regulations
                                           3. Exploring the feasibility and effectiveness of a program aimed at
                                           abating non-permitted habitable living space; and
                                           4. Exploring the potential for a new amnesty program.
.
                                           Monitor existing at-risk low-income housing units to determine if the
                                           owners plan to file a notice of interest to prepay the mortgage
  Preserve existing low-                   obligation. The prepayment would terminate the requirement that
  income housing units that                the units be rented to low-income individuals. The City should
  are at risk of being              23.1   maintain an up-to-date list of public and private non-profit housing     Housing Division           On-going    General Fund
  converted to market-rate                 entities who can and will be able to purchase the at risk units
  housing                                  should the necessity arise. The City should also maintain a current
                                           list of available financial resources to fund the potential purchase
                                           of these units.
                                         Objective HE 6: Avoid or reduce the economic and social difficulties caused by displacement.
.
  Preserve existing low-                   The City requires that property owners who place renters in units
  income housing units that                that violate the Municipal Code provide relocation assistance
  are at risk of being              24.1   when the tenant must vacate the premises due to code                     Housing Division           On-going    General Fund
  converted to market-rate                 enforcement activity. This policy will serve to protect particularly
  housing                                  residents living in substandard illegal secondary units.
                               Objective HE 7: Reduce unnecessary or wasteful energy practices, and encourage more energy efficient housing.
.
                                           Develop enhanced residential energy efficiency standards (Title
                                           24, California Administrative Code) in all new residential
                                    25.1                                                                            Building Division          On-going    General Fund
                                           construction which exceeds State-mandated requirements by five
                                           percent in 2015, ten percent in 2020, and twenty percent in 2030.
  Gradually increase energy                Establish energy and water efficiency upgrade programs that
  and water efficiency                     promote energy and water efficiency upgrades in all existing
  standards for all new and                residential buildings. Energy efficiency upgrades promoted as part
  existing housing while                   of this program could include upgrades such as attic insulation,
  minimizing the costs of such             programmable thermostats, heating duct insulation, and water
                                                                                                                   Planning Division;
  standards.                               heater insulation. Water efficiency upgrades could include the
                                    25.2                                                                          Department of Water            2010      General Fund
                                           installation of low-flow shower heads, where feasible, and retrofit of
                                                                                                                    and Wastewater
                                           existing toilets to meet low-flush requirements as established by the
                                           City. Examples of programs developed as a part of this task could
                                           provide financial incentives (e.g., rebates, appliance buy-back,
                                           and similar programs) aimed at providing strong incentives to
                                           residential building owners to use the programs.
Daly City 2030 General Plan | Housing Element                                                                                                                        127

                                     Appendix A (continued): Housing Element Task Implementation Timeframe and Responsibility
                                                                                                                                          Z.O.    Completion
             Policy            Task                                 Task Summary                                   Responsibility                                 Funding Source
                                                                                                                                         Update       Date
                                       Adopt amendments to the building code requiring the inclusion of
                                       mandatory green building standards for all new construction and
                                26.1                                                                               Building Division                  2011          General Fund
                                       remodels that exceed a certain valuation (to be determined at
  Mandate the inclusion of             the time of the building code amendment).
 green building techniques
 into most new construction.           Adopt amendments to the building code that require all City-
                                       funded affordable housing projects reach a Home Energy Rating
                                26.2                                                                               Building Division                  2011          General Fund
                                       System (HERS) score above 86 (the minimum Energy Star rating), or
                                       equivalent.
                                       Amend the Zoning Ordinance to require street tree planting as
                                       part of the construction of any new home and any remodel to any
                                       residential structure exceeding 50 percent valuation of the
                                27.1   structure being remodeled. The Ordinance shall require uniform              Planning Division       X          2013          General Fund
                                       street tree spacing within new neighborhoods of one tree per
 Provide a greater number of           each 25 linear feet of curb, to the maximum extent practical. All
 street trees throughout Daly          new street trees shall receive irrigation.
 City’s neighborhoods.
                                       Amend the plan check process to ensure compliance with
                                       amended Zoning Ordinance provisions related to street tree                                                    Initially
                                27.2   planting. At a minimum, applicants and developers shall identify            Planning Division            2012 and then on-   General Fund
                                       street tree placement on all utility plans submitted for City of public                                        going
                                       utility review and approval.
                                       Appoint a stormwater control manager within either the
                                       Department of Public Works or Department of Water/Wastewater
                                                                                                                     Public Works
                                       charged with implementing the City’s Stormwater Management
 Through the development of                                                                                          Department;
                                28.1   Program. The manager shall be responsible for reviewing public                                                 2014          General Fund
 a Stormwater Management                                                                                            Department of
                                       and private stormwater control mechanism proposals, requiring
 Program, ensure that all new                                                                                     Water/Wastewater
                                       amendments to such controls as part of the development review
 development complies with             process, and ensuring their proper construction.
 applicable municipal
 stormwater National                   Evaluate acceptable development standards for stormwater
 Pollutant Discharge                   treatment mechanisms and publish such standards for distribution        Planning Division, Public
 Elimination System (NPDES)            to developers. Such standards shall be based on a thorough                 Works Department,
 permits by incorporating       28.2                                                                                                                  2012          General Fund
                                       evaluation of modern stormwater control mechanisms and shall, to             Department of
 controls that reduce water            the extent feasible, consider soil conditions in various parts of Daly     Water/Wastewater
 quality impacts over the life         City.
 of the project.
                                       In locations where high density residential development is
                                                                                                                     Public Works
                                       prevalent (e.g., east of Interstate 280), consider the use of the
                                28.3                                                                           Department, Planning                On-going        None required
                                       public right of way as an appropriate location for privately
                                                                                                                        Division
                                       maintained stormwater treatment mechanisms.
                                       Create and adopt a Climate Action Strategy Plan that establishes
                                29.1   a greenhouse gas reduction goal, based on the baseline                  City Manager's Office                  2011          General Fund
                                       established in the respective Plan.
                                       Adopt progressive energy efficiency strategies similar to those
 Revise land use policies to           adopted by the California Public Utilities Commission:
 meet or exceed the
 greenhouse gas reduction              1. All new residential construction in California will be zero net
 goals established in                  energy by 2020;
 Assembly Bill 32 (reducing            2. All new commercial construction in California will be zero net
 California’s greenhouse gas                                                                                       Building Division,
                                29.2   energy by 2030;                                                                                                2011          General Fund
 emissions to 1990 levels by                                                                                       Planning Division
                                       3. Heating, Ventilation and Air Conditioning (HVAC) will be
 2020).                                transformed to ensure that its energy performance is optimal for
                                       California’s climate; and
                                       4. All eligible low-income customers will be given the opportunity
                                       to participate in the low-income energy efficiency program by
                                       2020.
                                       Reduce or eliminate permit fees for installations involving solar
                                30.1                                                                               Building Division                  2011          General Fund
                                       electric, wind and solar hot water systems.
                                       Encourage, incentivize, or require all new major construction
                                                                                                                   Building Division,
                                30.2   projects to pre-plumb for solar hot water and pre-wire for solar                                               2011          General Fund
 Promote alternative sources                                                                                       Planning Division
                                       electric systems.
 of energy in all homes.
                                       Develop a funding source to offer loans to residents and
                                                                                                                   Building Division,
                                30.3   developers that invest in solar electric, solar hot water, wind,                                               2011          General Fund
                                                                                                                   Planning Division
                                       and/or other clean energy systems.
                                       Amend the Zoning Ordinance to include development standards
                                30.4   for the installation of alternative energy generating systems on            Planning Division       X          2011          General Fund
                                       residential properties.
128                                                                                                            Daly City 2030 General Plan | Housing Element

                                      Appendix A (continued): Housing Element Task Implementation Timeframe and Responsibility
           Objective HE 8: Increase the supply of housing in a manner that does not negatively impact the quality of life in existing adjacent neighborhoods.
.
                                                                                                                              Z.O.       Completion
              Policy            Task                             Task Summary                          Responsibility                                 Funding Source
                                                                                                                             Update        Date
   Ensure that, in instances
  where higher density mixed-
  use development is
  permitted adjacent to                 Review the Mixed-Use Design Guidelines and Zoning Ordinance to
  existing neighborhoods, the           ensure that the guidelines address impacts created by larger
                                 31.1                                                                  Planning Division       X            2013        General Fund
  impacts of building height            mixed-use buildings proposed adjacent to smaller buildings and
  are decreased to the                  amend the Guidelines and Ordinance as needed.
  maximum extent feasible
  without reducing permitted
  General Plan density.
Daly City 2030 General Plan | Housing Element                                                                                                                     129
130 Daly City 2030 General Plan | Housing Elemen
Introduction
Scope and Role of the Circulation Element
The Circulation Element identifies policies for ensuring that adequate transportation facilities are
maintained throughout the planning period, that the facilities in which the City plans to invest reflect the
land uses contemplated by the Land Use Element, and that the transportation system provides a range
of transportation choices. The element accomplishes these objectives by describing the existing
transportation system, areas that need improvement, and proposing policies and tasks to ensure the
safe and efficient transport of people and goods throughout the City. Topics that are given special
attention in this plan are traffic improvements, public transit, bicycle facilities, and techniques to
mitigate impacts from individual development proposals.
State Planning Law
State Planning law requires every city and county adopt a Circulation Element consisting of the general
location and extent of existing and proposed major thoroughfares, transportation routes, terminals and
other public transit facilities. State law encourages the development of a balanced transportation
system within each community. In particular, Section 65302 (b) of the California Government Code
states that the Circulation Element policies and programs should:
        Coordinate the transportation and circulation system with planned land uses as outlined in the
         Land Use element;
        Promote the efficient transportation of goods and the safe and effective movement of a
         segments of the population;
        Make efficient use of existing transportation facilities; and
        Protect environmental quality and promote the wise and equitable use of economic and
         natural resources.
Additionally, the California Complete Streets Act requires that all cities plan for the development of a
multimodal transportation network which allows for effective travel by motor vehicle, foot, bicycle, and
transit to reach key destinations within their community and the larger region. The law emphasizes the
desire that cities prioritize the construction of public improvements that accelerate development of a
balanced, multimodal transportation network. The General Plan Circulation Element provides a policy
framework wherein both public and private project’s efforts to enhance the multimodal transportation
network are identified and, where necessary, funding mechanism(s) for their implementation explored.
Daly City 2030 General Plan | Circulation Element                                                        131

Background Information
Although Daly City remains one of the most-dense              Figure CE-1:       Daly City Residents Means
communities in the Bay Area in terms of population                               of Transportation to Work
per square mile, most of the City is characterized by
neighborhoods consisting of single-family homes most                        Home/other
easily accessed by the private automobile.             As                       3%
illustrated in Figure CE-1, approximately 78 percent of                    Bike/Walk
residents travel to work either driving alone or with                          1%
                                                                Public transit
others, up slightly since 1980 when about 75 percent
                                                                     18%
of residents did so.
Given the automobile’s predominance in the
transportation network, it is important to understand
how the City’s land use decisions can have a                                                            Drive alone
cumulative impact on traffic conditions. For example,                                                       58%
                                                                  Carpool
single-family subdivisions generate considerably more               20%
traffic (measured by the number of average daily
vehicular trips) than housing types which are typically
constructed in more-dense structures. As identified in
Table CE-1, a new development consisting of 50                    Source: US Census (2000)
single-family homes will generate 25 percent more
vehicular trips than a comparably-sized condominium project and almost 40 percent more trips than a
comparably-sized apartment project.
   Table CE-1: Traffic Generation by Comparable Residential Land Use
                                                                                          50-unit development
                                                      Morning             Evening
        Residential Land Use         Daily Traffic                                         Morning     Evening
                                                     Peak-Hour           Peak-Hour
                Type                  Generation                                             Peak        Peak
                                                     Generation         Generation
      Single family home                  9.57 trips   0.75 trips          1.01 trips       37.5 trips  50.5 trips
      Apartment                           6.65 trips   0.51 trips          0.62 trips       25.5 trips    31 trips
      Condo/townhouse                     5.81 trips   0.44 trips          0.75 trips         22 trips  37.5 trips
      Retirement Community                2.81 trips   0.18 trips          0.29 trips          9 trips  14.5 trips
      Source: Institute of Transportation Engineers
As land availability shrinks and higher densities become more commonplace, the City will likely see a
continued shift away from the single-family home to denser types of housing, such as condominiums
and apartments. As this occurs, it will become increasingly important that the Circulation Element
promote other modes of transportation in addition to -- and in some instances in-lieu of -- the private
automobile, e.g., public transit, bicycling, and pedestrian circulation. For this reason, the Circulation
Element provides information regarding each of these modes.
Vehicular traffic
Because the private automobile remains a primary transportation resource in Daly City, managing
vehicular traffic will remain a principal concern for the City. This section identifies the traffic system’s
132                                                             Daly City 2030 General Plan | Circulation Element

components, its current effectiveness in moving traffic, what concerns in the system could arise within
the planning period, and what can be done to address anticipated traffic issues.
Roadway network
Figure CE-2 identifies the City’s existing roadway network, categorized by size, volume of traffic, and
how each is connected to the larger regional transportation network. The following are descriptions of
the four major roadway types identified in the figure.
       Freeways are routes designed to carry large traffic volumes over long distances. The two
        freeways that travel through Daly City, Highway 1 and Interstate 280, are owned, operated, and
        maintained by the California Department of Transportation (Caltrans). Vehicular access to
        these freeways is limited to on- and off-ramps, crossings are grade separated and median
        islands are used to separate lanes moving in opposite direction. Interstate 280, an eight-lane
        freeway with a right-of-way of 290 feet, is the most heavily traveled roadway in the City carrying
        approximately 150,000 vehicles through Daly City every day.
       Highways are roads designed to carry heavy traffic volumes at moderate speeds. Like freeways,
        access is controlled to just a few locations and there are medians between lanes in opposite
        directions. Highways are different from freeways in that cross traffic usually is at the same grade.
        The basic right-of-way can vary from 100 to 170 feet. Access to abutting properties is provided
        by frontage roads. Intersections are signalized and parking is not permitted. Highways are
        typically landscaped heavily to give them a parkway-type character. At the present time,
        Highway 35 is the only highway in Daly City. Like Interstate 280, Highway 35 is owned, operated,
        and maintained by Caltrans.
       Arterials are designed to carry heavy traffic volumes at lower speeds than highways. Most
        arterials incorporate medians to control cross traffic, and provide separate turn lanes and signals
        controls at major intersections. In Daly City, four-lane arterials have rights-of-way ranging from 88
        to 115 feet, depending on whether there are parking lanes and typically provide a capacity of
        22,500 average daily trips (ADT). Examples of four-lane arterials are Geneva Avenue, Mission
        Street, John Daly Boulevard, and Serramonte Boulevard. Examples of two-lane arterials are
        Eastmoor Avenue and Southgate Avenue. They have right-of-ways ranging from 60 to 70 feet
        and have a capacity of 11,000 ADT.
       Collector streets are designed to channel traffic from local streets into the arterial street system
        and to handle short trips within neighborhoods. Collectors have two lanes in a right-of-way of 50
        or 60 feet and have a capacity of 3,000 ADT. Examples of collector streets include Crocker
        Avenue and South Mayfair Avenue.
In addition to the above roadways (not identified in Figure CE-2) are local streets. They provide access
from larger roadways to destinations within a residential or business district. Local streets may be loop
streets, cul-de-sacs, or straight connections between two collector streets, and are typically not
signalized. Travel distance to a collector typically does not exceed one-half of a mile. Right-of-way
widths typically range from 50 to 60 feet, and capacity does not typically exceed 800 ADT. Local streets
are designed for relatively low speed travel with parking permitted on both sides of the street.
Level of Service
Traffic at Daly City’s intersection is measured by a Level of Service (LOS) standard which grades
intersection performance on an “A” through “F” scale. This LOS measurement is calculated by summing
the average delay for vehicles in each lane for all intersection approaches. Table CE-2 provides a brief
description of the levels of service recognized by the City and corresponding driving conditions
associate with each:
Daly City 2030 General Plan | Circulation Element                                                         133

            Table CE-2: Traffic Level of Service (LOS) Descriptions
                 Level of  Average Stopped Delay1
                 Service       (seconds/vehicle)                     Description
                    A            Delay ≤ 10.0.0          Free flow; minimal to no delay
                                                            Stable flow, but speeds are
                    B          10.0 < Delay ≤ 20.0         beginning to be restricted by
                                                          traffic condition; slight delays.
                                                           Stable flow, but most drivers
                                                         cannot select their own speeds
                    C          20.0 < Delay ≤ 35.0
                                                          and feel somewhat restricted;
                                                                 acceptable delays.
                                                        Approaching unstable flow, and
                    D          35.0 < Delay ≤ 55.0              drivers have difficulty
                                                         maneuvering; tolerable delays.
                                                        Unstable flow with stop and go;
                    E          55.0 < Delay ≤ 80.0
                                                                        delays
                                                           Total breakdown; congested
                    F             Delay > 80.0
                                                        conditions with excessive delays.
               1
                  Control Delay per vehicle (seconds per vehicle).
               Source: Transportation Research Board, Special Report 209, Highway
               Capacity Manual, Chapter 16 – Signalized Intersections, 2000.
As identified in Task CE-1.6 on page 151, this Circulation Element employs a Level of Service “D”
standard intended primarily to determine impacts of new land uses on the City’s roadway network and
the intersection improvements that may need to occur as a result. This standard requires that a
minimum Level of Service “D” be maintained at all principal intersections. The morning and evening
peak traffic conditions occur between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m., and 4:00 p.m. and 7:00 p.m.,
respectively.
134                                                             Daly City 2030 General Plan | Circulation Element

                                                  Figure CE-2
                                                  EXISTING
                                                  ROADWAYS
                                                    CITY OF DALY CITY
                                                     CIRCULATION
                                                         ELEMENT
Daly City 2030 General Plan | Circulation Element                     135

Existing traffic conditions
In 2008, the City measured traffic volumes at 54 principal intersections to determine the peak-hour Level
of Service for each. According to these measurements, the vast majority of the City’s intersections
operate at minimum Levels of Service during both peak traffic periods. However, the following
intersections did not:
       The intersection of John Daly Boulevard/Junipero Serra Boulevard currently operates at LOS E
        during the p.m. peak. The congestion at this intersection can be attributed to commuters exiting
        the nearby BART station and the large number of motorists exiting and entering I-280.
       The intersection of Junipero Serra Boulevard/Washington Street currently operates at LOS F
        during the p.m. peak. The congestion at this intersection can be attributed to the large number
        of northbound and southbound vehicles access the I-280 on-ramp.
       The intersection of Hickey Boulevard/Skyline Boulevard currently operates at LOS E during the
        p.m. peak. This intersection provides access to a shopping center on the northwest corner as
        well as the Fairmont neighborhood in Pacifica.
The existing LOS identified in the Circulation Element constitute baseline traffic conditions in Daly City
and as such may be used for future analyses in the City in conjunction with, or tiered from, the
environmental document prepared in association with this element.
Future traffic conditions
Using a computerized traffic model, the City has been able to develop projections which identify the
intersections that will likely be impacted by additional traffic and new development occurring both
inside and outside Daly City between now and the a future year when all properties are expected to
be fully developed. This future year is called “build out”. Although the majority of the City’s
intersections would continue to operate at an acceptable Level of Service, several intersections could
degrade from acceptable to unacceptable levels, including the following six intersections:
       John Daly Boulevard/Mission Street/Hillside Boulevard could operate at LOS F in the a.m. and
        p.m. peaks and Junipero Serra Boulevard/Washington Street could operate at LOS F in the p.m.
        peak.
       Mission Street/East Market Street/San Pedro Road could operate at LOS E in the a.m. and p.m.
        peaks.
       John Daly Boulevard/Junipero Serra Boulevard could operate at LOS F in the p.m. peak.
       Hickey Boulevard/Skyline Boulevard could operate at LOS E in the p.m. peak.
       Geneva Avenue/Bayshore Boulevard could operate at LOS E in the p.m. peak.
In consideration of the traffic model projections, it is important to understand that the degradation of
these intersections is not imminent because the traffic impacts anticipated to affect service levels
would likely take several decades to be realized. Also, all new traffic is not attributable to new
development as high housing costs make intergenerational living arrangements and renting rooms to
unrelated individuals even more commonplace than they are today, resulting in increased traffic from
existing neighborhoods. Rather than causing alarm, the intent of developing the traffic model is that
the model act as a catalyst for how the City plans for future infrastructure needs, informing the City’s
decision-makers that with new housing and job opportunities comes the need to effectively plan for
and finance an expanded City infrastructure.
Daly City 2030 General Plan | Circulation Element                                                     137

Future roadway improvements
Figure CE-3 identifies the future roadway improvements that are presently considered by the City as
both feasible and necessary to improving the City’s transportation network within the planning period.
Although the figure may identify projects that are not located in Daly City or projects in which Caltrans is
the lead agency, the intent of identifying these improvements is to identify any project to which the City
intends to commit financial resources or seek public funding to help finance.
Parking
As mentioned in the introduction section of this element, housing construction in Daly City will likely
continue to shift away from the single-family home to denser types of housing, such as condominiums
and apartments. The decreased traffic associated with these higher densities (as compared with a
single-family home) has a related secondary impact of reducing parking demand according to the
studies of parking demand undertaken by the Institute of Traffic Engineers (ITE). In consideration of ITE’s
findings, the Circulation Element provides policies that offer parking reductions to denser transit-oriented
development that occurs in close proximity to public transit hubs like the Daly City and Colma BART
stations. These policies would be refined and incorporated into the Zoning Ordinance.
Public Transit
Despite the prevalence of the automobile, Daly City residents are somewhat more inclined to use
public transit for getting to work than their counterparts in other cities and in the entirety of San Mateo
County. As identified in Figure CE-4, when compared to the residents of the entire State of California,
Daly City residents are almost four times as likely to use public transit as a method of travel to and from
work. The reasons for this are very likely Daly City’s relatively easy access to SamTrans and Muni bus
services, and close proximity to two BART stations, both of which provide public parking.
138                                                           Daly City 2030 General Plan | Circulation Element

                                                  Figure CE-3
                                                  ROADWAY
                                                  IMPROVEMENTS
                                                    CITY OF DALY CITY
                                                     CIRCULATION
                                                         ELEMENT
Daly City 2030 General Plan | Circulation Element                     139

                                                  Figure CE-5
                                                  PUBLIC
                                                  TRANSPORTATION
                                                    CITY OF DALY CITY
                                                     CIRCULATION
                                                         ELEMENT
Daly City 2030 General Plan | Circulation Element                     141

           Figure CE-4: Daly City Workers Aged 16+ Using Public Transit
        San Francisco                                                31%
            Daly City                           18%
            Bay Area                  10%
  South San Francisco                9%
           San Bruno              8%
   San Mateo County              7%
           California         5%
                       Source: U.S. Census
Figure CE-5 identifies the public transit options, including bus routes, available to Daly City residents. As
shown in the figure, Daly City is served by two BART stations, SamTrans bus service, and Muni bus service.
San Mateo County Transit District (SamTrans)
SamTrans operates an overall fixed route bus system of 82 routes with a service area of 150 square miles.
SamTrans operates 14 fixed bus routes in Daly City with 14 routes directly serving the BART station. Four
of the fixed bus routes have vehicles equipped with handicapped access and one route is an express
route which runs along Interstate 280 directly into San Francisco.
San Francisco Municipal Railway (Muni)
Municipal Railways of the City and County of San Francisco (Muni) operates five routes into Daly City.
Route 28-19th Avenue and route 54-Felton serve the Daly City BART station, and the 14-Mission route
serves Mission Street at the Top of the Hill. Routes 8-Bayshore Express and 9-San Bruno serve the
Bayshore neighborhood. Of the three routes that serve the Daly City BART station, the 28-19th Avenue
has the highest number of passengers. Muni has expressed an interest in extending the 14-Mission line to
the Daly City BART station.
Bay Area Rapid Transit (BART)
Daly City is presently served by two BART stations: the Daly City BART Station located at the corner of
John Daly Boulevard and Junipero Serra Boulevard, and the Colma BART Station located south of San
Pedro Road in unincorporated Colma. In Fiscal Year 2009, the Daly City and Colma stations in
combination were used by almost 12,000 riders each weekday.
  Table CE-3: Daly City/Colma BART Ridership Levels 2002-2009 (Station Exits)
                      Station FY   2002    2003     2004     2005      2006     2007    2008    2009
                   Daly City        7,722  7,650     7,319    7,275    7,879    8,257   8,590   8,096
          Annual Change                     -0.9%     -4.3%    -0.6%      8.3%    4.8%    4.0%   -5.8%
                      Colma         6,530  6,332     3,770    3,221    3,181    3,350   3,632   3,759
          Annual Change                     -3.0%   -40.5%   -14.6%      -1.2%    5.3%    8.4%    3.5%
          Combined Total          14,252 13,982 11,089      10,496    11,060   11,607  12,222  11,855
          Annual Change                     -1.9% -20.7%       -5.3%      5.4%    4.9%    5.3%   -3.0%
  Source: Bay Area Rapid Transit District Annual Report
Daly City 2030 General Plan | Circulation Element                                                         143
According to Table CE-3, BART ridership levels at the Colma station has decreased since 2002, mostly
due to the opening of new BART stations in South San Francisco, San Bruno, Millbrae, and San Francisco
Airport. This decrease is most pronounced at the station between the fiscal years 2003 and 2004, when
the opening of the aforementioned stations in 2003 caused ridership at the station to decrease by
about 40 percent. Ridership at the Daly City BART Station has remained fairly consistent since 2002,
peaking at over 8,500 daily riders in 2008.
As identified in Figure CE-6, most of the riders arriving at the Daly City and Colma BART Stations do so by
private automobile and just under half of these riders do so by driving to the stations alone. The
percentage of riders who have walked to the station is approximately the same (15 to 17 percent) as
the number who have arrived by public transit (SamTrans or Muni), while the number arriving by bicycle
is extremely low (one percent).
Figure CE-6: Daly City/Colma BART Stations (combined)
               – Mode of Travel to Station
               Dropped-Off
                   11%
      Car- pool
          8%                   Walked        Bicycle
                                 17%           1%
                                     Transit
                                       15%
                     Drove Alone
                         48%
   Source: 2008 BART Station Profile Study
With regard to the destinations of the riders at both the Daly City and Colma BART Stations who have
arrived at these stations from home, the trip destination for 82 percent of these riders is to work.
Specifically with regard to riders who have arrived at the Daly City BART Station from a place other than
home, 63 percent have arrived from school and 27 percent have arrived from work (2008 BART Station
Profile Study).
Paratransit Services
Paratransit is an alternative mode of flexible passenger transportation that does not follow fixed routes
or schedules. In Daly City, paratransit consists of shuttlebuses, carpools, vanpools, and taxicab services.
As described below, some paratransit services respond to special needs of people who cannot use
public transit and require an on-call service to get to a doctor’s appointment, shopping, or social event.
Other paratransit services are pre-arranged ridesharing services that operate mainly during peak times
and provide commuters with constant work schedules the opportunity to share vehicles.
144                                                             Daly City 2030 General Plan | Circulation Element

Shuttlebuses
Shuttlebuses services are typically provided by employers or homeowners associations to transport
residents or employees to work or to public transit hubs. Examples of shuttlebuses in Daly City are the
Seton Shuttle and the shuttle provided by Crown Colony Condominium Association. Both of these
shuttles provide the opportunity for a large concentration of individuals to ride to a specific common
destination such as BART, where the rider can continue their commute to work.
Two shuttlebus programs serve the mobility-impaired population in Daly City. SamTrans contracts with
the Redi-Wheels program to operate a County-wide service. This program provides curb-to-curb
service for handicapped individuals and the elderly who have impairments that exclude them from
effectively using public transit. The service is provided on-call to persons who make reservations. In Daly
City, Redi-Wheels focuses on taking people to various medical offices in the St. Francis Heights
neighborhood, Seton Hospital on Sullivan Avenue, and Kaiser medical facilities. The service is also
extended to groups of elderly people for trips to adult day care centers and social gatherings, and
handicapped students who attend Skyline College in San Bruno.
Vanpools
Vanpools allow groups of people to share a ride similar to a carpool, but on a larger scale with
concurrent savings in fuel and vehicle operating costs, providing a flexible and cost effective mode of
transportation. Vehicles may be provided by individuals, individuals in cooperation with various public
and private support programs, through a program operated by or on behalf of an element of
government, or a program operated by or on behalf of an employer. The key concept is that people
share the ride from home or one or more common meeting locations and travel together to a common
destination or work center.
Carpools
Carpooling, also known as car-sharing, is the sharing of car journeys so that more than one person
travels in a car. Carpooling reduces the costs involved in car travel by sharing journey expenses such as
fuel, tolls, and car rental between the people travelling. Carpooling is also an environmentally friendly
and sustainable way to travel as sharing journeys reduces carbon emissions, traffic on the roads, and
the need for parking spaces.
Carpools are typically established by private individuals who may work together or are brought
together by Rideshare 511, a private non-profit corporation funded mostly by the Metropolitan
Transportation Commission and Caltrans. Established as Rides in 1977, the program was established to
promote and facilitate alternative transportation for commuters who work and/or live in the nine-county
Bay Area and Santa Cruz. Rides provides carpooling services for both individual commuters and large
employers. The services for individual commuters includes free computerized car pool matching,
general commuter and transit information, and specialized information on how to establish, operate,
and maintain a carpool.
Taxicabs
Two companies provide twenty-four hour private taxi service in Daly City. The City Council reviews and
approves the license to operate a taxi service in the City. The Gateway Cab Company operates
eleven cabs and, with a fleet of sixteen vehicles, the Daly City Cab Company provides about 500 trips
per day to locations within and outside of the City. The average length of a trip is approximately three
miles and the average number of passengers is 1.25 persons.
Daly City 2030 General Plan | Circulation Element                                                       145
Bikeway System
The topography, level of development, and high traffic volumes in Daly City provide the greatest
challenge to providing a safe environment for bicyclists. There are a limited number of flat or even
relatively flat through-routes in the City, and bicycles must compete for space on these streets with
automobiles and transit. In spite of these challenges, much can be done to make bicycling safer and
more convenient.
Figure CE-7 identifies the City’s existing bicycle network. The following are descriptions of the three
major bikeway types identified in the figure.
       Class I bikeways are designed and operated for the exclusive use of bicycles. Street and
        pedestrian crossings are minimized or are avoided altogether by building underpasses or
        overpasses. This type of bikeway is best located in parks or alongside freeways, railroad right-of-
        way or waterways. An example of a Class I bikeway located in Daly City on Lake Merced
        Boulevard extending from Westlake Park into San Francisco. Another example is John Daly
        Boulevard between Ashland and Poncetta.
       Class II bikeways are adjacent to, but separated from motor vehicle and/or pedestrian traffic.
        While the cyclist has a separate path, it may be preempted by turning or parking vehicles. This
        type of bikeway can be added easily to existing streets by removing curb parking or narrowing
        travel lanes to provide a path separated by a low berm or painted markings. One way lanes
        should be at least four feet wide. An example of a Class II bikeway in Daly City is found along
        Callan Boulevard.
       Class III bikeways are shared bikeways where the cyclist occupies the same right-of-way with
        either motor vehicles or pedestrians. Signs are used to designate that the street or path also is to
        be used by cyclists. While this type of bikeway is the most hazardous, it also is the least expensive
        to install and is often used to provide continuity to other bicycle facilities (e.g., Class II bikeways)
        where right-of-way is limited). The segment of Southgate Avenue between St. Francis Boulevard
        and Junipero Serra Boulevard is an example of this type of bikeway in Daly City.
In 2004 the City adopted a Bicycle Master Plan intended to provide a comprehensive network of signed
and mapped routes for bicyclists and identify improvements that would expedite travel and improve
safety along these routes. Since the plan’s adoption, new bicycle facilities not contemplated by the
plan have been installed and other aspects of the plan are in need of refinement to the extent that this
Circulation Element has identified the update of the Master Plan as a task.
Although the Circulation Element provides broad policies for improvements intended to make bicycling
a viable transportation option, the Bicycle Master Plan should continue to be the primary policy
document used to guide the provision of bicycle facilities in Daly City.
146                                                            Daly City 2030 General Plan | Circulation Element

                                                  Figure CE-7
                                                  BICYCLE NETWORK
                                                    CITY OF DALY CITY
                                                     CIRCULATION
                                                         ELEMENT
Daly City 2030 General Plan | Circulation Element                     147

Pedestrian Circulation
The pedestrian circulation system in Daly City has been determined by the type and extent of land uses
within the City. In the older areas of the City, most notably the Original Daly City and Crocker
neighborhoods, commercial land uses are integrated with residential uses in the form of corner grocery
stores that are easily accessed by walking rather than driving. The central location of Mission Street
within these two neighborhoods also provides the residents with commercial uses within walking
distance. However, in the newer areas such as the St. Francis Heights and Serramonte neighborhoods,
commercial uses are concentrated in small neighborhood serving commercial shopping centers which
are more easily accessed by automobile or bus, therefore restricting pedestrian access.
There are several hiking trails in Daly City. Most notably is the coastline trail which runs north to south
along the pacific coastline and closely follows the abandoned Highway 1 right-of-way. Other hiking
trails in the city are located around San Bruno Mountain and provide access to San Bruno Mountain
State and County Park. Although opportunities for new full-length trail development are limited, the
development of a coastline trail would provide better access to Daly City's scenic coastal resources. In
addition, the continued inclusion of pedestrian access easements in new developments located
around San Bruno Mountain that provide links to the extensive trail system in the San Bruno Mountain
State and County park would further promote hiking and a recreational activity in the City.
To assist the City in identifying potential pedestrian improvement, the Circulation Element calls for the
development of a Pedestrian Mobility Plan (PMP) which would include specific projects for inclusion in
the City’s Capital Improvement Program (CIP). These projects would not just include new sidewalk
construction, but projects that raise the profile of walking as a mode of transportation as well as expand
walking as an attractive recreational opportunity in Daly City. In this regard, the Pedestrian Master Plan
should make specific recommendations for both Mission Street and Geneva Avenue. An existing
conditions report related to the PMP was under preparation as of the summer of 2011.
Circulation Goal, Policies, and Tasks
The circulation goal represents the type of circulation system the City would prefer. The objectives
represent actions, which can be measured over time, that provide a general direction towards
achievement of the goals, while the policies reflect more specific actions that the City has to take in
order to attain the circulation goal.
The City's Circulation goal is:
          “Develop and maintain an efficient, balanced transportation system which preserves
          and enhances environmental quality while providing for the safe movement of all
          people and goods throughout the community. To this end, the City shall strive to
          provide complete streets that are safe, comfortable, and convenient routes for
          walking, bicycling, and public transportation to increase use of these modes of
          transportation, enable active travel as part of daily activities, reduce pollution, and
          meet the needs of all users of the streets, including bicyclists, children, persons with
          disabilities, pedestrians, users of public transportation, seniors, and families, while
          continuing to maintain a safe and effective transportation system for motorists and
          movers of commercial goods consistent with the other goals, objectives, and policies
          of this plan.”
Several facets of the goal warrant consideration. First of all, a balanced transportation system provides
the community with alternative transportation choices. Although the automobile is still the primary
mode of transportation in the City, many people use other forms of transportation such as buses, taxis,
Daly City 2030 General Plan | Circulation Element                                                       149

ridesharing, shuttle services and bicycles to move throughout the City. The location of BART in Daly City
and in Colma also provides the community with an alternative method of travelling throughout the Bay
Area region. However, there are some people who have little or no choice in terms of transportation
mode. These transit dependent citizens must use public transit to move throughout the community or
region. Emphasis should be placed on developing new choices and maintaining and improving
existing alternative forms of transportation.
Second, the goal promotes the development of an efficient system. The efficiency of a transportation
system is related to the reduction in costs associated with travelling between two places. Two types of
costs, direct and indirect costs can be defined. Direct costs include: time, gas, vehicle maintenance,
and traffic accidents. Indirect costs include: emotional or psychological stress, energy use, and air
quality impacts. A reduction in these costs can be achieved through the development of a balanced,
multi-modal transportation system.
Third, a balanced and efficient transportation system helps to preserve and enhance environmental
quality. The use of alternative modes of transportation reduces the number of single occupancy
vehicles, will result in improved air quality through the conservation of natural resources such as fuel and
reduce parking demand. Adverse transportation impacts resulting from development can be
mitigated through the requirement of contributions for transportation system improvements such as the
signalization of intersections and widening of roads. Other transportation impacts such as insufficient
parking can also be mitigated by requiring in-lieu fees for the construction of parking garages or
requiring payments under a parking assessment district.
Fourth, all forms of transportation within the community provide for the safe movement of all citizens.
The proper maintenance of streets, sidewalks, intersections, signals, bus stops and directional signs is
essential to the safety of the community. The construction of handicapped modifications allow for the
improved movement and safety of the physically handicapped. Programs and policies should be
directed towards improving the safety of public transit systems that serve the City such as BART,
SamTrans, and Muni, in order to ensure the safety of their passengers.
The following provides a set of integrated policies and tasks.
Vehicular Traffic
Policy CE-1:     Use the City’s traffic model and environmental review process outlined by the California
                 Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) to ensure that the City’s existing roadway network is
                 relatively free flowing during peak traffic periods.
                 Task CE-1.1: Keep the city’s traffic model up to date to reflect new development,
                 circulation network improvements, and land use projection amendments as they occur.
                 Task CE-1.2: Monitor traffic at intersections to identify timing of improvements by
                 analyzing intersections currently operating at LOS C or worse on a regular basis. It is
                 recommended that intersection counts are collected every five years on a typical mid-
                 week day at these locations and analyzed per Daly City’s Local Thresholds of
                 Significance Guidelines to determine if and when improvements are needed.
                 Unsignalized intersections should also be analyzed using the most current California
                 Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices (California MUTCD) to determine if and when
                 a traffic signal is warranted. Monitoring of intersections currently operating at LOS C or
                 worse would continue through 2035, or until an improvement is warranted and
                 implemented, whichever comes first.
150                                                             Daly City 2030 General Plan | Circulation Element

                Task CE-1.3: Require a traffic study as part of a complete application for discretionary
                projects which meet pre-determined criteria established by the City Engineer. The study
                shall determine the cumulative impact of the project on the City’s principal intersections
                together with approved projects and projects under construction in Daly City and
                adjacent jurisdictions.
                Task CE-1.4: Allow a trip generation discount pre-determined by the City Traffic
                Engineer for residential projects exceeding 30 dwelling units per acre located within 0.25
                miles of any public bus hub or are within 0.5 mile distance of a BART station. For the
                purpose of this task, a bus hub shall be defined as a location where significant numbers
                of passengers are exchanged from one mechanized mode of transport to another (e.g.,
                bus transfer points, bus “park-n-rides”, etc.)
                Task CE-1.5: Require a traffic study as part of a complete application in accordance
                with the Caltrans Guide for the Preparation of Traffic Impact Studies and proactively
                consult Caltrans where there exists ambiguity as to whether such a study is required
                under Caltrans guidelines.
                Task CE-1.6: Incorporate a Level of Service (LOS) standard into Daly City’s Local
                Thresholds of Significance Guidelines and use the standard as an evaluation measure for
                the traffic impacts created by new discretionary projects and to identify future roadway
                and intersection improvements in the City’s Capital Improvement Program.
                This standard shall be applied as follows:
                    Require that a minimum LOS D be maintained at all principal intersections.
                    Where a traffic study identifies that a discretionary project will degrade the Level of
                     Service at any of the City’s principal intersections to below acceptable levels, the
                     City shall, through the environmental review process, require measures to mitigate
                     the anticipated impact to a level of insignificance.
                    New vehicular traffic created by a discretionary project that causes any of the City’s
                     principal intersections to degrade to LOS F during any traffic period shall be
                     considered a significant impact subject to the preparation of an Environmental
                     Impact Report (EIR). The EIR shall provide both mitigation measures and feasible
                     project alternatives that would effectively mitigate anticipated traffic impacts to a
                     level of insignificance.
                    Mitigation measures shall include construction of or financial contribution toward
                     traffic improvements that can effectively mitigate the impact within a ten-year
                     timeframe from the project approval date. Traffic impacts which are not fully
                     mitigable within a ten-year timeframe shall be considered temporarily unmitigable
                     and subject to the adoption of a Statement of Overriding Considerations in addition
                     to mitigation measures.
                    The City shall consider the potential for adoption of a Statement of Overriding
                     considerations related to traffic in instances where there is substantial evidence that
                     the project possesses qualities (including environmental, legal, technical, social, and
                     economic factors) that merit the project’s approval despite the traffic impacts
                     caused by the project.
                The Local Thresholds of Significance Guidelines may provide additional detail and clarity.
Daly City 2030 General Plan | Circulation Element                                                         151

Policy CE-2: Minimize impacts on collector and local streets by moving traffic with origins and
             destinations outside of Daly City efficiently to area freeways and major arterial streets.
             Task CE-2.1: Review new development projects in adjacent jurisdictions and make
             every reasonable effort to ensure that these projects do not degrade traffic conditions at
             Daly City’s principal intersection to Levels of Service identified in Daly City’s Local
             Thresholds of Significance Guidelines.
             Task CE-2.2: Support efforts by the City of Brisbane to establish an extension of Geneva
             Avenue, connecting with the Candlestick Highway 101 Interchange, as a part of the
             Baylands Specific Plan implementation, to the extent that any pass-through traffic
             originating from the new interchange can be effectively dissuaded/mitigated.
             Task CE-2.3: Ensure that the Bi-County Transportation Study provides for an
             infrastructure phasing plan which ensures that Daly City roadways and intersections are
             not onerously impacted for significant periods of time.
             Task CE-2.4: Limit and control the number and location of driveways into arterial streets
             and disallow any traffic entering City or State right-of-way to do so by backing into the
             right-of-way.
Policy CE-3: In areas adjacent to principal intersections anticipated to experience Level of Service
             degradations, give preference to new development that can demonstrate a 20 percent
             reduction in long-term vehicular trip generation.
Policy CE-4: Proactively plan for roadway network improvements by using the City’s Capital
             Improvement Program (CIP) to prioritize necessary traffic improvements and identifying
             the funding sources necessary to construct these improvements.
             Task CE-4.1:      Continue updates of the CIP which include circulation improvements
             identified in Figure CE-3 and ensure that the figure is maintained to reflect all planned
             circulation improvements.
             Task CE-4.2: Within the CIP, allocate to existing and new development the
             proportionate costs for traffic improvements identified in Figure CE-5, and identify
             anticipated funding sources for all improvements. In addition to circulation improvement
             projects in Daly City, the CIP should provide a component which identifies funding
             sources and responsibilities for joint-benefit transportation projects in adjacent
             jurisdictions to which the City intends to commit financial resources.
             Task CE-4.3: Continue to collect AB1600 impact fees from new development and, from
             time to time, re-assess the amount and distribution of monies collected from such fees to
             ensure that these amounts are sufficient to provide an adequate pro-rata contribution
             toward the public improvements identified in the City’s Capital Improvement Program
             (same as Task LU-17.2 and RME-11.1).
             Task CE-4.4: As part of the comprehensive infrastructure plan for the Geneva Avenue
             Corridor identified in Task LU-3.2, develop a infrastructure enhancement fee program
             specific to new development in the Bayshore area which provides funding for any
             necessary circulation, utility, and joint-benefit projects planned in this area.
Policy CE-5: Work with the Metropolitan Transportation Commission to coordinate the transportation
             planning efforts of the City with those of adjacent jurisdictions.
152                                                          Daly City 2030 General Plan | Circulation Element

                Task CE-5.1: Support the Metropolitan Transportation Commissions (MTC) efforts to
                coordinate regional transportation planning insofar as they contribute to the
                accomplishment of the goals and policies of the General Plan.
                Task CE-5.2: Ensure that the programs contained in MTC's Regional Transportation Plan
                are in accord with the needs of the City by participating in the yearly revisions of the
                plan.
Policy CE-6:    Support regional efforts to improve traffic while accommodating future development.
                Task CE-6.2: Participate in regional planning efforts conducted by CCAG and ensure
                the Countywide Congestion Management Program reflects the future transportation
                needs of Daly City residents and businesses.
                Task CE-6.3: Actively participate in the multi-agency Bi-County Transportation Study
                currently being undertaken by the San Francisco County Transportation Authority to
                ensure that the study adequately identifies traffic improvements in and adjacent to Daly
                City necessary to accommodate future development in Bi-County study area.
Public Transit
Policy CE-7:    Ensure an effective transit system by supporting the work of other agencies in their efforts
                to expand public transit in and around Daly City.
                Task CE-7.1: Participate in SamTrans service planning and work with SamTrans staff to
                ensure the service levels in Daly City are enhanced and expanded.
                Task CE-7.2: Participate in efforts by MUNI to extend the 14 Mission Street bus service to
                the Daly City BART Station to the extent that such a connection does not require the
                installation of additional utilities in Daly City’s right-of-way or create a visual blight on
                John Daly Boulevard.
                Task CE-7.3: Participate in efforts by MUNI to extend the T-Third light rail line and
                construct a multimodal Bayshore transit station.
                Task CE-7.4: Support efforts to enhance MUNI and SamTrans service in the Bayshore
                neighborhood.
Policy CE-8:    Accommodate the transit system by considering mechanisms which help public transit
                agencies reduce the headway times of their vehicles.
                Task CE-8.1: Work with both San Mateo County Transit District and the San Francisco
                Municipal Transportation Agency to explore the concept of peak-hour exclusive bus-only
                lanes along Mission Street and Geneva Avenue.
                Task CE-8.2: Ensure that plans for future exclusive bus-only lanes accommodate
                dedicated bicycle lanes identified by the City’s Bicycle Master Plan.
Policy CE-9:    Increase ridership levels for all public transit services by promoting public transit
                programs.
Daly City 2030 General Plan | Circulation Element                                                         153

              Task CE-9.1: Develop a program which provides free or reduced public transit vouchers
              to City employees who can demonstrate that their travel to work is provided primarily by
              public transit.
              Task CE-9.2: Allow as a mitigation measures bona fide private programs which provide
              free or reduced public transit vouchers/passes to employees who can demonstrate that
              their travel to work is provided primarily by public transit.
              Task CE-9.3: Ensure that access to public transit services is convenient by providing
              information about these services, such as bus routes and schedules, at City facilities such
              as libraries and community centers.
              Task CE-9.4: Promote the development and maintenance of programs that increase
              transit ridership levels through incentives such as reduced fares and/or preferential
              passes for senior citizens, students, and other transportation dependent citizens.
Parking
Policy CE-10: Parking requirements contained within the Zoning Ordinance should, as closely as
              possible, reflect accepted current parking trends. Regulations for residential uses should
              recognize the ability for high-density mixed-use development that is close to transit to
              reduce parking requirements.
              Task CE-10.1: As a part of the Zoning Ordinance update, ensure that parking
              requirements are identified for all non-residential land uses allowed within the City and
              that the off-street parking requirements for these uses reflect the minimum parking
              requirements supported by recognized parking demand studies.
              Task CE-10.2: Amend the parking regulations to allow for a 30 percent parking
              reduction for all mixed-use development projects (as defined in the Zoning Ordinance)
              and clarify that the mixed-use parking reduction is allowed for buildings containing
              residential and retail components (same as Task HE-3.3).
              Task CE-10.3: For larger residential projects (e.g., 50 units or more), allow further parking
              reductions for all development projects that provide permanently-funded HOA/POA
              amenities (e.g., van pools or car sharing programs) to building occupants, are within 0.25
              miles of any public bus hub, or are within 0.5 mile distance of a BART station. For the
              purpose of this task, a bus hub shall be defined as a location where significant numbers
              of passengers are exchanged from one mechanized mode of transport to another (e.g.,
              bus transfer points, bus “park-n-rides”, etc.) (same as Task HE-3.4).
              Task CE-10.4: Amend the parking regulations to remove differentiation between single-
              family, multiple-family, and condominium uses for the purpose of parking regulations, and
              establish such regulations based on total bedroom count. This requirement shall also
              apply to residential additions and the provision of additional bedrooms within any
              existing dwelling (same as Task HE-3.5).
              Task CE-10.5: Clarify in the parking regulations that no parking reduction incentive
              (other than incentives allowed for senior affordable units) shall result in less than one
              parking space per unit. Any housing development that is willing to deed-restrict at least
              20 percent of the units for extremely low-income households shall, however, be exempt
              from the minimum parking requirement identified by this task and instead a be subject to
              providing at least 0.5 parking spaces per unit (same as Task HE-3.6).
154                                                           Daly City 2030 General Plan | Circulation Element

Policy CE-11: Consider the use of in-lieu fees for parking areas, joint-use of parking areas, the creation
                of parking assessment districts, and other innovative methods of providing off-street
                parking.
                Task CE-11.1: Continue to explore the potential for use of innovative methods of
                providing off-street parking in these and other areas.
                Task CE-11.2: Formalize within the Zoning Ordinance the allowance of shared parking
                between uses and provided criteria which identify when shared parking is appropriate
                and the extent to which it is allowed.
                Task CE-11.3: Explore amendments to the Zoning Ordinance to require the payment of
                parking in-lieu fees for parcels 5,000 square feet or less with direct frontage on Mission
                Street or Geneva Avenue. As part of any such amendment, the City shall identify capital
                improvement(s) for both Mission Street and Geneva Avenue toward which in-lieu money
                is expended within a certain time. These improvements may include any improvements
                that enhance parking, pedestrian mobility, or public transit access along each
                respective corridor.
Policy CE-12: Encourage parking lots of 500 or more spaces in new development to be provided in
                parking structures.
                Task CE-12.1: Consider revisions to the Zoning Ordinance that require structured parking
                for projects which require the provision of 500 or more parking spaces in all zones,
                including Planned Development zones.
Bicycle and Pedestrian Travel
Policy CE-13: View transportation improvements (new and retrofit) as opportunities to improve safety,
                access, and mobility for all travelers and recognize bicycle, pedestrian, and transit
                modes as integral elements of the transportation system.
                Task CE-13.1: As part of the comprehensive infrastructure and streetscape plan for the
                Geneva Avenue Corridor (see Task LU-3.2), ensure that both public and private
                improvements provide significant accommodation of both pedestrian and bicycle
                transportation modes.
                Task CE-13.2: Continue to the participate in the effort of the Grand Boulevard Initiative
                for Mission Street and, when considering the design of Mission Street pedestrian
                improvements, make every reasonable effort to implement the street design guidelines
                identified by the Grand Boulevard Multimodal Transportation Corridor Plan.
                Task CE-13.3: Consider impacts to the existing and future bicycle and pedestrian
                network when completing environmental review for private development projects, and
                require mitigation measures where necessary and reasonable to ensure that these
                systems are not impacted.
                Task CE-13.4: Ensure that as part of any reassessment of the City’s Development Impact
                Fee (AB1600) that adequate and commensurate money is collected and distributed to
                City projects involving the expansion of Daly City’s pedestrian and bicycle network. The
                amount of this allocation shall be determined at the time of the fee reassessment, should
                a reassessment occur.
Daly City 2030 General Plan | Circulation Element                                                      155

              Task CE-13.5: As part of the effort to unify the Zoning Ordinance into a more broad set
              of development regulations (as identified in Policy LU-14.3), review the City’s public
              improvement (i.e., street, curb, sidewalk) standards to ensure that safe and effective
              bicycle and pedestrian circulation is accommodated to the same extent as the
              automobile.
Policy CE-14: Actively comment on the environmental reviews completed by other public agencies
              and quasi-public agencies desiring to undertake projects within Daly City in an effort to
              ensure impacts to pedestrian and bicycle circulation systems are not impacted.
              Task CE-14.1: As part of any City involvement in or comments provided for the Geneva
              Avenue connection with the Candlestick Highway 101 Interchange, work toward the
              inclusion of the both pedestrian and bicycle transportation modes that, at a minimum,
              extend those identified in the Geneva Avenue infrastructure plan, and/or Daly City
              Bicycle Route Map.
Policy CE-15: Ensure the new buildings along Mission Street and Geneva Avenue are situated so that
              they are easily accessible by pedestrians.
              Task CE-15.1: Explore amendments to the Zoning Ordinance to provide for maximum
              setbacks along Mission Street and Geneva Avenue, consistent with any City-adopted
              urban design plan, and which disallow parking within any provided front setback area.
              Task CE-15.2: Amend the Zoning Ordinance to require, in new development projects
              located along either Mission Street or Geneva Avenue, that all parking spaces provided
              for projects located be either underground or placed behind buildings.
Policy CE-16: Strengthen pedestrian access between and within residential areas and schools,
              commercial areas, recreational facilities, transit centers, and major activity centers in the
              City.
              Task CE-16.1: Develop a Pedestrian Master Plan and, include specific projects in the
              City’s Capital Improvement Program (CIP) that raise the profile of walking as a mode of
              transportation and as an attractive recreational opportunity. This Master Plan should
              make specific recommendations for both Mission Street and Geneva Avenue, consistent
              with any City-adopted urban design plan.
              Task CE-16.2: Update the Comprehensive Accessibility and Mobility Plan, and codify
              requirements for private replacement of non-compliant sidewalk curbs for
              redevelopment or significant rehabilitation of non-residential properties.
              Task CE-16.3: Improve pedestrian safety by providing adequate separation of
              pedestrian and motor vehicle traffic. This includes making provisions for sidewalks on
              newly constructed or existing roads and constructing pedestrian overcrossings in areas of
              heavy pedestrian and vehicular traffic.
              Task CE-16.4: Make street crossings easier and more accessible to pedestrians by
              widening sidewalks, medians, installing bulb-outs, and/or allowing more time for
              pedestrians to cross the street.
              Task CE-16.5: Consider developing parking lot design guidelines for shopping center
              parking lots exceeding a certain size that maximizes safe pedestrian access from
              perimeter sidewalks, parking lots to storefronts, and between storefronts.
156                                                         Daly City 2030 General Plan | Circulation Element

                Task CE-16.6: Work with BART on providing safe pedestrian access to and from the Daly
                City BART Station that utilizes existing street level crossings on John Daly Boulevard and
                maximizes either existing or future grade separated crossing(s) at this location.
                Task CE-16.7: Evaluate increasing the City standard for new sidewalk construction to at
                least five (5) feet wide in an effort to increase sidewalk usability for pedestrians with
                strollers, wheelchairs, and other walking assistance devices.
                Task CE-16.8: Explore amendments to the Zoning Ordinance which would require
                increased sidewalk dedication along roadways where existing sidewalk width has been
                determined by the City to be inadequate and/or less than optimal.
                Task CE-16.9: Require as a condition of development/redevelopment project approval
                the provision of sidewalks and wheelchair ramps where lacking, repair or replacement of
                damaged sidewalks, and sidewalks that link directly to building entrances.
                Task CE-16.10: Develop a policy which minimizes the number of curb-cuts along arterial
                and collector roadways.
Policy CE-17: Work with local school districts to implement projects and activities that promote walking
                to school among students, parents, and staff.
                Task CE-17.1: Invite school districts in Daly City to participate in the Bicycle and
                Pedestrian Advisory Committee.
Policy CE-18: Continue to install bicycle facilities throughout the city in accordance with the Bicycle
                Master Plan
                Task CE-18.1: Update the Bicycle Master Plan and Capital Improvement Programs to
                ensure that the City’s bikeways system is effectively coordinated with the countywide
                system and conveniently serves major areas of attraction, such as shopping centers,
                public buildings, parks, schools and places of employment.
                Task CE-18.2: Implement bicycle route improvements, which include signing, striping,
                paving and provision of bicycle facilities at employment sites, shopping centers, schools,
                and public facilities.
Policy CE-19: Take proactive steps to ensure that owning and using a bicycle in Daly City is a viable
                transportation option.
                Task CE-19.1: Require the provision of secure covered bicycle parking for large
                multifamily residential, commercial and office/institutional uses, and other key
                destinations, including public facilities such as transit stations. The requirement for such
                provision shall be detailed in the Zoning Ordinance and may be implemented through
                either code compliance during major remodel or environmental review undertaken as a
                part of the California Environmental Quality Act.
                Task CE-19.2: Encourage provision of showers and lockers for employees as a part of all
                non-residential development by providing within the Zoning Ordinance a pre-specified
                parking reduction for projects that provide such facilities in perpetuity.
                Task CE-19.3: Pursue regional funding and other sources for new bikeways to the extent
                possible under federal and State law.
Daly City 2030 General Plan | Circulation Element                                                         157

              Task CE-19.4: Work with transit providers to ensure that transit facilities are equipped
              with adequate bicycle carrying capacity.
              Task CE-19.5: Work with local school districts to implement projects and activities that
              promote bicycling to school among students, parents, and staff.
Complete Streets
Policy CE-20: Integrate Complete Streets infrastructure and design features into street design and
              private construction to create safe and inviting environments for people to walk, bicycle,
              and use public transportation.
              Task CE-20.1: In the design of any new roadway and as a part of any development
              review, ensure that adequate infrastructure is included that promotes a safe and
              convenient means of travel for all users. This shall include the provision of sidewalks,
              shared use paths, and, where practical, bicycle lanes.
              Task CE-20.2: In the review of new residential subdivisions, ensure that sidewalks are
              provided on both sides of the street where site conditions allow, whether the new street is
              public or private. Where determined feasible by the City and where minimum lot size
              can be maintained, new residential development shall provide separated sidewalks to
              ensure the comfortable and attractive sidewalks. The City shall update and provide a
              standard cross-section for separated sidewalk to developers.
              Task CE-20.3: Require that new subdivisions be designed to minimize the use of cul-de-
              sacs, unless pedestrian connections are provided in perpetuity between cul-de-sac
              ends.
              Task CE-20.4: Require during the design review of all new public or private parking lots
              and driveways the incorporation of raised sidewalks providing access from the City
              sidewalk adjoining the development to site interior or, in the case of non-residential
              development, to the proposed store- or office-front(s).
              Task CE-20.5: Include infrastructure in new public roadway projects that facilitates safe
              crossing of the right-of-way, such as accessible curb ramps, crosswalks, refuge islands,
              and, where necessary, pedestrian signals; such infrastructure must meet the needs of
              people with different types of disabilities and people of different ages.
              Task CE-20.6: Give strong consideration to mid-block pedestrian crossings where these
              crossings can be implemented safely and provide facilitate a direct pedestrian
              connection between properties and uses.
              Task CE-20.7: As a part of all new development, require, where appropriate, the
              provision of pedestrian-oriented signs, pedestrian-scale lighting, benches, and other
              street furniture so as to make non-motorized forms of travel comfortable and attractive
              alternatives to the automobile. Where necessary in new development, the City may
              require additional sidewalk and/or right-of-way width to accommodate these amenities.
              Task CE-20.8: Ensure that sidewalks, crosswalks, public transportation stops and facilities,
              and other aspects of the transportation right-of-way are compliant with the Americans
              with Disabilities Act and meet the needs of people with different types of disabilities,
              including mobility impairments, vision impairments, hearing impairments, and others.
158                                                          Daly City 2030 General Plan | Circulation Element
                Task CE-20.9: Incorporate multimodal improvements into pavement resurfacing,
                restriping, and signalization operations where the safety and convenience of users can
                be improved within the scope of the work.
                Task CE-20.10 In any assessment, collection, and/or distribution of AB1600 funds,
                consider the implementation of City projects that further the provision of Complete
                Streets in Daly City.
Policy CE-21: Provide children with safe and appealing opportunities for walking and bicycling to
                school in order to decrease rush hour traffic and fossil fuel consumption, encourage
                exercise and healthy living habits in children, and reduce the risk of injury to children
                through traffic collisions near schools.
                Task CE-21.1: Work with the school districts in Daly City to pursue encouragement
                programs such as Walk and Bike to School Days, as well as “Walking School Bus”/“Bike
                Train” programs at elementary schools, where parents take turns accompanying a group
                of children to school on foot or via bicycle.
                Task CE-21.2: Work with the school districts in Daly City and advocates to obtain Safe
                Routes to School funding to implement educational programs.
                Task CE-21.3: Work with the school districts in Daly City to encourage educational
                programs that teach students safe walking and bicycling behaviors, and educate
                parents and drivers in the community about the importance of safe driving.
                Task CE-21.4 Enforce speed limits and traffic laws, assist in ensuring safe crossings, and
                promote safe travel behavior within the schools.
Policy CE-22: Prioritize safety and roadway improvements around schools.
                Task CE-22.1     Pursue Safe Routes to School funding to implement infrastructure.
Daly City 2030 General Plan | Circulation Element                                                       159

Appendix CE-A                                                                                    Glossary
The following section defines some of these technical terms used in this document in an attempt to
clarify their meaning. Many of the terms described below are also used in other planning documents,
such as environmental impact reports, when estimating the traffic impact of a proposed development
project.
Average Daily Traffic (ADT) is the total volume of traffic that crosses over a fixed point on a road in a 24-
hour period. This data is usually averaged over a month, year, or several years.
Average Weekday Traffic (AWDT) is very similar to ADT. As the name indicates, the figure for AWDT does
not include weekend traffic. The weekday traffic count is used when traffic from employment centers
needs to be analyzed.
Accessibility is the relative ease with which a location can be reached by car, public transit, bicycle, or
walking.
Capacity of a road or street is measured in several ways. Capacity of a road is the maximum number of
vehicles that can use the road over a time period, such as one hour, under the prevailing roadway and
traffic conditions. The prevailing roadway conditions are the factors that influence the design capacity
of the roadway.
Design capacity is the number of vehicles that can use a portion of the roadway in one direction, for
one hour. The design capacity assumes existing traffic conditions and works toward a prescribed level
of service. For example, when traffic engineers are asked to design road improvements, they will
'analyze the existing traffic volumes and propose the improvements needed to meet the desired level
of service. (See below for explanation of level of service.)
Intersection capacity is affected by design factors such as the width of the streets and the timing and
length of the signal cycle. Other characteristics also factor into the capacity of an intersection. These
include the percent of turning vehicles, the percent of commercial vehicles, whether parking is allowed
nearby, pedestrian use of the intersection, and the location of bus stops.
Controlled access means that through traffic is given preferential treatment in the design of a roadway.
Expressways and some arterials have controlled access to increase the capacity of the road to handle
larger volumes of traffic. Access to a road is controlled by limiting connections to selected public
streets, and prohibiting direct connections of private driveways.
Directional split is always associated with a number and is used to identify the difference in the number
of vehicles travelling in opposite directions on a road.
Headway is the time between arrivals of a bus or train at a specific location.
Mobility—impaired refers to that segment of the population where physical or mental handicaps, or
age has made it impossible for individuals to use standard modes of transportation such as a vehicle or
public transit.
Mode of travel is the type of transportation used by people to get to where they want to go. A mode of
travel can be an auto, bus, skateboard, bicycle, walking, rapid transit, or airplane. This plan uses the
term multimodal. This means maximizing the use of all modes of travel in an effort to design and/or
promote a circulation system that is efficient.
160                                                            Daly City 2030 General Plan | Circulation Element

Paratransit is an alternative form of transportation that fall between a fixed route public transportation
and the private automobile. Conventional public transit has predetermined schedules, fixed routes and
stops, and is available to the general public. Depending on the type of paratransit service, it may or
may not have a fixed route or stops, or a predetermined schedule. They do not serve the general
public. The paratransit service is targeted for a specific group of people such as employees from a
company, residents of a residential complex, or the mobility- impaired. Examples of paratransit are dial-
a-ride, carpools, shuttlebuses, and shared-ride taxis.
Peak hour(s) is the sixty-minute period(s) in which traffic volume is the highest for the day. Peak hours
during the weekday typically occur during the time periods from 7:00 to 9:00 a.m. and 4:00 to 6:00 p.m.
Transportation Systems Management is the combination of several programs used by an employer to
reduce the impact of single occupancy automobiles on the transportation system. A variety of ways
can be used to reduce the impacts of a large concentration of employees on the traffic and air quality
of an area. For example, the employer could provide a shuttle service to mass transit facilities, promote
ridesharing of employees that live in the same area, or allow for flexible work hours that allow
employees to arrive and leave work at non-peak hours of traffic congestion.
A trip is one-way travel from an origin to a destination for a particular purpose such as a journey-to-work
or the grocery store. A trip end is both the origin and destination of a trip; each trip has two trip ends. A
person trip is one way travel by one person from an origin to a destination by any mode of travel.
Volume/Capacity Ratio, or V/C Ratio is the ratio of the volume of traffic to the design capacity of a
road to handle those volumes. For example, if the capacity of a road is 20,000 vehicles/day and a day
of traffic counts indicate 18,000 vehicles are using the road, then the V/C Ratio is 1.8:2.0. VC Ratios are
used to estimate levels of service and congestion.
Daly City 2030 General Plan | Circulation Element                                                         161
162 Daly City 2030 General Plan | Circulation Elemen
Introduction
Scope and Role of the Safety Element
The Safety Element identifies the natural and man-made hazards that the City needs to consider when
making land use decisions or when preparing plans and policies for control and response to potential
danger (i.e. emergency response plans, evacuation plans, etc.). The Safety Element is therefore a
means to identify these hazards and to educate residents, City staff, elected officials, and other
members of the community that a risk or a problem exists, and, when feasible, implement land use
policies to reduce the public exposure to these risks.
A Safety Element is not a static document. It is a changing document in the light of advances in
scientific discovery and new information. The past decades have ushered in many environmental laws
based on new information addressing geologic safety, air quality, water quality, etc. Further, stricter
development controls have been imposed to minimize or eliminate potential man-made hazards such
as buildings in landslide areas or earthquake prone areas. In the past, homes and other structures were
built in geologically sensitive areas in many parts of California and Daly City prior to the knowledge that
a hazard existed. Recent disasters (i.e. the Loma Prieta earthquake of 1989, the Oakland fire storm of
1991, and the Northridge earthquake of 1994) have served as reminders of the need to be aware of the
safety issues and to be prepared to deal with the aftermath of disasters.
State Planning Law
State planning law, Government Code Section 65302 requires every city and county to adopt a Safety
Element. The element must contain, to the extent that they pertain to the community the following:
        the effects of seismically induced surface rupture, ground shaking, ground failure, tsunami,
         seiche and dam failure;
        the effects of slope instability leading to mudslides and landslides, subsidence and other
         geologic hazards;
        mapping of known seismic or other geologic hazards;
        flooding; and
        identification and appraisal of evacuation routes, peak load water supply routes, and minimum
         road widths as they relate to identified fire and geologic hazards.
Daly City 2030 General Plan | Safety Element                                                            163

Background Information
A hazard is a potential danger, risk, threat, or peril and is often viewed as a constraint. It is necessary to
understand the nature of hazards and constraints in order to effectively protect ourselves against these
threats and to respond efficiently to disasters when they do occur.
Natural Hazards
Natural hazards are those that are not man-made. Natural disasters illicit the most fear and attention
because the time, place, and intensity of their occurrence cannot be exactly predicted or forecasted.
For example, seismologists talk in terms of ranges and probabilities, and do not yet have the exact
science for predicting when and where the next earthquake will occur. Another cause of fear is that
natural hazards are beyond our control. It is important to understand natural hazards, especially those
that occur in our immediate vicinity. Increased knowledge and awareness may lead to better
preparation so that one can avoid or minimize the effects of natural disasters.
Generally, there are four types of natural hazards that may occur in Daly City and nearby areas:
seismic hazards, slope instability, flooding, and wildland fires. Each of these hazards is described as
follows:
Seismic Hazards
The San Francisco Bay Area is one of the most seismically active regions in the United States. The San
Andreas Fault, which runs directly through the southwestern portion of the Serramonte neighborhood
and coastal areas in Daly City, is considered the most dominant of all faults in the Bay Area.
The most recent earthquake on the San Andreas Fault was the Loma Prieta earthquake which occurred
on October 17, 1989 with a 7.1 magnitude, epicentered 16 kilometers northeast of Santa Cruz. The
event was responsible for 63 deaths and at least $5.9 billion in damages, making it one of the costliest
natural disasters in the United States history. On April 18, 1906, an earthquake measuring 8.3 on the
Richter Scale caused near total destruction of San Francisco primarily due to resulting fires. A lesser
known earthquake on the San Andreas Fault occurred on March 1957 and had a magnitude of 5.3 on
the Richter Scale. Its epicenter was located just off the Daly City coast. Although there were no
noticeable surface ruptures, the earthquake resulted in approximately $1,000,000 in property damages
and caused several landslides along the coastline.
The San Andreas Fault zone can be observed in the Mussel Rock area of the City, where the greatest
potential for surface rupture exists in the City. The Alquist-Priolo Special Studies Zone Act of 1972
delineated special studies zone ranges from 750 to 1,000 feet on each side of the fault trace, for that
portion of the zone located in Daly City. Surface rupture of the San Andreas within the Alquist-Priolo
special studies zone could directly affect several single-family residences, a high school, and a mini-
storage facility existing in the area.
Several different types of hazards are seismically-induced or caused by an earthquake. These hazards
can be responsible for damage, the amount of which depends on several factors including existing
geologic conditions and the extent and type of land uses in the area. Seismically-related hazards
include surface rupture, ground shaking, liquefaction, subsidence, and landslides.
Surface Rupture. Surface rupture is the fracturing or cracking of the earth's surface by fault
displacement or fault movement during an earthquake. Surface rupture in the form of landslides
occurred during both the 1906 and 1989 earthquakes, the more recent of which produced cracks in
sidewalks, streets, and residential lots causing curb separation, cracks on structures, and broken gutters.
164                                                                 Daly City 2030 General Plan | Safety Element
Ground Shaking. The most perceptible of all hazards associated with earthquakes is ground shaking,
the amount which depends on several factors including the local geology, the intensity and magnitude
of the earthquake, and the distance of the area from the fault. Geologic formations that underlie a
certain area greatly influence the intensity of the ground shaking. Thick, loose soils such as bay mud
tend to amplify and prolong the shaking while bedrock formations are considered to be less susceptible
to ground shaking.
Ground shaking is a potentially serious seismic hazard for Daly City. Since Daly City for the most part is
underlain by weak to moderately consolidated, loose to firm sands, and is in close proximity to the San
Andreas Fault, the potential for damage due to ground shaking is high. A Geologic Units Map prepared
by the Association of Bay Area Governments (ABAG) classifies geologic units into categories of similar
susceptibility to ground shaking from very low to extremely high. The ABAG map indicates that if an 8.3
earthquake on the San Andreas Fault occurred, the portions of Daly City underlain by the Colma and
Merced Formations would have moderately high to very high susceptibility to groundshaking. Areas
underlain by the Franciscan outcrop, such as those adjacent to San Bruno Mountain, have low to
moderately low susceptibility. Some areas in the Bayshore neighborhood, however, have high to
extremely high susceptibility due to the mixture of different geologic formations near the San Francisco
Bay.
Liquefaction. Liquefaction is the transformation of saturated, loose, granular soil such as silt sand or
gravel to a liquefied state.     In 1987, the United States Geological Survey (USGS), in cooperation with
San Mateo County, prepared a Liquefaction Susceptibility Map for San Mateo County. The map
categorizes areas in the county into eight classes of liquefaction susceptibility, ranging from low to high.
Because the data contained within Liquefaction Susceptibility Map is very generalized, the map should
not be used to determine the presence or absence of liquefiable soils in any specific area. Rather, an
on-site geotechnical investigation should be required to make a site specific assessment.
Subsidence. Subsidence is the sinking or lowering of a part of the earth's surface, and may be either
earthquake-induced or occur independent of earthquakes. In Daly City, the potential for seismically-
induced land subsidence is greater in areas most susceptible to liquefaction. Subsidence as a direct
result of fault displacement is not as likely in Daly City due to the nature of the how the San Andreas
Fault moves during an earthquake.
Landslides. Landslides have occurred in Daly City during major earthquakes, the most notable of which
was as a result of the 1906 earthquake when large quantities of earth and rocks slipped down due to
the earthquake (Lawson and others, 1908). The failure was so extensive that a cut bench for the Ocean
Shore Railroad was entirely destroyed along a five kilometer stretch. Similarly, in 1957, a 5.3 magnitude
earthquake with an epicenter near Mussel Rock caused extensive landslides along the same section of
the bluffs. The Loma Prieta earthquake in 1989 also caused a large landslide and is notable because
the landslide occurred about 55 miles from the earthquake’s epicenter in Santa Cruz County.
Slope Instability
Slope instability hazards, consists of non-seismic landslides and cliff erosion, which exist where unstable
hills and cliffs threaten occupied structures and public facilities.
Non-Seismic Landslides. Landslides are defined as the downward movement caused by gravity of soil,
rock, mud, or debris. Landslides can occur as a direct result of an earthquake but more frequently they
are caused by other natural events such as heavy rainfall. Landslides can also be the result of human
activities such as grading and deforestation or removal of vegetation.
The effect of landslides in Daly City has been most prevalent in the Westlake neighborhood of the City
where, over the past several decades, a number of existing homes have been removed due to risks
posed by landslides. As recently as 2000, the City declared 21 single-family homes located on Westline
Drive unsuitable for human occupancy and the homes were subsequently removed. Blufftop erosion
Daly City 2030 General Plan | Safety Element                                                             165

will continue to threaten existing homes. The vulnerability of homes to landslide hazards in this area is
exacerbated by the San Andreas Fault which bisects the neighborhood.
Cliff erosion. This type of slope instability is often considered a type of landslide and is generally caused
by an increase in moisture along the bluff line of a cliff which results in the breaking away of material
along the face of the cliff. Development along the coastal bluffs can also contribute to increases in cliff
erosion through increased runoff due to ineffective storm drainage design.
The rates of erosion along the bluffs vary greatly. A comparison of measurements taken between
December 1974 and January 1982, for example, along the 900 block of Skyline Boulevard indicated that
the cliff at that time had receded between one to thirteen feet over that time period. It was notable
however, that other parts of the bluffs had receded at much slower rates.
Flooding
A flood is defined as a partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from the overland
flood of a lake, river, stream ditch or other inland water body. It is also defined as the unusual rapid
accumulation or runoff of surface waters and sudden collapse of shoreline land. The standard for
assessing the risk of flood hazards is the 100-year flood plain. A flood plain is the land area that is
submerged during a flood. The 100-year flood plain is the land area that has a one percent statistical
probability of being flooded within any given year.
The Federal Insurance Administration (FIA) administers the National Flood Insurance Program and is the
primary agency for flood related disasters and mitigation. The FIA also prepares and updates the flood
zone maps. Flooding is not considered a significant natural hazard in Daly City. To attest to this fact, FIA
has no flood zone map for Daly City. No part of Daly City lies within the 100-year flood plain meaning
that the statistical probability of flooding is less than one percent in any part of the City on any given
year. The City has been designated Flood Zone C (Flood Hazard No. 060317) per letter from FIA dated
July 13, 1979. Areas within the 100-year floodplain are designated Flood Zone A.
Fire Hazards
Fires in urban areas pose one of the greatest threats to life and property. In Daly City, the close
proximity of many of the structures to each other, combined with typical wood frame construction
intensifies an emergency response. In addition, many older neighborhoods have narrow and steep
access roads, and poor water pressure which also increases the potential hazard. Many fires in the City
are caused by unattended cooking, accident, arson, and juvenile firesetters. While the majority of fires
occur in vehicles, single family homes, and some wildland areas, regular inspections of commercial
establishments have helped to keep fire incidents low.
There are numerous areas with potential for wildland fires in both San Mateo County and Daly City.
Although not a true wildland, the Southern Hills section of Daly City has flammable vegetation consisting
primarily of gorse weeds. This area has been identified by the California Department of Forestry as a
very high fire hazard severity zone. Because of its designation, and fire hazard, the City has initiated a
gorse weed abatement program for residents to clear the gorse weed and other combustible
vegetation 50 feet away from structures. Other fire hazard areas within the City's boundaries are the
wildlands adjacent to the freeways and highways, parks, and numerous areas where structures are built
near vegetation.
Man-Made Hazards
Man-made hazards are those risks created directly by human activity (i.e. generation of hazardous
materials) or those indirectly, accidentally, or unknowingly created as part of man's everyday living (i.e.,
houses near fault lines). Although it may be argued that since these hazards are caused by man and
are avoidable or can be controlled unlike natural hazards, the reality is that most man-made hazards
166                                                                  Daly City 2030 General Plan | Safety Element
could be eliminated or minimized only at great cost and effort. For example, a man-made hazard is the
construction of houses and critical facilities near fault lines. It is often infeasible to relocate already built
structures. At best, safety policies may be limited to response and containment of damage of existing
facilities once a hazard occurs and controls of the siting or design of new facilities and structures.
Destruction or Damage of Critical Facilities
Critical facilities are facilities serving many people, such as hospitals, fire and police stations, and public
utilities such as water, gas, and sewer transmission lines. A structure may also be considered a critical
facility because it houses a large number of people: shopping centers, a BART station, schools, libraries,
senior centers, churches and high-density residential structures. Damage to these sorts of facilities
would be a serious disaster in itself or would act as a hindrance to response to disasters elsewhere.
Because the public utility infrastructure is old and many of the service delivery systems in the City are
more than twenty-five years old, the potential for damage to these facilities is high. For example, the
water and sewer systems infrastructure in some parts of the City are old and have a higher potential for
damage than newer systems. Age of these critical facilities is a major consideration for hazard
reduction and emergency preparedness.
Another factor to consider in damage to critical facilities is the potential effect of other threats and
hazards. The water and sewer systems and other service delivery systems in the portion of the City
traversed by the San Andreas Fault has a greater potential for damage and destruction in an
earthquake.
Hazardous Materials
Hazardous materials and wastes include any substance that has the potential to cause substantial
injury, serious illness, or harm to human beings and to the environment. A legal definition of hazardous
waste is a material that is toxic, corrosive, flammable or an irritant. Hazardous waste may take many
forms: liquid, solid, gas, sludge, or slurry. Wastes are often the by-products of the manufacturing process
although the term also includes household items such as bleaches, pesticides, motor oils, thinners, and
solvents. The threats brought about by hazardous materials are not limited to areas where these wastes
are generated.
Safe and responsible management of hazardous materials, particularly hazardous waste, is one of the
most important environmental issues facing the region, State, and nation. As society continues to
depend upon chemical products and processes to enhance the quality of life, the potential for human
exposure to hazardous materials increases. Some hazardous materials are known to produce serious
adverse human health and environmental effects, while little is known about others. With the evolution
of technology industries in the Bay Area and the general proliferation of toxics in the environment, it is
essential that Daly City become more involved in the management of hazardous materials, particularly
through development of techniques which protect public health and safety from hazardous materials
exposure.
Hazardous Buildings and Conditions
A hazardous building is a structure that poses a risk to life or property in the event of an earthquake or
other disaster. The hazardous condition is usually due to the fact that a structure was constructed prior
to the adoption and enforcement of local codes requiring earthquake resistant design of buildings. An
example of a hazardous building is one that was constructed of unreinforced masonry, and is
inadequately maintained or abandoned.
Hazardous buildings and conditions can and have been responsible for human injury and death. At the
same time, unsafe construction is a man-made hazard which is most amenable to control and
Daly City 2030 General Plan | Safety Element                                                                 167
elimination. Thus, it is within the City's fundamental purpose to ensure that human health is protected
and injury avoided through the guarantee of safe and adequate structures and living conditions.
Providing safe structures and conditions involve development of techniques which address both existing
building stock and new building construction in the City. Regulating new development to conform to
accepted set of construction standards is one approach toward obtaining safe structures. This
technique involves adoption of a building code to assure uniform building practice and administration
by the City.
Hazard Control and Emergency Response
The response to any man-made or natural disaster must include two parts: hazard control and
emergency response. Of these two actions needed to adequately ensure safety, emergency response
or emergency preparedness has received more attention and planning. However, lessons from the
past and recent disasters point to the eventual need for hazard control and risk reduction.
Perhaps the most important lesson learned from the Loma Prieta and Northridge earthquakes is the
need for a commitment to reduce risk over time. These earthquakes happened several years into
fortuitous planning, seismic forecasting, and risk reduction statewide and still became the two most
expensive natural disasters in United States history. A rational program of hazard control or risk reduction
should be instigated over time. Hazards will not be immediately eliminated. Hazard control should start
with a comprehensive program that emphasizes the reduction of existing risk and start in those areas of
greatest life threats (critical facilities) and at the same time insure that risks are reduced for future
development. In identifying critical facilities, cities should gather data on (1) which types of structures
have the greatest potential for danger, (2) how many people use them and at what times of the day,
and (3) where are they concentrated. Such programs and mitigations may be costly but experience
has shown that it is more cost effective to invest in preparedness than to spend millions of dollars for
relief and reconstruction.
Safety Goal, Policies, and Tasks
This section of the Safety Element contains a discussion of the goal, objectives, and policies the City has
outlined in order to promote a safe environment. The safety goal reflects the general direction the City
wishes to advance. The objectives represent actions which can be measured over time, and provide
general direction toward achievement of the goal. The policies provide a more specific statement for
achievement of the goal as well as direction for the formulation of programs to implement the goal.
The City's Safety goal is:
         "Promote a safe environment which minimizes the potential risks from manmade and
         natural disasters, informs and educates the public on appropriate procedures to
         follow during emergencies, and integrates data from these disasters to identify
         hazardous areas and mitigation measures."
Several important issues in this goal should be addressed. First, the goal seeks to accomplish a safe
environment for all citizens, businesses, structures, and uses within the City. In achieving a safe
environment, the City must understand the nature of hazards which are both natural and manmade on
a general level. Then the City must identify and assess the safety hazards and issues relevant to Daly
City.
Second, the goal promotes the City to inform and educate the public about both natural and man-
made disasters relevant to Daly City. In addition the City must inform the public about the appropriate
procedures to follow during emergencies.
168                                                                Daly City 2030 General Plan | Safety Element
Third, the goal directs the City to gather information from natural and man-made disasters to better
prepare the City and the public from potential disasters. In light of advances in scientific discovery and
new information on disasters, the Safety Element will be updated to meet current levels of hazard
assessment. Issues within the Safety element may change as new environmental laws are adopted
which address geologic safety, air quality, and water quality. Further, as disasters occur, stricter
development controls will be imposed to minimize or eliminate potential man-made hazards such as
buildings in landslide areas or earthquake prone areas.
To implement the safety goal, the General Plan provides the following policies and tasks:
Seismic and Geologic
Policy SE-1.1: Continue to investigate the potential for seismic and geologic hazards as part of the
                development review process and maintain this information for the public record. Update
                Safety Element maps as appropriate.
Policy SE-1.2: Require site specific geotechnical, soils, and foundation reports for development
                proposed on sites identified in the Safety Element and its Geologic and Hazard Maps as
                having moderate or high potential for ground failure.
Policy SE-1.3: Permit development in areas of potential geologic hazards only where it can be
                demonstrated that the project will not be endangered by, nor contribute to, the
                hazardous condition on the site or on adjacent properties. All proposed development is
                subject to the City's Zoning Ordinance and Building Codes.
Policy SE-1.4: Prohibit development - including any land alteration, grading for roads and structural
                development - in areas of slope instability or other geologic concerns unless mitigation
                measures are taken to limit potential damage to levels of acceptable risk.
Policy SE-1.5: Design and improve all critical care facilities and services to remain functional following
                the maximum credible earthquake. Avoid placement of critical facilities and high-
                occupancy structures in areas prone to violent ground shaking or ground failure.
Policy SE-1.6: Work with San Mateo County, California Water Service Company, and the San Francisco
                Water Department to ensure that all water tanks and San Francisco's main water pipeline
                are capable of withstanding high seismic stress.
Flooding
Policy SE-2.1: Protect the City of Daly City from unreasonable risk to life and property caused by flood
                hazards by designing and constructing drainage facilities to improve the flow capacity of
                the City's water system in order to accommodate the storm water runoff generated by a
                100-year storm.
Policy SE-2.2: Reduce localized flooding through City funded drainage system improvements; seek
                alternate funding where possible.
Policy SE-2.3: Continue to require the habitable portions of new structures to have a finished floor
                elevation 1.5 feet above the projected 100-year water surface or to be adequately
                protected from flooding.
Daly City 2030 General Plan | Safety Element                                                            169
Policy SE-2.4: Prohibit any reduction of creek channel capacity, impoundment or diversion of creek
               channel flows which would adversely affect adjacent properties or the degree of
               flooding. Prevent erosion of creek banks.
Policy SE-2.5: Protect new development adjacent to creeks by requiring adequate building setbacks
               from creek banks and provision of access easements for creek maintenance purposes.
Fire Safety
Policy SE-3.1  Support and maintain the City's Insurance Service Office (ISO) rating of a Class 2, which
               establishes the fire insurance rates for the City.
Policy SE-3.2  Provide for a seven (7) minute total reflex time for arrival of a first due company to 90% of
               all emergency incidents.
Policy SE-3.3  Provide for an eleven (11) minute total reflex time for arrival of multiple fire companies to
               90% of all structure fires.
Policy SE-3.4  Maintain fire company reliability, whereby 90 percent of all incidents are handled by the
               district fire company.
Policy SE-3.5   Continue to support and participate in the county wide auto-aid and boundary drop
               agreement within San Mateo County, which provides the closest fire resources to
               emergency and non-emergency incidents regardless of jurisdiction.
Hazardous Materials
Policy SE-4.1: Support efforts to locate, regulate, and maintain information regarding hazardous
               materials located or transported within the City.
Policy SE-4.2: Cooperate with the County of San Mateo in the regulation of hazardous materials and
               transportation of such material in Daly City.
Policy SE-4.3: Promote on-site treatment of hazardous wastes by waste generators to minimize the use
               of hazardous materials and the transfer of waste for off-site treatment.
Policy SE-4.4: Promote measures aimed at significantly decreasing solid waste generation including
               community recycling. Require recycled materials storage and collection areas in
               accordance with requirements of the Recycling Ordinance.
Policy SE-4.5: Promote public awareness of safe and effective hazardous waste use, storage, and
               disposal; utilize the media sources to inform residents.
Policy SE-4.6: Require the preparation of a risk assessment to determine site suitability for applications
               for hazardous waste management facilities. Establish the distance requirements for these
               facilities from public assembly, residential or immobile population and recreation areas
               and structures. Assess impacts from seismic, geologic, and flood hazards, impacts on
               wetlands, endangered species, air quality and emergency response capabilities; and
               proximity to major transport routes.
170                                                               Daly City 2030 General Plan | Safety Element
Emergency Operations
Policy SE-5.1: Maintain the City's emergency readiness and response capabilities, especially regarding
                hazardous materials spills, natural gas pipeline ruptures, earthquakes, and flooding due
                to dam failure, peak storms, and like failure.
Policy SE-5.2: Continue to participate with San Mateo County's Automatic and Mutual Aid Programs,
                Area/County Emergency Plan, and Operational Area Emergency Services Organization
                as a basis for community emergency preparedness.
Policy SE-5.3: Continue to analyze the significant seismic, geologic and community-wide hazards as
                part of the environmental review process; require that mitigation measures be made as
                conditions of project approval.
Policy SE-5.4: Utilize emergency evacuation routes as determined by the Police Department. The
                evacuation routes will follow the major roadways as set forth in the Circulation Element.
Policy SE-5.5: Promote awareness of the City's emergency operations procedure; utilize media sources
                to inform residents.
Policy SE-5.6: Improve inter-jurisdictional, interagency cooperation with other public and private
                agencies for safety in future land use planning, hazard prevention and emergency
                response.
Policy SE-5.7: Support the adoption and full implementation of the Local Hazard Mitigation Plan (LHMP)
                which was adopted by the City Council on March 12, 2012, under resolution 12-33 and
                accepted by FEMA and posted by ABAG June 5, 2012.
Building Construction/Hazardous Structures
Policy SE-6.1: Regulate building construction practices to prevent hazardous structures and assure
                structural safety. Measures may include requiring conformance to an accepted set of
                construction standards, authorizing inspection of suspected dangerous structures,
                discontinuing improper construction activities, and eliminating hazardous conditions.
Policy SE-6.2: Support efforts to inform purchasers of existing buildings and structures that the City's
                building inspection services are available, upon request, to inspect structures, describe
                their condition and existing violations and provide construction history to the extent that
                such information is available.
Policy SE-6.3: Consider measures which would facilitate timely resolution of outstanding building
                inspection violations. Measures may include establishing authority to record citations
                against notified properties.
Policy SE-6.4: Facilitate rehabilitation of hazardous structures through measures which offer financial as
                well as technical assistance.
Policy SE-6.5: Encourage the Contractor's State License Board to undertake vigorous monitoring of and
                enforcement against unlicensed building activities.
Daly City 2030 General Plan | Safety Element                                                            171
Safety Programs
Safety Programs are action programs defining what Daly City is doing and intends to do to implement
the policies and achieve the Goal and Objectives of the Safety Element. The Safety Programs are
organized into two categories, Current and Proposed Programs for Safety. The program identifies the
specific action; the existing or anticipated funding source; the responsible agency; and, the time frame
for each component. The following specific actions have been undertaken by Daly City to achieve a
safe community.
Current Programs for Safety
California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) Environmental Review Procedure
The California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) mandates an initial study be prepared for all projects
that are non-discretionary in nature, i.e., projects that are allowed for which an applicant need only
apply for a plan check and a building permit. An initial study is prepared for applicable projects and
based upon findings of the study, the project is conditioned accordingly. If significant potential impacts
are identified, an environmental impact report is required. Mitigation measures are applied to the
project accordingly. The initial study would identify the effects of the project on available safety
resources and the relative safety of the project itself.
Resource Protection Combining District
The Resource Protection Combining District may be used in conjunction with an underlying zoning
district classification such as R-1 Single Family Residential or OS Open Space. The intent of the District is
to ensure that the character and intensity of development does not create adverse impacts on
geotechnically hazardous areas. The Resource Protection Combining District is used only in conjunction
with the R-1 single family residential zoning district for those properties directly fronting coastal bluffs. The
district requires that a Use Permit be acquired prior to any construction within the zone and prohibits
construction within fifty feet of a bluff, on a slope greater than thirty percent, or where the vertical relief
is ten feet or greater. The district prohibits grading or filling operations except those required as
drainage and erosion control measures. In addition, each new project in the district must provide a
geotechnical report which includes past and possible future landslide conditions. Furthermore, each
project must have certification that the development will not endanger life or property during the
economic life of the property.
Subdivision Ordinance
The Subdivision Ordinance sets forth minimum standards for land division, site preparation and facility
design. Soil and Geotechnical reports may be required by the City Engineer.
Municipal Code
The Daly City Municipal Code requires all new and remodeled projects to comply with Building Code
requirements, Fire Code requirements, and City ordinances applicable to development.
Inspection of Buildings
The Fire Prevention Services Bureau’s Fire Safety Inspection Program includes enforcement of current fire
and building code requirements. The Fire Prevention Services Bureau and the Building Division are
responsible for the identification of hazardous buildings and proper structural maintenance of critical
care faculties or services.
172                                                                  Daly City 2030 General Plan | Safety Element

Fire Sprinkler Ordinance
This ordinance requires provision of a fire sprinkler system in new construction and existing occupancies.
When an existing building undergoes any alteration, renovation, addition, or repair which exceeds 50%
of the building's original gross area, the entire building shall be protected by an automatic fire sprinkler
system. Gross area shall be the area included within surrounding exterior walls.. The ordinance was
passed in an effort to provide additional life safety measures and fire protection primarily because of
the close proximity of many of the structures to each other in the City.
Seismic Retrofit Program
This program provides assistance for citizens in retrofitting their home to safeguard against severe
earthquake damage. The Building Division of the Economic and Community Development Department
administers the voluntary program, which includes provision of construction handouts and promotion of
an "open house for the public.” The Building Division also issues permits for the seismic upgrades and
inspects the construction.
Project Review
Proposed projects are reviewed by the Building and Planning Divisions, Police, Public Works, and Fire
Department personnel. This procedure provides information for use in design review and the
conditioning of permits for new development.
Emergency Operations
This Plan outlines the City's planned response to emergency situations. Emergency response is
administered by the Police and Fire Departments. Daly City's emergency operations center (EOC) is
located in rooms 201-203 of the War Memorial Community Center. The plan includes periodic practice
drills to ensure emergency preparedness for both natural and man-made disasters.
Hazardous Material Inventory
This program involves the maintenance of records of hazardous materials locations for
commercial/industrial businesses in the City. The program would determine the nature, extent,
cumulative impacts, and an associated risk factor for hazardous material use and transportation within
the City. The program is operated in conjunction with the Office of Environmental Health, Office of
Emergency Services, and cooperation from local emergency response agencies.
Public Education for Use and Disposal of Hazardous Materials
The North County Fire Authority’s Community Emergency Preparedness & Planning Division, as well as
the Fire Prevention Services Bureau provides public education programs for both local businesses, and
residents in areas including emergency preparedness, fire safety and hazardous materials and
household hazardous waste. The household hazardous waste program, in conjunction with the
Hazardous Material Inventory Program, regulates the location of uses involving the manufacture,
storage, transportation, use, treatment, and disposal of hazardous materials to ensure community
compatibility. The program also provides adequate siting, design, and performance standards for
hazardous material sites.
San Mateo County Major Air Crash/High Risk Plan
This plan specifies initial notification and response assignments in reference to a major airliner accident
or high rise fire in the County.
Daly City 2030 General Plan | Safety Element                                                            173

Automatic and Mutual Aid Programs
Local cities and the County utilize automatic and mutual aid programs to respond to major
emergencies.
County Health Department
This agency provides comprehensive identification of hazardous waste generators within San Mateo
County and enforcement of hazardous waste regulations. The department is continuing efforts to
improve emergency spill response and prevent illegal dumping through vigorous enforcement and
programs which educate the public and industry. The department is engaged in the preparation of a
hazardous waste management plan which includes a Countywide survey of hazardous waste
generators, full investigation of reported illegal disposal accidents, and development of a multi-agency
emergency response plan.
Sherrif’s Office of Emergency Services (OES)
The San Mateo County Sheriff’s Office of Emergency Services & Homeland Security serves in the
capacity of the Operational Area (OA) emergency management agency. Their function is to
coordinate information, resources and priorities among local governments within the county following a
disaster and serves as the communication link between the local government level and the state’s
regional level.
Proposed Programs for Safety
The following specific actions will be undertaken by Daly City in order to implement the policies outlined
in the element.
Program S-1:                Grading and Erosion Control Ordinance
Objective:                  Minimize runoff from grading
Responsible Agency:         Department of Public Works, Engineering Division, Department of Economic
                            and Community Development
Time Frame:                 2013-2015
Funding Source:             General Fund
Activity:                   Adopt ordinance which ensures that new construction, on-going businesses,
                            and municipal maintenance will preserve storm water runoff which flows to
                            the ocean and bay.
Program S-2:                Implementation of Erosion Control Program
Objective:                  Reduce hazards associated with soil erosion
Responsible Agency:         Department of Public Works
Time Frame:                 2013-2014 initially, then continually Funding Source: General Fund
Activity:                   Inspection and monitoring of construction activities to ensure compliance
                            with the erosion and grading ordinance.
Program S-3:                Establishment of a Geological Sensitive Zone
Objective:                  Protection of geologically sensitive areas
Responsible Agency:         Department of Economic and Community Development, Department of
                            Public Works, Engineering Division
Time Frame:                 2013-2014 initially, then continuously Funding Source: General Fund
174                                                                 Daly City 2030 General Plan | Safety Element

Activity:                   This program involves identifying geologically sensitive areas throughout Daly
                            City. These areas could include land subject to landslides, erosion, and areas
                            with steep slopes. The first phase of program will identify these areas. The
                            second phase will include these areas in a combining district and preparation
                            of performance standards to be included in Zoning Ordinance.
Program S-4:                CEQA - Thresholds of Significance
Objective:                  Protection of geologically sensitive areas
Responsible Agency:         Department of Economic and Community Development, Planning Division
Time Frame:                 2013-2014
Funding:                    General Fund
Activity:                   Prepare objective thresholds of significance which will trigger preparation of
                            an EIR. Thresholds of significance will include conditions which relate to
                            physical conditions of the land or the potential for natural or man-made
                            disasters which would necessitate the preparation of an EIR.
Daly City 2030 General Plan | Safety Element                                                           175
176 Daly City 2030 General Plan | Safety Elemen
Introduction
Scope and Role of the Resource Management Element
Daly City, over time, has been developed primarily as an urban area, and therefore the discussion of
resource management is limited to natural resources such as water, air, water, stormwater, vegetation
and wildlife, and cultural resources including historic resources, archaeological resources, and visual
quality. This is not to say, however, that there are no remaining resources worth managing in the Daly
City area. San Bruno Mountain and the Daly City Coastline provide some of the greatest natural and
archaeological resources in the County. Older portions of Daly City reflect the architectural styles of a
bygone era, and remind us of the historical events that have made Daly City what it is today. Therefore,
it is important that any remaining resources are carefully managed, to ensure that the spirit of
environmental and historic preservation is upheld and that future generations can enjoy these precious
resources.
State Planning Law
The Resource Management Element consists of the Conservation Element and Open Space Element as
required by State Planning Law. State law permits the consolidation of elements when doing so will
avoid redundancy, more easily achieve internal consistency, and effectively group together related
goals, objectives, and policies for easier reference.
State Planning, Zoning and Development Law and State General Plan Guidelines provide direction for
municipalities preparing the required General Plan Elements. Section 65302(d) makes specific
reference to the content of the Conservation Element and indicates that Conservation Elements shall:
        "Address the conservation, development and utilization of natural resources,
        Including but not limited to; water, forests; soils, rivers, harbors, fisheries, wildlife and
        minerals."
The requirement for, and the content, objectives, and intent of the Open Space Element are addressed
in Government Code Sections 65302(e) and 65560-65567. Section 65302(e) mandates that every
municipality shall include an Open Space Element in their General Plan. Sections 65560-65567 are
specific sections of the code which define open space and give direction with regard to the content
and objectives of the Element. Sections 65560(a) and 65563 are concerned with the requirement of an
Open Space Element and the time frame in which that requirement must be met. Section 65560(b)(1-4)
defines open space land as:
Daly City 2030 General Plan | Resource Management Element                                             177
        "Any parcel or area of land or water which Is essentially unimproved and devoted to
        an open space use as defined in this section, and which is designated on a local,
        regional or state open space plan as any of the following:"
           Open space for the preservation of natural resources.
           Open space used for the managed production of resources.
           Open space for outdoor recreation.
           Open space for public health and safety.
Section 65561(a-e) specifies the findings and declarations as to the need for open space, whereas
Section 65564 requires that every open space element must contain an action program consisting of
specific programs for implementation of the policies outlined in the Element. Sections 65566 and 65567
state that actions within a municipality must be consistent with the adopted open space element.
Background Information
Natural and cultural resources must be identified so that provisions for the conservation and
preservation of those resources can be made.
        Natural resources are defined as:
                Resources present in the natural environment that could continue to
                exist without intervention by humans, but have the potential to be
                either depleted, eliminated, or preserved by humans.
        Cultural resources are defined as:
                Resources created by humans, that through events and places
                located within an area, describe the historic events that have
                contributed to the present culture of the City.
Natural resources discussed include: water, air, open space, and vegetation and wildlife. Cultural
resources discussed include: visual quality, historic resources, and archaeological resources. Visual
resources can be considered a combination of natural and cultural resources. This is due to the visual
qualities associated with natural landscapes, man-made landscapes, and architectural design.
Water Resources
Up until the 1970s, most people viewed water as an unlimited resource. Since that time, supply
shortages caused by declining rainfall levels and increasing demand for water, have resulted in
mandatory conservation practices. In Daly City, water is used for many different purposes including
domestic, commercial, and irrigation uses. The majority of water, however, is used by residents for
drinking, cooking, and general household purposes, including residential irrigation. Since water is one of
the most important and finite natural resources, determining the existing and future supply and demand
is extremely important.
Water Supply
In June 2010, the City of Daly City adopted an Urban Water Management Plan (UWMP). The purpose of
the plan is to describe the water system operated by the City’s Department of Water and Wastewater
Resources (DWWR) and the water supply sources, magnitudes of historical and projected water use,
and a comparison of water supply to demands during normal, single-dry, and multiple-dry years.
178                                              Daly City 2030 General Plan | Resource Management Element

According to the plan, the City pumps local groundwater and receives a large portion of its water
supply from the San Francisco Public Utilities Commission (SFPUC) and supplements the SFPUC supply
with groundwater pumped from six local wells. During dry periods, groundwater makes up a larger
proportion (up to 45 percent) of the City’s supply. The City also uses tertiary recycled water from the
North San Mateo County Sanitation District wastewater treatment plant wherever feasible, to offset
potable/aquifer water demands.
Historically, the City has provided an average of about 45 percent of its water from its wells. The recent
replacement of Well 10 with the new Junipero Serra Well is expected to result in a groundwater supply
average of 50 percent of water needs. Since 1999, groundwater supplies have provided as much as 44
percent in drought years and as little as 8 percent in wet years. Table RPE-1 shows the breakdown
between groundwater production and surface water purchases for the Daly City System from 1999 to
2009.
     Table RME-1: Historical Well Production and Water Purchases
                      Groundwater      Water
             Year         Wells      Purchases     Total
             1999         4,101        5,199       9,300
             2000         3,960        5,534       9,494
             2001         3,880        5,001       8,881
             2002         2,190        6,678       8,868
             2003         1,500        7,142       8,642
             2004         1,018        7,843       8,860
             2005          726         7,380       8,106
             2006          862         6,795       7,657
             2007         2,603        5,796       8,399
             2008         3,564        4,791       8,354
             2009         1,667        6,067       7,734
          Average         2,370        6,202       8,572
         Source: Daly City 2010 Urban Water Management Plan
Water Consumption
Information about how much is currently consumed by City water customer is provided by analyses of
water meter data. For purposes of this analysis, metered water customers are classified as single-family
residential, multifamily residential, commercial, industrial, institutional, governmental, and landscape
irrigation (there are agricultural uses in the City). Table RPE-2 on page 190 identifies the water use and
customer account profile percentages for each water use sector. These classifications provide a basis
by which current consumption patterns among various types of customers may be analyzed.
According to the table, the largest number of customers (55 percent) was single-family residences,
including attached dwelling units with individual meters. The second largest customer group was the
multifamily with connections comprising about 30 percent of total accounts. The relative proportion of
demand that each of these customer types exerts on the water system is not however the same.
Although comprising five percent of the total connections, nonresidential customers represent 16
percent of the average annual demand. Multifamily connections account for another 30 percent of
the annual water demand leaving 55 percent of the metered demand originating from single-family
residential units.
Daly City 2030 General Plan | Resource Management Element                                               179

    Table RME-2: Historical Well Production and Water Purchases
                                             Use
                                           profile                  Account
         Category                          percent Accounts       Percentage
         Single Family                         54.5      18,683        83
         Multifamily                          30.26       2,840        13
         Commercial                            8.65         668         3
         Industrial                            0.13           3       0.01
         Institutional                         2.47          80       0.36
         Governmental                          2.35         112       0.5
         Irrigation                            1.64         123       0.55
         Total No. of Accounts in 2001                   22,509       100
        Source: Daly City 2010 Urban Water Management Plan
Future Water Use
To determine future water use, the UWMP model uses population and employment projections provided
by the Association of Bay Area Government’s Projections 2007 document for Daly City to estimate how
much water demand there will be. Table RPE-3 provides a summary of projected water deliveries
based on these population and growth figures for the year 2030.
        Table RME-3: Projected Water Deliveries in Year 2030
                                   Number of       Metered
         Water Use Sector           Accounts        Volume
         Single family               22,360          4,945
         Multi-family                 3,399          2,763
         Commercial                   1,723          1,469
         Industrial                     4              14
         Institutional                 207            567
         Governmental                  134            251
         Landscape irrigation          147            150
         Agriculture                    0               0
         Total                       27,974          10,158
        Source: Daly City 2010 Urban Water Management Plan
Total water use within the City is the sum of the water use by customer type and water losses. Through
water conservation designed to save 0.82 million gallons per day (mgd) by 2035, the UWMP estimated
that the City’s water use will remain consistent with current use. Table RPE-4 summarizes the total water
use for the City through 2035.
        Table RME-4: Projected Water Deliveries in Year 2030
                                                             Total Water Use (AFY)
         Water Distributed                        2015        2020        2025     2030       2035
         Total Water Deliveries                  9,396       9,965     10,036    10,159     10,192
         Sales to Other Water Agencies                0           0          0         0         0
         Additional Water Uses and Losse         3,704       7,561       7,579    7,597      7,617
         Total                                  13,100      17,526     17,615    17,756     17,809
            Source: Daly City 2010 Urban Water Management Plan
180                                                    Daly City 2030 General Plan | Resource Management Element

Water Use Reduction Plan
In 2000, the City began implementing an aggressive water conservation program and has had a
consistently low per capita water demand, i.e., less than 100 gallons per capita per day (gpcd), as
shown in Figure 3-2.
            Figure RME–3.1: Per Capita Per Day Water Demand 1990 - 2010
                                                                                                         82
                                  81                                                81            81
   Gallons per day (per capita)
                                                        77                   79            79
                                                               76                                                       76
                                                                      78                                                              76
                                                                                                                76
                                                                                                                                74
                                                   73
                                                                                                                                                            71
                                                                                                                                                                     70
                                                                                                                                                    69
                                         68
                                                                                                                                                     65
                                                                                                                                                                           64
                                  1990   1991   1992    1993   1994   1995   1996   1997   1998   1999   2000    2001   2002   2003   2004   2005    2006   2007   2008   2009
            Source: City of Daly City Department of Water and Wastewater (water data)
It is important to note that conservation practices instituted in the past three decades during two major
droughts and, most recently, during two dry years have contributed to the below average gpcd use.
During emergencies, conservation is a more limited option in Daly City as the City’s current use is
already at 48 gpcd for residential uses and 62 gpcd for gross use. Daly City’s per capita use is less than
the regional use among other water delivery agencies (excluding Stanford University) of 78 gpcd for
residential uses and 130 gpcd for gross use.
Air Resources
The overall quality of life in Daly City is directly related to air quality. Significant amounts of air pollution
are unsightly and can result in health hazards for residents. Fortunately, the Bay Area’s air quality has
actually improved significantly over the past several decades. According to the Bay Area 2010 Clean
Air Plan prepared by the Bay Area Air Quality Management District (BAAQMD), this improvement has
greatly reduce health effects related to air pollution, extending the average life expectancy in the Bay
Area by approximately six months over the past two decades. In economic terms, the public health
dividend of the improvement in air quality provides billions of dollars in benefits to the Bay Area each
year.
Undoubtedly, implementation of the policies and programs outlined in the General Plan could result in
air quality impacts. Development activities contemplated by the Housing and Land Use Elements for
example will indirectly pollute the air by causing increases in traffic, construction dust, and greenhouse
gas emissions. For this reason, the policies and programs contained within this Resource Management
Daly City 2030 General Plan | Resource Management Element                                                                                                                        181

Element are directed towards compliance with and implementation of the regional Air Quality Plan
which identifies regional policies targeted to toward minimizing these air quality impacts.
In Daly City, vehicle emissions and construction activities are considered to be the primary contributors
to increases in air pollution levels. BAAQMD inventories of stationary sources of air pollution within the
Bay Area Air Basin do not identify any major stationary sources of air pollution within Daly City's city limits.
Regulating Air Quality
Under the authority of the Clean Air Act of 1970, the United States Environmental Protection Agency
(EPA) has established air quality standards for six air pollutants: ozone, carbon monoxide, sulfur dioxide,
nitrogen dioxide, lead, and particulate matter. The California Air Resources Board (CARB) has also
established air quality standards for these same pollutants, which in many cases are more stringent than
those developed by the EPA. Both federal and state air quality standards prescribe the level of a
pollutant that cannot be exceeded during a specific time period, usually one, eight, or twenty-four hour
periods within a specific area. A description of regulated pollutants is provided in the subsequent
section.
For the purpose of managing California’s air resources on a regional basis, the CARB has divided the
state geographically into 15 air basins which possess similar meteorological and geographic conditions.
Daly City is located in the San Francisco Bay Area Air Basin, which includes seven Bay Area counties,
each of which is subject to the regulatory authority of the Bay Area Air Quality Management District
(BAAQMD).
Because polluted air cannot be contained within any single jurisdiction, the regulatory authority of the
BAAQMD provides guidance to municipalities like Daly City in developing implementation measures for
helping to improve regional air quality. The General Plan provides a policy for framework for
implementing measures to reduce air quality impacts in the area of land use planning. In addition to
the preparation of the plan, the BAAQMD is also responsible for regulating point or stationary sources of
air pollution. Stationary sources include: manufacturing and chemical plants; oil refineries; and
construction sites. Other types of air pollution, such as vehicle emissions, are often referred to as mobile
sources of air pollution.
Air Pollutants
The following air pollutants are regulated by the Federal Government, State of California, and Bay Area
Air Quality Management District (BAAQMD):
Ozone (O3) is a gas composed of three oxygen atoms and is not usually emitted directly into the air, but
at ground-level is created by a chemical reaction between oxides of nitrogen (NOx) and volatile
organic compounds (VOC) in the presence of sunlight. Ozone has the same chemical structure
whether it occurs miles above the earth or at ground-level and can be "good" or "bad," depending on
its location in the atmosphere. In the earth's lower atmosphere, ground-level ozone is considered "bad,"
where it is the primary constituent of smog. Motor vehicle exhaust and industrial emissions, gasoline
vapors, and chemical solvents as well as natural sources emit NOx and VOC that help form ozone.
Sunlight and hot weather cause ground-level ozone to form in harmful concentrations in the air. As a
result, it is known as a summertime air pollutant.
Carbon monoxide (CO) is a colorless, odorless gas that is formed when carbon in fuel is not burned
completely. It is a component of motor vehicle exhaust, which contributes about 56 percent of all CO
emissions nationwide. Other non-road engines and vehicles (such as construction equipment and
boats) contribute about 22 percent of all CO emissions nationwide. Higher levels of CO generally
occur in areas with heavy traffic congestion. In cities, 85 to 95 percent of all CO emissions may come
from motor vehicle exhaust. The highest levels of CO in the outside air typically occur during the colder
182                                                Daly City 2030 General Plan | Resource Management Element

months of the year when inversion conditions are more frequent. The air pollution becomes trapped
near the ground beneath a layer of warm air.
Particulate Matter (PM). Particle pollution is a complex mixture of extremely small particles and liquid
droplets created by both natural sources, such as wind-blown dust and pollen, as well as man-made
sources, such as vehicles, roads, and industrial and agricultural practices. The size of particles is directly
linked to their potential for causing health problems. Particles that are 10 micrometers in diameter or
smaller are considered unhealthy because those are the particles that generally pass through the throat
and nose and enter the lungs. Once inhaled, these particles can affect the heart and lungs and cause
serious health effects.
Particle pollution is grouped into two categories:
   "Respirable Particulate Matter," such as that found near roadways and dusty industries, are larger
    than 2.5 micrometers and smaller than 10 micrometers in diameter. This pollution is referred to as
    PM10.
   "Fine Particulate Matter," such as that found in smoke and haze, are 2.5 micrometers in diameter
    and smaller. These particles can be directly emitted from sources such as forest fires, or they can
    form when gases emitted from power plants, industries, and automobiles react in the air. This
    pollution is referred to as PM2.5. According to the 2010 Bay Area Clean Air Plan, Exposure to PM2.5 is
    by far the leading public health risk from air pollution in the Bay Area, accounting for more than 90
    percent of premature mortality related to air pollution.
Sulfur dioxide (SO2) is a colorless gas emitting a strong, irritating odor. The odor, which is similar to rotten
eggs, is most noticeable around oil refineries, power plants, and sewage treatment plants. Sulfur
dioxide (when oxidized to sulfur trioxide), in combination with nitrogen oxides, is responsible for the
creation of acid rain. SO2 also is linked with a number of adverse effects on the respiratory system.
Nitrogen dioxide (NO2) is a brown-colored toxic gas, noticeable in the Bay Area as a reddish-brown
haze. It is one of two oxides of nitrogen formed by combustion, the other being nitric oxide.
Automobiles and industry are the major contributors to the formation of oxides of nitrogen. The
evaporation of paints, inks, solvents or gasoline, as well as the burning of fuels or organic materials, result
in the formation of organic gases. Photochemical oxidants are formed in the atmosphere during a
chemical reaction between nitric oxide (which is converted to nitrogen dioxide during the reaction),
organic gases and sunshine.
Existing Air Quality
Due to its close proximity to the coast and resulting onshore winds, the air quality within Daly City itself is
generally excellent during a majority of the year. BAAQMD air quality monitoring stations in San
Francisco, the closest to Daly City, indicate that the area is an attainment area for all federal and state
ambient air standards except particulate matter (PM10 and PM2.5). The City’s previous Resource
Management Element previously identified this station as exceeding the state and federal standards
related to CO emissions. However, the entire air basin has been in attainment of the CO standards
since 1991 due largely to the introduction of cleaner burning fuels and a more efficient fleet of motor
vehicles. A summary of this localized monitoring between the years 2002 and 2009 is provided in Table
RME-5.
Daly City 2030 General Plan | Resource Management Element                                                    183

                Table RME-5:         Local Air Quality (2002 – 2009)
                                                          2009 Standards                                        Study Year                                 Total
                                                     California                                                                                        Exceedances
                                                                                    2002         2003    2004      2005     2006   2007   2008   2009    (CA + US)
                Air Pollutant                          (CA)       National (US)
                Ozone
                  1-Hour (ppb)                           90              -            50           90      90        58      53     60     82      72
                  8-Hour (ppb)                           70             75            50           60      60        54      46     49     66      56
                  Days of Exceedance (CA)                                              0            0       0         0       0      0      0       0        0
                  Days of Exceedance (US)                                              0            0       0         0       0      0      0       0        0
                Carbon Monoxide
                  1-Hour (ppm)                           20             35            3.5          3.6     2.9       2.5     2.7    2.5    5.7     4.3
                  8-Hour (ppb)                            9              9            2.6          2.8     2.2       2.1     2.1    1.6    2.3     2.9
                  Days of Exceedance (CA/US)                                           0            0       0         0       0      0      0       0        0
                Nitrogen Dioxide
                  1-Hour (ppm)                          0.25             -           0.08         0.07    0.06     0.066   0.107  0.069  0.062   0.059
                  Annual Average (ppm)                  0.03          0.053         0.019        0.018   0.017     0.016   0.016  0.016  0.016  0.0151
                  Days of Exceedance (CA/US)                                           0            0       0         0       0      0      0       0        0
                Sulfer Dioxide
                  24-Hour (ppm)                         0.04           0.14         0.006        0.007   0.008     0.007   0.006  0.006  0.005      -
                  Annual Average                          -            0.03        0.0019       0.0022  0.0014    0.0014   0.0013 0.0015 0.0015     -
                  Days of Exceedance (CA/US)                                           0            0       0         0       0      0      0       -        0
                Particulates ≤ 10 microns (PM10)
                  24-Hour (µg/m3)                        50            150            21           52      52        46      61     70     41      36
                  Annual Average                         20              -           24.7         22.7    22.5      20.1    22.9   21.9    22     18.7
                  Days of Exceedance (CA)                                              2            1       1         0       3      2      0       0        9
                  Days of Exceedance (US)                                              0            0       0         0       0      0      0       0        0
                Particulates ≤ 2.5 microns (PM2.5)
                  24-Hour ( µg/m3)                        -             35            70           42      46      43.6     54.3   45.2   29.4   35.6
                  Annual Average ( µg/m3)                12             15           13.1         10.1     9.9       9.5     9.7    8.7    9.8     9.7
                  Days of Exceedance (US)                                              4            0       0         0       3      5      0       1       13
                         Total Exceedances (CA + US)                                   6            1       1         0       6      7      0       1       22
                  Source: Bay Area Air Quality Management District (BAAQMD) Bay Air Air Pollution Summaries 2002-2009
Daly City 2030 General Plan | Resource Management Element                                                                                                          184

On a regional level, the Bay Area as a whole attains all national and state standards for four of the six
criteria pollutants: lead, carbon monoxide, sulfur dioxide, and nitrogen dioxide. It has not however
attained standards for ozone and PM. Under the Clean Air Act, areas that do not meet federal
ambient air quality standards must prepare an Air Quality Management Plan outlining the measures
that need to be undertaken to meet the federal and state standards. In the Bay Area, the BAAQMD
has been charged with preparing such a plan due to non-attainment of the PM air quality standard.
Thresholds of Significance
To assist the City in conforming to state and federal air quality regulations, the BAAQMD has adopted
thresholds of significance to be used when the City reviews any discretionary project subject to the
California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA). The thresholds of significance are included in the Air
District’s updated CEQA Guidelines. It is the Air District’s policy that the adopted thresholds apply to
projects for which a Notice of Preparation is published, or environmental analysis begins, on or after the
applicable effective date.
The BAAQMD CEQA Guidelines recommend air quality significance thresholds, analytical
methodologies, and mitigation measures for local agencies to use when preparing air quality impact
analyses under CEQA. The updated CEQA Guidelines seek to better protect the health and well-being
of Bay Area residents by addressing new health protective air quality standards, exposure to toxic air
contaminants, and adverse effects from global climate change.
The updated CEQA Guidelines address recent changes in air quality standards for ozone and
particulate matter (PM) from the State of California and federal government. The new health-
protective air quality standards are in response to growing scientific evidence that exposure to ozone,
fine particles, and air toxics have greater health effects than previously estimated. In addition, the
BAAQMD’s new greenhouse gas thresholds were developed to ensure that the Bay Area meets the
State’s plan to address global climate change. The CEQA Guidelines also address exposure to toxic air
contaminants, which is associated with increased risk for cardiovascular disease, asthma, reduced birth
weight, and higher mortality. Although air quality in the Bay Area has improved over the last thirty years,
fine PM and other air toxic contaminants released by transportation and industrial activities threaten the
health of local residents. The updated CEQA Guidelines seek to better protect the health and well-
being of Bay Area residents.
Stormwater Management
Urban development is a major contributor to stormwater-caused pollution.                 Development or
redevelopment of property represents an opportunity to incorporate measures that can reduce water
quality impacts over the life of the project. The legal mandate to do so stems from the Federal Clean
Water Act which required municipalities like Daly City to proactively control and regulate pollution from
their municipal separate storm sewer systems (MS4) to the maximum extent feasible. In addition, the
State of California's Porter-Cologne Water Quality Control Act of 1969 and other State legislation require
municipalities to protect water quality.
On October 14, 2009, the San Francisco Bay Regional Water Quality Control Board (RWQCB) adopted
the Municipal Regional Stormwater NPDES Permit for the San Francisco Bay Region. In an effort to
standardize stormwater management requirements throughout the region, this permit replaces the
formerly separate countywide municipal stormwater permits with a regional permit for 76 Bay Area
municipalities, including the City of Daly City.
The intent of these various laws and permits is to mitigate potentially detrimental effects of urban runoff
through proper site design and source control early in the development review process, and to provide
guidance in the selection of appropriate Best Management Practices (BMPs). BMPs are defined as
methods, activities, maintenance procedures, or other management practices for reducing the
amount of pollution entering a water body. The City of Daly City reviews individual public and private
Daly City 2030 General Plan | Resource Management Element                                               185

projects for stormwater conformance with applicable laws, policies, and guidelines, and is the lead City
agency responsible for implementing the C.3 Provision requirements of the NPDES Permit related to new
development and redevelopment.
 The C.3 Provisions of the NPDES Permit require each of the co-permittees, including the City of Daly City,
to implement measures/BMPs to reduce stormwater pollution and to reduce increases in stormwater
runoff flow, volume, and duration (“hydromodification”) from new development or redevelopment
projects. In addition to the NPDES Permit provisions, all construction projects in the City of Daly City are
regulated by the NPDES General Permit for Storm Water Discharges Associated with Construction
Activity (General Permit), which requires the preparation of a Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plan
(SWPPP) and the filing of a Notice of Intent (NOI) with the State Water Resources Control Board (SWRCB)
for all projects that disturb an area of one acre or greater.
Open Space
Open space is one of the most precious and limited natural resources in Daly City. For the purposes of
discussion in this element, open space has been divided into two categories: 1) Open Space as a
Natural Resource and; 2) Open Space for Recreational Purposes.
Open Space as a Natural Resource
As identified by the General Plan Land Use Map, approximately 400 acres within Daly City will continue
to remain designated as Open Space Preservation on the General Plan Land Use Map. Areas within this
acreage are a large conglomeration of vacant parcels along the coastline that, because of
environmental constraints such as steep slopes and unstable soils, have limited development potential.
In addition to their designation as Open Space Preservation in the General Plan, coastal bluff areas are
protected through the Resource Protection (-RP) Combining District of the Zoning Ordinance. This
combining district prohibits construction within 50 feet of the blufftop, on a slope greater than thirty
percent, or where the vertical relief is ten feet or greater. The district also prohibits grading or filling
operations except for those required as drainage and erosion control measures, and requires
permanent vista corridors of at least five feet or 15 percent of the lot, whichever is greater, for any
development which occurs within the district.
Although areas designated as Open Space Preservation function primarily as non-usable open space,
portions of the coastal bluffs and beaches provide limited recreational opportunities for Daly City
residents. However, these areas have not been designated as recreational open space because they
do not contain any recreational improvements such as playground equipment, benches, and similar
improvements.
Open Space for Recreational Purposes
This category of open space has been further divided into two categories: public and private
recreational open space. Public recreational open space consists of City parks and related facilities,
and State and County parks. Private recreational open space consists of private golf and country clubs
which limit access only to members.
City parks. Thirteen municipal parks and twelve tot lots are located in Daly City, resulting in a total of
82.95 acres of developed public recreational open space. Table RME-2 identifies each of the parks, tot
lots, and recreational facilities in Daly City. School playgrounds also provide recreational open space
opportunities, but have not been included in this figure because they are owned and regulated by their
respective school districts, and are only available during limited periods of time to residents of Daly City.
State and County parks. In addition to City parks, San Bruno Mountain State and County Park provides
Daly City residents with a variety of open space and recreational facilities and unique views of the San
Francisco Bay Area. The 2,063-acre park is located east of the City’s Hillside neighborhood and
186                                               Daly City 2030 General Plan | Resource Management Element

comprises both State and County owned lands. The planning, development, and management of the
park, however, is the responsibility of the San Mateo County Division of Parks and Recreation. The park is
also the home of several rare and endangered species of plants and animals. Endangered species
located on the mountain are discussed in greater detail in the Vegetation and Wildlife section of this
element. Recreational facilities in the park include: picnic; day camp and open space areas; scenic
vista areas; a nature interpretive center; as well as hiking, bicycling and equestrian trails.
At the coastline, Thornton Beach State Park, which has been made largely inaccessible due to
landslides, now provides a panoramic overlook and parking lot adjacent to Highway 1, at the end of
the John Daly Boulevard.
Private parks. Private recreational open space in Daly City is comprised of three golf and country clubs
located in the northwestern portion of the City. These clubs include the Lake Merced Golf and Country
Club, and portions of the Olympic and San Francisco Golf and Country Clubs. Although these areas
contribute to open space in Daly City, they do not provide recreational opportunities for all Daly City
residents. All three of these golf and country clubs restrict use to members only.
Recreational Facility Deficiencies
The City has twenty-seven recreational facilities dispersed throughout the various neighborhoods to
serve residents. While the number of facilities might be abundant, the city as a whole contains only
approximately 0.26 acres of parkland per 100 dwelling units, well below the State Recreation
Commission standard of 2.6 acres of parkland per 100 dwelling units. In terms of population, Daly City
contains only .76 acres of parkland per 1,000 persons, well below the National Park and Recreation
Commission Standard of four to five acres per 1,000 persons.
To comply with these standards, the City would need to provide several hundred acres of additional
parkland, a prospect which is impractical due to both fiscal limitations and the general lack of vacant
land on which to construct new centrally-located park facilities. Also, it is worth noting that the
aforementioned standard should be viewed as a guideline only and does not necessarily represent a
definitive or even the most appropriate measure of the amount of required recreational facilities for a
specific city, but rather should be considered as one means of determining system-wide deficiencies.
Based on the City’s current parkland dedication ratio of three acres per 1,000 residents identified in the
Municipal Code, the City would need to provide 15.8 acres of parkland to meet future need resulting
from the additional population.
While the potential for construction of additional active park space may be limited due to fiscal realities
and a scarcity of vacant land in locations suitable for park space, the City could instead improve
underutilized park sites already owned by the City or properties owned by the City that have the
potential for passive recreation.
One example of an area that has the potential for passive recreation is the Mussel Rock area, which is
located along the coastline and functions primarily as a natural resource due to the environmentally
sensitive habitat area on the bluffs surrounding it. While the Mussel Rock area is currently undeveloped,
the potential exists for the portions of the area to be improved with amenities such as directional
signage, cultural/environmental interpretive stations, a recreational par course, and/or developed vista
points. To this end, Task RME-12.1 provides for the development of Mussel Rock Park as a passive
recreational area for community use.
Daly City 2030 General Plan | Resource Management Element                                              187

Table RME-5: Existing Daly City Parks, Tot Lots, and Recreational Facilities
                       Parks                                                     Tot Lots
 Name                                          Size          Name                                 Size
 Bayshore Heights Park                         3.50          Alta Loma Tot Lot                    0.11
 David Rowe Park                               3.50          Ardendale Tot Lot                    0.40
 Broderick-Terry Duel Site                     3.19          Camelot Tot Lot                      0.37
 Edgewood Park                                 1.00          Cameo Ct. Tot Lot                    0.30
 Dan Gilbrech Park                             0.64          Caterbury Tot Lot                    0.40
 Gellert Park                                 19.53          Hampshire Tot Lot                    0.40
 Hillside Park                                 6.40          John Daly Tot Lot                    0.18
 Lincoln Park                                  2.40          Longview Tot Lot                     0.30
 Marchbank Park                                7.77          Lycett Tot Lot                       0.59
 Northridge Park                               1.31          Mission Hills Tot Lot                0.68
 Palisades Park                                0.99          Norwood Tot Lot                      0.20
 Westlake Park                                10.44          Polaris Tot Lot                      0.20
 Westmoor Park                                 7.64
                  Other Facilities                                            Undeveloped
 Rio Verde Horseshoe Pits                      0.08          Mussel Rock Park                     140
 Parkview Clubhouse                            0.69
 War Memorial Community Center                 2.09
 Margate Tennis Courts                         4.53
 Teglia Community Center                       0.41
 Doelger Art Center                            2.70                             Daly City Total  82.95
 Category Defintions:
 C = Citywide Park                 N = Neighborhood Park                    S = Subneighborhood Park
Visual Quality
To assess visual quality in Daly City, this Resource Management element considers natural scenic vistas
available to Daly City residents. These include: the Coastline, San Bruno Mountain, and scenic corridors.
The following is a discussion of each:
The Coastline
The Daly City coastline is the largest scenic area In Daly City. Although access to the lower portion of
the coastline is extremely limited, the upper portions of the coastal bluffs provide visual access. Three
parks, Northridge, Palisades, and Edgewood Park are located along the coastal bluffs and provide vista
points for Daly City residents. Coastal Element policies encourage the preservation, enhancement and
further development of visual access from these parks. The incorporation of a major portion of the
coastline in the GGNRA and future recreational improvements in the Mussel Rock area could improve
visual access and limited physical access along the coastline.
San Bruno Mountain
San Bruno Mountain is located along the eastern and northeastern city limits of Daly City. The mountain,
rising to approximately 1,000 feet in elevation, provides a scenic background along the eastern portion
of the City. In addition to being a scenic resource in itself, the mountain also provides hiking trails
188                                                 Daly City 2030 General Plan | Resource Management Element
around portions of the mountain and vista points on top of the mountain which provide dramatic views
of the City, the Pacific Ocean and San Francisco Bay.
Scenic Corridors
Although no State or County designated scenic highways are located in Daly City, several roadways
have been recognized as having scenic quality. Those highways recognized by the State include:
Skyline Boulevard (Route 35), Junipero Serra Freeway (I-280), and the Cabrillo Highway (Route 1). The
County has also recognized Guadalupe Canyon Parkway and Mission Street (Highway 84), as well as
the previously mentioned three highways, as having scenic quality. The recognition of these roadways
as having scenic quality, indicates that they have the potential to be designated as official scenic
highways by the State or County. Elements of these roadways that contribute to their scenic quality
include: views of San Bruno Mountain; the coastline; San Francisco Bay; and panoramic views of both
Daly City and San Francisco.
Other roadways that provide scenic vistas, but are not recognized by the State or County as having
scenic quality include John Daly Boulevard, and Lake Merced Boulevard. In addition to providing
scenic quality, some of these roadways also function as open space links to areas such as San Bruno
State and County Park along Guadalupe Canyon Parkway and the Milagra Ridge and Sweeny Ridge
open space areas along Route 35.
Vegetation and Wildlife
This section of the element contains a discussion of the different plant and animal resources found in the
Daly City area. Since the City consists primarily of developed areas, the focus of this section is on San
Bruno Mountain and the Coastal Zone, two areas rich in biotic and biologic resources. A discussion of
the rare and endangered species of plants and animals, located in each of these two areas, is
contained in each respective section.
San Bruno Mountain
San Bruno Mountain represents the greatest collection of plant and animal resources in the Daly City
area. The mountain is the location of several rare and endangered species of plants and animals, most
notably the four different species of butterflies located on the mountain. A complete list of rare and
endangered species of plants and animals found on San Bruno Mountain is contained in Appendix A.
Since the time that the last Resource Management Element was prepared, significant development has
occurred along the northern and northeastern portion of San Bruno Mountain. All of the developments
within this area have been required to meet the requirements of the Habitat Conservation Plan
prepared for San Bruno Mountain.
Habitat Conservation Plan (HCP)
In order to preserve the different rare and endangered plant and animal species on San Bruno
Mountain, a Habitat Conservation Plan was prepared and an agreement with regards to the plan
entered into by several local and regional agencies including Daly City, Brisbane, South San Francisco,
San Mateo County and LAFCo, local developers, properly owners, the United States Fish and Wildlife
Service, and the California Department of Fish and Game. The HCP was the first of its kind adopted in
the United States and was prepared to protect the endangered species habitat, while allowing limited
development on portions of the Mountain.
The primary focus of the HCP continues to be the preservation of rare and endangered species, most
notably the four species of butterflies and their food plants located on the mountain. A Habitat
Conservation Plan must be prepared to allow the Department of Interior to issue a Section 10(a) permit.
A Section 10(a) permit allows the incidental taking of an endangered species during development. A
taking is generally defined as any action that results in harm to an endangered species during
Daly City 2030 General Plan | Resource Management Element                                              189
development. In addition to the Section 10(a) Permit, an agreement, setting forth the obligation of the
interested parties to implement the HCP must be entered into by federal, state, and local agencies and
the participating land owners and developers. The HCP contains specific mitigation measures which
must be incorporated into developments within the HCP boundaries. The mitigation measures consist
primarily of plans for the reclamation of lands which are to be graded, the payment of a fee to San
Mateo County to operate the HCP, a ban on pesticide spraying, the designation of a buffer area, and
the construction of a habitat fence to separate developed and undeveloped areas.
The Coastline
The 2.6-mile long Daly City Coastline encompasses approximately 280 acres of undeveloped and
partially developed land. The Coastal Zone, as designated in Daly City's Coastal Element, includes all
areas west of Skyline Boulevard and two small areas east of Skyline Boulevard in the Westlake North
neighborhood. This section, however, focuses on the undeveloped open space areas, including only
the coastal bluffs and beaches.
The Coastal Element identifies two areas within the Coastal Zone as Environmentally Sensitive Habitat
areas. These areas are located in the Daisaku Ikeda Canyon and the bluffs around Mussel Rock Park.
Environmentally Sensitive Habitat is defined in the Coastal Element as any area in which plant or animal
life or their habitats are either rare or especially valuable because of their special nature or role in an
ecosystem and which could be easily disturbed or degraded by human activities and developments. A
botanical inventory taken in 1980 indicated that both native and non-native species have become or
were becoming established in these two areas. A listing of these species by area is included in
Appendix B.
Archaeology
Archaeological resources in Daly City consist primarily of the remains of the Ohlone Indian tribe which
inhabited the area. The following discussion briefly describes the OhIone tribe and their customs, as well
as the significant archaeological find, with regard to the tribe, that was made at Mussel Rock.
Ohlone Tribe
The Ohlone Indian Tribe inhabited a large area along the California Coast, running from the San
Francisco Bay Area to Monterey Bay. The tribelet which inhabited the Daly City area lived primarily In
two main inland villages located on the Colma and San Bruno Creeks and a seasonal village along the
coast at Mussel Rock. The Ohlones were a small and very mobile tribe of hunters and gatherers that
travelled to find food and other items that were available only in certain areas on the Peninsula. The
women and children were responsible for gathering the nuts, roots, berries, and shellfish such as mussels
and clams. They were also responsible for preparing the meals and making baskets to store the food.
The males were responsible for hunting and fishing. The Ohlone hunted deer, rabbits, wild geese, and
ducks to go along with the gathered food. Most of the fishing was done on the inland bay areas, while
the coast provided sea otters and seals. Items which could not be found locally were usually obtained
through trading with neighboring villages.
Mussel Rock Archaeological Site
The Mussel Rock archaeological site, San Mateo County Site SMa-72, is the only site in Daly City from
which artifacts of the Ohlone tribe were uncovered. During the excavation and grading of the area in
1977, for the construction of the waste transfer station, archaeologists uncovered the largest amount of
Ohlone artifacts of any of the registered sites in San Mateo County. Artifacts uncovered at the site
included: human remains; cooking and food preparation tools; hunting and fishing items; shell jewelry;
and mammal remains. Archaeologists have determined that the artifacts date back to approximately
1500 A.D.
190                                                Daly City 2030 General Plan | Resource Management Element
Resource Management Goal, Policies, and Tasks
This section of the Resource Management Element establishes a single goal and several objectives and
policies that provide direction for the management of natural and cultural resources. The goal provides
the definitive statement of how natural and cultural resources will be handled by local government. The
objectives provide a means how attainment of the goal can be measured, while the policies provide a
more specific statement for achievement of the goal as well as direction for the formulation of
programs to implement the goal.
         "Ensure the enhancement and preservation of existing resources by effectively
         managing their development and conservation and providing adequate
         recreational open space for future generations."
Since the Resource Management Element contains the Open Space and Conservation Elements,
components of both are incorporated into a single goal. Several of the components of the goal
warrant further consideration. The management of resources is directly related to the first component
of the goal, assuring the preservation and enhancement of existing resources. The preservation of
resources speaks directly to air, vegetation and wildlife, and visual resources as well as open space. In
addition to preserving resources, efforts should also be directed at enhancing resources. The goal seeks
to ensure that past efforts to improve air quality; preserve and enhance environmentally sensitive and
rare and endangered species habitat: and provide open space areas are continued and given priority
attention. It also seeks to extend those efforts to cultural resources, including both historic and
archaeologically significant resources, so they can also be preserved.
Second, the goal seeks to effectively manage the development and conservation of resources.
Resource development focuses on water and open space resources. The development and
conservation of water and open space resources is required to maintain the high quality of these
resources. For example, to maintain the quality of the existing water supply, new supplies must be
developed and existing supplies conserved. To allow development in areas and still maintain adequate
open space, careful attention must be paid to the type of development and its impact on the existing
environment.
The third facet of the goal, providing adequate recreational open space for future generations, is
directed at maintaining and expanding recreational opportunities for existing and future residents.
Recreational opportunities are provided through a citywide system of parks, tot lots, and indoor
facilities. Due to a lack of an adequate mixture of facilities in the City, overall system deficiencies exist.
The City should make every effort to protect and maintain existing parks, tot lots, and recreational open
space areas as well as provide additional facilities in order to alleviate system-wide deficiencies.
To implement the resource management goal, this element provides for the following policies and tasks:
Water Resources
Policy RME-1:       Reduce average per capita demand by implementing cost effective water
                    conservation programs that address all applicable methods of water conservation.
                    Task RME-1.1: Enforce the provisions of the Indoor Water Use Efficiency Ordinance
                    through an extensive public outreach campaign to residents and contractors, to be
                    completed by 2014.
Daly City 2030 General Plan | Resource Management Element                                                191
              Task RME-1.2: Explore mechanisms that would allow permanent retrofits for fixtures
              requiring replacement under 15.66.020 (A)(3) the provisions of the Indoor Water Use
              Efficiency Ordinance through an extensive public outreach campaign to residents
              and contractors, to be completed by 2014.
              Task RME-1.3: Develop a capital plan to retrofit plumbing fixtures at existing City
              facilities by 2015 and complete all retrofits by 2020.
Policy RME-2: Require drought resistant landscaping and water conserving irrigation methods in
              new development, and encourage the replacement of existing water-intensive
              landscaping.
              Task RME-2.1:       Enforce the provisions of the Water Conservation in Landscaping
              Ordinance and conduct a public education effort to ensure that residents,
              businesses, and contractors are aware of the Ordinance provisions.
              Task RME-2.2:       Examine the feasibility of a cost-effective turf buy-back program
              offered to owners of residential properties who voluntarily replace water intensive
              landscape with landscaping that meets predefined water efficiency standards.
Policy RME-3: Continue to use recycled wastewater for irrigating and explore opportunities to
              expand capacity to accommodate its use in development projects, landscaped
              medians, golf courses, cemeteries, parks, and school playgrounds.
Policy RME-4: For development projects which will create water demand exceeding a pre-defined
              amount, require that developers provide a water supply analysis for the project to
              demonstrate water availability to adequately serve the proposed project.
              Task RME-4.1:       Develop a water supply questionnaire for inclusion with any
              application involving 50 or more residential units, 50,000 square feet of commercial or
              industrial development, or other pre-defined development intensity that constitutes a
              significance threshold under CEQA.
              Task RME-4.2:       Amend the application submittal checklist to include a water
              supply analysis when necessary.
Air Resources
Policy RME-5: Assess projected air emissions from new development and associated construction
              and demolition activities in conformance with the Bay Area Air Quality Management
              District (BAAQMD) CEQA Guidelines, and relative to state and federal standards.
              Task RME-5.1:       Amend the Planning Division’s development review procedures to
              include a formal step that would help identify how a development project can
              incorporate design or functional changes that will minimize air quality impacts.
              Task RME-5.2:       Incorporate air quality significance thresholds into the Local
              Thresholds of Significance document identified in Program RME-1.
              Task RME-5.3:       Consider cumulative air quality impacts consistent with the region's
              Clean Air Plan and State law.
              Task RME-5.4:       Require the preparation of a Transportation Systems Management
              plan for new development that has been determined to contribute to a reduction in
              location air quality.
192                                         Daly City 2030 General Plan | Resource Management Element

                   Task RME-5.5:        Consult with BAAQMD to identify stationary and mobile TAC
                   sources and determine the need for and requirements of a health risk assessment for
                   proposed developments.
Policy RME-6:      Minimize exposure of residents to objectionable smoke and odors by proactively
                   regulating potential sources.
                   Task RME-6.1:        For new, expanded, or modified development proposals
                   (including tenant improvements) that are potential sources of objectionable smoke
                   and odor, require an analysis of possible smoke and odor impacts and the provision
                   of smoke and odor minimization and control measures as mitigation.                 The
                   requirements for such shall be codified within the Daly City Municipal Code.
                   Task RME-6.2:        Require new residential development projects and projects
                   categorized as sensitive receptors to be located an adequate distance from facilities
                   that are existing and potential sources of odor. An adequate separate distance will
                   be determined based upon the type, size and operations of the facility.
Policy RME-7:      To the maximum extent fiscally reasonable, minimize air quality impacts in City
                   operations.
                   Task RME-7.1:        Develop an Environmentally Preferable Purchasing Policy which
                   requires City employees to consider the environmental attributes along with
                   traditional purchasing factors such as performance, safety, price and local
                   availability, when making purchasing decisions.
                   Task RME-7.2:        Compile a master fleet replacement schedule which identifies
                   vehicles in need of replacement (including heavy-duty and off-road vehicles) and
                   offers suggestions for the most environmentally friendly replacement.
                   Task RME-7.3:        Construct all new City facilities at a Leadership in Energy and
                   Environmental Design Gold standard.
Stormwater
Policy RME-8:      Through the development of a Stormwater Management Program, ensure that all new
                   development complies with applicable municipal stormwater Municipal Regional
                   Stormwater NPDES Permit by incorporating controls that reduce water quality impacts
                   over the life of the project in way that is both technically and economically feasible,
                   and reduces pollutants in stormwater discharges to the maximum extent practicable.
                   Task RME-8.1: Appoint a stormwater control coordinator charged with overseeing
                   the implementation of the City’s Stormwater Management Program. The coordinator
                   shall be responsible for reviewing public and private stormwater control mechanism
                   proposals, requiring amendments to such controls as part of the development review
                   process, and their proper construction.
                   Task RME-8.2:       Evaluate acceptable development standards for stormwater
                   treatment mechanisms and publish such standards for distribution to developers.
                   Such standards shall be based on a thorough evaluation of modern stormwater
                   control mechanisms and shall, to the extent feasible, consider soil conditions in
                   various parts of Daly City.
Daly City 2030 General Plan | Resource Management Element                                             193

               Task RME-8.3: In locations where high density residential development is prevalent
               (e.g., east of Interstate 280), consider the use of the public right of way as an
               appropriate location for privately maintained stormwater treatment mechanisms.
               Task RME-8.4: Assess projected stormwater impacts from new development in
               conformance with the San Mateo County Water Pollution Prevention Program,
               CEQA Guidelines and relative to state and federal standards.
               Task RME-8.5: Ensure the regular inspection of stormwater treatment facilities as
               required by the Municipal Regional Stormwater NPDES Permit.
Policy RME-9:  Balance stormwater mitigation measures with the other inherent benefits of higher
               density development that is in close proximity to public transit, i.e., reduction of
               Vehicle Miles Traveled (VMT) on local and regional roadways, to the extent permited
               under the Municipal Regional Stormwater Permit.
               Task RME-9.1:      Continue to explore low-impact development credits for high
               density transit-oriented development within the City’s established Priority
               Development Areas with the Regional Water Quality Control Board.
               Task RME-9.2:      Ensure during the update of the Zoning Ordinance the City’s
               compliance with the State’s “by right” program requirement whereby sites identified
               within the Housing Element and part of the City’s adequate sites program continue to
               provide zoning that allows the residential density identified within Table HE-27.
               Task RME-9.3:      Amend the Zoning Ordinance to provide flexibility in development
               regulations in instances where the City determines that, in the review of a
               development proposal, a stormwater regulation will effectively decrease the number
               of units allowable within a parcel identified in Table HE-27.
Open Space
Policy RME-10: Minimize development in all areas designated as open space preservation.
               Task RME-10.1:     Review the land uses in the Zoning Ordinance to ensure that
               allowed uses are consistent with the intent of the Open Space Preservation
               designation.
Policy RME-11: Areas designated as open space recreation-public shall continue to be maintained
               and upgraded by the Public Works Department.
               Task RME-11.1:     Continue to collect AB1600 impact fees for new development
               and, from time to time, re-assess the amount and distribution of monies collected
               from such fees to ensure that these amounts are sufficient to provide an adequate
               pro-rata contribution toward the public improvements identified in the City’s Capital
               Improvement Program (same as Task LU-4.4B).
Park Facilities
Policy RME-12: Encourage a diverse, equitable, and integrated system of park facilities throughout
               Daly City that are accessible to all age, social, and economic groups and all
               geographic areas of the City.
194                                          Daly City 2030 General Plan | Resource Management Element

                   Task RME-12.1:        Program for and undertake improvements to develop Mussel Rock
                   Park as a passive recreational area for community use. All improvements within the
                   park shall be in substantial conformance with a Public Access Management Plan
                   prepared for the site which shall include the following:
                   1. Public access paths provided in such a way as to ensure connectivity, maximize
                        utility, and provide access along the entirety of the park site.
                   2. Public access amenities (such as benches, table and chairs, bicycle racks, trash
                        and recycling receptacles, etc.), including benches in the public view overlook
                        at appropriate locations.
                   3. Public access signs to facilitate, manage, and provide public access to the park,
                        including the provision of directional signs.
                   4. At a minimum, two interpretive panels relevant to the site shall be provided at
                        locations that maximize their utility.
Policy RME-13:     Require the dedication of parkland or the payment of an in-lieu fee in accordance
                   with Subdivision Map Act.
                   Task RME-13.1:        Review and amend the park in-lieu fee payment requirement as
                   necessary to assure that the formula for park in-lieu fee payment is more
                   standardized equitable among all residential uses, including rental housing (see also
                   Task LU-17.3).
Policy RME-14:     Prioritize the dispersal of park in-lieu fees collected from the development of new
                   subdivisions to ensure that the fees are spent in the appropriate areas (see Program
                   RME-3).
Visual Resources
Policy RME-15:     Require public visual access easements in new developments along the coastline.
                   Task RME-15.1: Amend the Zoning Ordinance to require, as a part of a complete
                   development application, for projects over a certain size located in the Resource
                   Protection (RP) Zone, that an analysis be included which evaluates potential visual
                   impacts caused by the proposed development.
                   Task RME-15.2: Develop, as a part of Program RME-1, a significant threshold for visual
                   impacts and develop potential mitigation criteria for such impacts.
Vegetation and Wildlife
Policy RME-16:     Continue to recognize the importance of the San Bruno Mountain Habitat
                   Conservation Plan (HCP), uphold the integrity of the concepts behind the plan, and
                   respect the agreements that serve to implement it (same as Task LU-22).
                   Task RME-16.1:        Through the development review process, the City shall continue
                   to assist with the effort of preserving undisturbed habitat containing unique flora and
                   fauna in areas adjacent to San Bruno Mountain State and County Park. Where
                   mandated by State or federal law, the City shall adopt mitigation measures to either
                   reduce to insignificance or eliminate the impacts on these resources as part of the
Daly City 2030 General Plan | Resource Management Element                                               195
               approval private development occurring in the HCP area or vicinity (same as Task LU
               22.1).
               Task RME-16.2:      Amend the Zoning Ordinance to require approval of a San Bruno
               Mountain Site Activity Permit for any construction projects located with the HCP area
               (same as Task LU-22.2).
Policy RME-17: Preserve environmentally sensitive habitat by imposing strict regulations on
               development in areas that have been identified as environmentally sensitive habitat.
               Task RME-17.1:      The City shall continue to consult with the Department of Fish and
               Game, Army Corps of Engineers, and other regulatory agencies to identify
               avoidance or mitigation measures where special status species and their respective
               habitats would be potentially significantly impacted by development proposals (see
               also Task LU-24.2).
Policy RME-18: Preserve trees that do not pose a threat to the public safety.
               Task RME-18.1: Consider amendments to Chapter 12 (Streets, Sidewalks, and Public
               Spaces) that would severely restrict or disallow topping or removal by private
               individuals and public utilities of live, growing trees within the public right-of-way
               which do not pose an imminent threat to the public safety.
               Task RME-18.2: Consider amendments Chapter 17 (Zoning) to disallow the topping or
               removal by private individuals and public utilities of live, growing trees on private
               property which were required as a condition of development approval (including
               Design Review approval) and do not pose an imminent threat to the public safety.
Historical and Archaeological Resources
Policy RME-19  Undertake measures to protect and preserve historic and archaeological resources.
               Task RME-19.1:      Comply with State statues related to historical and archaeological
               resources.
               Task RME-19.2:      Serve as a leader in historic preservation by preserving, restoring,
               and reusing City-owned historic resources where feasible.
               Task RME-19.3:      Through the City’s Facade Improvement Program, encourage the
               preservation of facades and exteriors that exhibit historical architectural
               characteristics, e.g., those identified by the City’s Mission Street Urban Design Plan.
               Task RME-19.4:      Continue to support community projects that will add to the
               knowledge of Daly City’s past, including the continuing work of the History Guild of
               Daly City/Colma and the Daly City History Museum.
               Task RME-19.5:      Cooperate with civic organizations in the placement                 of
               appropriate monuments or plaques to publicize or memorialize historic sites.
Policy RME-20: Recognize the physical differences between different parts of the City and regulate
               land uses within these areas accordingly (same as Policy LU-7).
               Task RME-20.1:      Retain elements in the Zoning Ordinance which effectively
               preserve the architectural character of Daly City’s older neighborhoods (e.g.,
               predominant setback and tandem parking allowances) (same as Task LU-7.1).
196                                           Daly City 2030 General Plan | Resource Management Element

                      Task RME-20.2:      Amend the Zoning Ordinance to provide development regulations
                      that more closely reflect the predominant neighborhood character established when
                      the neighborhood was constructed (e.g., provide for three-foot side yard setbacks in
                      Westlake where there is currently no side setback required). Where necessary,
                      establish either separate or overlay zoning districts for such neighborhoods (same as
                      Task LU-7.2).
                      Task RME-20.3:      Update the Residential Design Guidelines to provide bulk, mass,
                      and architectural guidelines for exterior additions and reconstructed homes in
                      neighborhoods which possess unique architectural characteristics (same as Task LU-
                      7.3).
                      Task RME-20.4:      Incorporate design features in new development that reflects the
                      character of the neighborhood, to ensure that new construction is compatible with
                      existing development (same as Task LU-7.4).
Resource Management Programs
Current Programs for Resource Management
Resource Protection Combining District
The Resource Protection Combining District may be used in conjunction with an underlying zoning
district classification such as R-1 Single Family Residential or OS Open Space. The intent of the District is
to ensure that the character and intensity of development does not create adverse impacts on
sensitive resources or geotechnically hazardous areas. The District outlines specific regulations for the
preservation of designated open space areas and the creation of buffer zones between designated
open space areas and development. The Resource Protection Combining District is currently used only
in conjunction with the R-1 single family residential zoning district for those properties directly fronting
coastal bluffs. The district requires that a Use Permit be acquired prior to any construction within the
zone and prohibits construction within fifty feet of a bluff, on a slope greater than thirty percent or
where the vertical relief is ten feet or greater. Additional District regulations prohibit grading or filling
operations except for those required as drainage and erosion control measures and the provision for
permanent vista corridors of at least five feet or fifteen percent of the lot, whichever is greater.
S-1 Design Review Combining District
The S-1 Design Review Combining District may be used in conjunction with any underlying zoning district
classification. The intent of the District is to create, preserve, and enhance areas of unusual civic
significance. The District requires that special design treatment and consideration of the aesthetic and
functional relationships of the surrounding development, be applied in these areas. The S-1 Design
Review Combining District is most prevalent in the Civic Center/ Sullivan Corridor area and is used in
conjunction with both residential and commercial zoning districts in this area. The District requires that
each project be reviewed by the City Planner to determine the consistency of the project with the
requirements of the District. If the City Planner determines that the project is consistent and does not
require further consideration by the Planning Commission, the City Planner refers the project directly to
the City Council for their review.
Daly City 2030 General Plan | Resource Management Element                                                 197
San Bruno Mountain Habitat Conservation Plan
The Habitat Conservation Plan (HCP) was prepared to protect endangered species habitat, while
allowing limited development on portions of San Bruno Mountain. The intent of the HCP is to preserve
the endangered species located on the mountain and their habitat. As a requirement of the HCP, Daly
City entered into an agreement with federal, state and local agencies as well as participating land
owners and developers, to implement the policies contained in the HCP. The HCP contains specific
mitigation measures that must be incorporated into developments within HCP boundaries, including:
plans for the reclamation of lands which are to be graded; the payment of a fee to San Mateo County
to operate the HCP; a ban on pesticide spraying; the designation of a buffer area; and the construction
of a habitat fence to separate developed and undeveloped areas.
Proposed Programs for Resource Management
Program RME-1:            Local Thresholds of Significance Guidelines
Objective:                To make objective and consistent determinations of environmental impact
                          significance for discretionary projects subject to CEQA review
Responsible Agencies:     Department of Economic and Community Development, Public Works
                          Department, and Department of Water/ Wastewater Resources
Time Frame:               2013-2014
Funding Source:           General Fund
Activity:                 This program requires that the City develop a policy document that
                          establishes the quantitative or qualitative standards used to determine when
                          non-exempt discretionary projects will likely have significant environmental
                          impacts. The document would serve as an analytical tool used to make
                          consistent determinations of significance. Project environmental reviews
                          undertaken by different staff members or at different times would employ a
                          standard methodology, increasing the certainty for both the agency and the
                          applicant. The City’s efficiency in preparing an initial study would also be
                          improved. Development of the Local Thresholds will place the City further in
                          compliance with the CEQA Guidelines' requirement that the City’[s
                          determination of significance be "based to the extent possible on scientific
                          and factual data" (Guidelines Section 15064).
Program RME-2:            Residential Design Review Guidelines
Objective:                To preserve the architectural integrity of residential buildings while minimizing
                          the impacts
Responsible Agencies:     Department of Economic and Community Development, Planning division;
                          City Attorney
Time Frame:               2015
Funding Source:           General Fund
Activity:                 Design review has been required for new development as either conditions of
                          approval or in areas with a S-1 Design Review Combining District zoning
                          overlay. Design review is currently handled by committees assigned by the
                          Mayor and only three areas in the City, the Redevelopment Areas on Juniper°
                          Serra Boulevard and Mission Street and the Sullivan Corridor Specific Plan
                          area, have specific guidelines for design review. The preparation of a specific
                          ordinance for regulating design review procedures should be enacted to
198                                              Daly City 2030 General Plan | Resource Management Element

                            ensure high quality design not only in specific areas, but throughout the entire
                            City. The ordinance would create specific criteria for design review, create a
                            design review committee and develop a fee structure for design review
                            projects which are not part of a discretionary review procedure.
Program RME-3:              Park System Analysis and Master Plan
Objective:                  Address existing and future park needs
Responsible Agency:         Department of Public Works
Time Frame:                 2015
Funding Source:             General Fund
Activity:                   The preparation of a Parks and Recreation Analysis and Master Plan is
                            proposed to address existing and future opportunities for parks and
                            recreational services for the City. Envisioned as a ten year plan, the Master
                            Plan is to be a comprehensive document that will include a format for the
                            planning, selection, dedication and funding of future park land in the City. A
                            park system analysis would inventory existing park sites and outline future
                            needs of the current park space. The proposed Master Plan will focus on the
                            planning for new sites or expanding and/or improving existing sites. In
                            addition, the Master Plan would allow priorities to be adopted and that
                            individual park site locations and development plans be determined at the
                            time the acquisition and development process begins.
Daly City 2030 General Plan | Resource Management Element                                               199
Appendix A
Environmentally Sensitive Habitat - Coastal Zone
                                      Daisaku Ikeda Canyon
                                                                         Native or           Observed
Latin Name                              Common Name
                                                                         Invasive            Frequency
Lupinus arboreus                        Yellow bush lupine               Native              Abundant
Eriophyllum staechadifolium             Lizard tail                                          Abundant
Scrophluaria californica                Bee plant                        Native              Abundant
Anaphalis margaritacea                  Pearly everlasting               Native              Localized
Gnaphalium species (2 types)            Cudweed                                              Localized
Epilobium franciscanum                  Willow herb                      Native              Abundant
Matricaria matricariodes                Pineapple weed                   Invasive            Abundant
Stachys species                         Hedge nettle                     Invasive            Localized
Brassica species                        Wild Mustard                     Invasive            Abundant
Raphinus sativus                        Wild radish                      Invasive            Abundant
Melilotus indica                        Yellow sweet clover              Invasive            Abundant
Heracleum lanatum                       Cow parsnip                      Native              Abundant
Erigeron glaucus                        Seaside daisy                    Native              Localized
CIrcium species                         Thistle                                              Infrequent
Baccharis pilularis                     Coyote bush                      Native              Localized
Artemesia caifornica                    Sagebrush                        Native              Localized
Mesembryanthemum edule                  Hottentot fig                    Invasive            Localized
Mesembryanthemmn chilense               Sea fig                                              Localized
Aehillea millefolium                    White yarrow                     Invasive            Abundant
Castineje species                       Indian Paintbrush                                    Infrequent
Vicia species (3 types)                 Vetch                                                Abundant
Gallium species                         Bedstraw                                             Localized
Geranium species                        Storksbill, cranebill                                Localized
Lobularia maritima                      Sweet alyssum                    Invasive            Localized
Anagallis arvenis                       Scarlet pimpernel                Invasive            Localized
Solarium species                        Nightshade                       Invasive            Abundant
Rubus species                           Blackberry                                           Abundant
Senicio elegans                                                          Native              Infrequent
Sidalcea species                        Checkerbloom                     Invasive            Localized
Note: Observed frequencies identified above varry by season and general environmental conditions
200                                                 Daly City 2030 General Plan | Resource Management Element
                                      MUSSEL ROCK CANYON
                                                                      Native or           Observed
Latin Name                              Common Name
                                                                      Invasive            Frequency
Lupinus arboreus                        Yellow bush lupine            Native              Abundant
Eriophyllum staechadifolium             Lizard tail                   Invasive            Abundant
Scrophluaria californica                Bee plant                     Native              Abundant
Anaphalis margaritacea                  Pearly everlasting            Native              Infrequent
Gnaphalium species (2 types)            Cudweed                                           Infrequent
Epilobium franciscanum                  Willow herb                   Native              Localized
Stachys species                         Hedge nettle                  Invasive            Localized
Brassica species                        Wild Mustard                  Invasive            Abundant
Raphinus sativus                        Wild radish                   Invasive            Abundant
Melilotus indica                        Yellow sweet clover           Invasive            Localized
Heracleum lanatum                       Cow parsnip                   Native              Abundant
Erigeron glaucus                        Seaside daisy                 Native              Localized
Baccharis pilularis                     Coyote bush                   Native              Abundant
CastIlleja species                      Indian Paintbrush                                 Infrequent
Artemesia caifornica                    Sagebrush                     Native              Localized
Vicia species (3 types)                 Vetch                                             Abundant
Geranium species                        Storksbill, cranebill         Invasive            Localized
Lobularia maritima                      Sweet alyssum                 Invasive            Abundant
Anagallis arvenis                       Scarlet pumpernel             Invasive            Abundant
Solarium species                        Nightshade                                        Abundant
Rubus species                           Blackberry                    Native              Abundant
Sidalcea species                        Checkerbloom                                      Localized
Cotula coronopifolia                    Brass buttons                 Invasive            Localized
PotentiIla egedei                       Silverweed                    Native              Localized
Mimulus auranticus                      Bush monkey-flower            Native              Infrequent
Mimulus guttatus                        Common monkey-flower          Native              Infrequent
Linocera involucrata                    Twinberry                     Native              Infrequent
Conium maculatum                        Poison hemlock                Invasive            Abundant
Lotus corniculatus                      Bird's foot trefoil           Invasive            Infrequent
Satureja douglasil                      Yerba buena                   Native              Abundant
Arnsinckia spectabilis                  Coast fiddleneck              Native              Infrequent
Sanicula crassicaulis                   Pacific sanicle               Native              Localized
Solanum species                         Nightshade                                        Abundant
Ribes species                           Currants                                          Infrequent
Achillea mellefolium                    Common yarrow                 Invasive            Abundant
Lathyrus species                        Beach pea                                         Infrequent
Senecio milcanioides                    German Ivy                    Invasive            Localized
Dudleya caespitosa                      Live forever                  Native              Localized
Helenium bolanderi                      Sneezeweed                    Native              Infrequent
Phacelia malvifolia                     Stinging phacelia             Native              Infrequent
Equiselum species                       Horsetail                                         Infrequent
Myrica califomica                       Wax myrtle                    Native              Abundant
Rhus toxicodendron                      Poison oak                    Native              Abundant
Corladeria argentea                     Panpas grass                  Invasive            Localized
Salix species                           Willow
Note: Observed frequencies identified above varry by season and general environmental conditions
Daly City 2030 General Plan | Resource Management Element                                            201
    Appendix B
    Environmentally Sensitive Habitat – San Bruno Mountain
                                          San Bruno Mountain
                        Rare, Endangered/Endemic, and Range Limit Plants
                                            Common                                  Observed
    Latin Name                                                        CNPS Code
                                            Name                                    Frequency
    Maieanthemum dilatatum                  False Lily of the Valley                Rare
    Allocarya chorisiana                                                            Rare
    Sambucus callicarpa                     Red elderberry                          Rare
    Silene scouleri                                                                 Rare
    Silene v erecunda                                                 2-2-1-3       Rare
    Chtysopsis v illosa                     Golden Aster                            Frequent
    Cirsium quercetorum                     Brow nie Thistle                        Occasional
    Grindelia maritima                      Steyermark                3-3-3-3       Rare
    Helianthella castanea                                             2-2-1-3       Rare
    Layia hieracioides                                                              Frequent
    Pentechaeta bellidiflora                                          2-2-1-3       Rare
    Senecio aronicoides                     Butterw eed                             Frequent
    Tanacetum camphoratum                   Dune Tansy                2-2-2-3       Rare
    Arabis blepharaphylla                   Coast Rock Cress          1-2-2-3       Frequent
    Erysimum franciscanum                   Franciscan Wallflow er    1-2-2-3       Occasional
    Arctostaphylos imbricata                Manzanita                 3-3-3-3       Occasional
    Arctostaphylos montaraenisis            Montara Manzanita         2-1-1-3       Rare
    Arctostaphylos pacifica                                           3-3-3-3       Rare
    Arctostaphylos uv a-ursi                Bear-berry                              Occasional
    Vaccinium arbuscula                     Huckleberry                             Rare
    Lathyrus v estitus                      Pacific Pea                             Common
    Clarkia rublcunda                       Farew ell-to-Spring                     Frequent
    Chorizanthe pungens                     Spine-flow er                           Rare
    Grossularia leptosma                    Bay/Canyon Gooseberry
    Castilleja franciscana                  Franciscan Paint Brush                  Occasional
    Orthocarpus florib-undus                                                        Rare
    Ligusticum appiifolum                   Lov eage                  1-1-1-3       Occasional
    CNPS R-E-V-D CODE
    R (Rarity)
     1 - rare, but found in sufficient numbers and distributed w idely enough that the
         potential for extinction or extirpation is low at this time.
     2 - occurence confined to sev eral populations or to one extended population.
     3 - occurence limited to one or a few highly restericted popultaions,or present in such
         small numbers that it is seldom reported.
    E (Endangerment)
     1 - not endangered
     2 - endangered in a portion of its range
     3 - endangered throughout its range
    Vigor (Vigor)
     1 - increasing or stable in number
     2 - declining in number
     3 - approaching extinction or extirpation
    D (Distribution)
     1 - more or less w idespread outside or California
     2 - rare outside of California
     3 - endemic to California
202                                                            Daly City 2030 General Plan | Resource Management Element

                                                   San Bruno Mountain
                                                     Insect Host Plants
           CNPS R-E-V-D CODE
           R (Rarity)
            1 - rare, but found in sufficient numbers and distributed w idely enough that the
                potential for extinction or extirpation is low at this time.
            2 - occurence confined to sev eral populations or to one extended population.
            3 - occurence limited to one or a few highly restericted popultaions,or present in such
                small numbers that it is seldom reported.
           E (Endangerment)
            1 - not endangered
            2 - endangered in a portion of its range
            3 - endangered throughout its range
           Vigor (Vigor)
            1 - increasing or stable in number
            2 - declining in number
            3 - approaching extinction or extirpation
           D (Distribution)
            1 - more or less w idespread outside or California
            2 - rare outside of California
            3 - endemic to California
           Plants - Larval Food
                1. Plantago erecta - larv al food plant for the Bay Checkerspot
                2. Sedum spathulifolium - larv al food plant for the San Bruno Elfin
                3. Lupinus albifrons - larv al food plant for the Mission Blue
                4. Lupinus v arlicolor - larv al food plant for the Mission Blue
                5. Lupinus formosus - larv al food plant for the Mission Blue
                6. Viola pedunculata - larv al food plant for the Callippe Silv erspot
                7. Lupinus arboreus - larv al food plant for the Tree Lupine Moth
                8. Orthocarpus densiflorus - larv al food plant for the Bay Checkerspot
           Other Plants - Host Plant, Rare, Endemic, and Range Limit
                1. Lomatium utriculaturn - host plant
                2. Chrysopsis v illosa - Golden Aster; range limit; host plant
                3. Cirsium quercetorum - Brow nie Thistle; range limit host plant
                4. Eriogonum latifolium - Wild Buckw heat; host plant
                5. Brodiaea pulchella - Blue dicks; host plant
                6. Carduus species - host plants
                7. Silybum rnarianum - Milk thistle; introduced host plant
                8. Pteridium auqilinum - Braken Fern: host plant
                9. Monardella v illosa - Coyote Mint. Pennyroyal; host plant
                10. Horkelia californica - California Horkelia; host plant
                11. Scabiosa atropurpurea - Pincushion Plant; host plant
                Species of Concern
                Common Name                           Latin Name
                Mission Blue butterfly             Plebejus icariodes missionensis
                Callippe Silv erspot               Speyeria callippe callippe
                San Bruno Elfin                    Callophrys mossil bayensis
                Bay Checkerspot                    Euphydryas editha bayensis
                San Francisco Garter Snake Thamnophis sirtalis tetrataenia
                Solitary Bee                       Dufourea stage
                San Francisco Tree Lupine MoGrapholitha edw ardsiana
                Source:
                Adoption and implementation of San Bruno Mountain Habitat Conserv ation Plan
                Endangered Species Act Section 10a permit. Final EI R and EA. Nov ember 1982.
                County of San Mateo and US Dept. of the I nterior.
Daly City 2030 General Plan | Resource Management Element                                           203
204 Daly City 2030 General Plan | Resource Management Elemen
Introduction
Scope and Role of the Noise Element
Noise in excessive levels and over prolonged time periods has the potential to incrementally degrade
the quality of life in Daly City. Studies have shown that excessive noise can have adverse physiological
and psychological effects. Extreme levels can cause pain and hearing loss. Continuous exposure to
low-level noise can present long-term impacts to human health such as raising blood pressure, lessening
the quality of sleep, or inhibiting children’s ability to learn.
In Daly City, the most prevalent noise sources are from motor vehicle traffic on heavily traveled
roadways like Mission Street or Interstate 280, BART trains, and noise from aircraft associated with San
Francisco International Airport (SFO). Although the city is largely built-out, redevelopment of properties
with more intense land uses, expansion of BART and San Francisco International Airport operations, and
increased peak-hour traffic along area roadways will likely add to the City’s noise levels. Because the
City’s population will rise in locations most likely to experience increases in noise (e.g., in close proximity
to freeways and transit), an increasingly greater proportion of the population will be exposed to these
increasing noise levels.
Controlling noise at its source to acceptable levels can make a substantial improvement in the quality
of life for people living and working in Daly City. When this is not feasible, the city can apply additional
measures to limit the effect of noise on future land uses, which include spatial separation, site planning,
and building design.
The Noise Element provides an overview of how much noise is already in the environment, a framework
for how sound will be measured and regulated, and policy direction to guide decision makers in
regulating new uses that either produce excessive noise or expose persons or institutions to
unacceptable noise levels.
State Laws Affecting the Noise Element
State planning law requires every city and county to adopt a Noise Element. In preparing the Noise
Element, state law requires that the City recognize guidelines for noise element preparation set forth by
the State Office of Noise Control (Government Code Section 65302).
According to the guidelines, the City must identify the extent of noise exposure through actual
measurement or the use of noise modeling. Noise level contours must be mapped and the conclusions
Daly City 2030 General Plan | Noise Element                                                                 205

of the element used as a basis for land use decisions. Technical data relating to mobile and point
sources must be collected and synthesized into a set of noise control policies and programs identified
that “minimizes the exposure of community residents to excessive noise.” The element must include
implementation measures and possible solutions to existing and foreseeable noise problems.
Furthermore, the policies and standards must be sufficient to serve as a guideline for compliance with
sound transmission control requirements. The noise element directly correlates to the land use,
circulation, and housing elements.
In addition to specific requirements for the Noise Element, state law obligates the City to ensure that its
General Plan is in conformance with the San Mateo County Comprehensive Airport Land Use Plan
(CLUP), adopted in 1996. The CLUP identifies policies and criteria to help achieve compatibility
between proposed land use development and/or proposed airport development with airport and
aircraft operations. The plan is administered by the City/County Association of Governments of San
Mateo County (C/CAG), which has conferred the airport land use planning process to the Airport Land
Use Committee. The Committee advises and recommends actions to C/CAG regarding the updating
of the Plan, and other land use compatibility issues affecting the three airports in San Mateo County.
Background Information
Identifying and Measuring Noise
Noise is generally defined as unwanted sound. Whether a sound is unwanted or not depends on a
number of factors, including when it occurs, what the listener is doing when it occurs, the characteristics
of the sound, and how intrusive it is above background (ambient) noise levels. In the urban
environment, different sounds possess different characteristics that make some sounds more unwanted
than others, including the loudness or intensity of the sound, its duration, its repetition rate, and its
unfamiliarity or uniqueness.
Common noise levels are identified in Figure NE-1. As shown in the figure, noise is measured in decibels
(dBA) using a measuring device which closely approximates the way the human ear responds to sound.
The threshold of human hearing roughly corresponds to 0 dBA while the threshold of pain is
approximately 120 dBA; 120 dBA corresponds to a jet taking off at 200 feet from the source. Decibels
are calculated on a logarithmic scale. An increase of 10 decibels represents a ten-fold increase in
sound level, although the sound is perceived as twice as loud. For example, 65 dBA is perceived to be
about twice as loud as 55 dBA. An increase of 3 dBA is just barely perceptible to the human ear; a 5
dBA increase is clearly noticeable; and a 10 dBA increase is heard as an approximate doubling in
loudness.
Although a single noise level value may adequately describe the noise at a particular location at any
given instant in time, noise levels vary continuously throughout the day and include different types of
noise. Continuous noise in the distance for example, is called ambient noise. Ambient noise contributes
to noise levels when the listener experiences it in combination with a succession of identifiable or
intrusive noise events.
Noise descriptors are used to describe the time-varying character of ambient noise by itself and when in
combination with intrusive noise events. The Noise Equivalent Level (Leq) is such a descriptor and is
representative of an equivalent constant sound level over a given period of time. The actual noise
measured during a given period of time, say 24 hours, varies; a single noise event during the time period
may have reached 90 dBA the Lmax and the lowest may have been 45 dBA while the Leq representing
that time frame may be 55 dBA Leq. The 90 dBA level represents the most intrusive noise event during
the measuring period and is referred to as the Lmax. Intrusive noise events are of particular importance in
understanding and assessing aircraft noise impacts.
206                                                                Daly City 2030 General Plan | Noise Element

Community Noise Equivalent Level (CNEL)
People are usually more sensitive to noise in the nighttime than they are during the daytime. Two
factors contribute to this increased sensitivity. First, during the evening and nighttime, outdoor ambient
noise levels are generally lower than in the daytime. Most offices and businesses are closed and
automobile traffic has decreased. Second, as household noise levels decrease during the evening,
changes in exterior nighttime noise levels can be more noticeable and annoying than such changes
are during the day.
To account for this sensitivity, a calculation called the Community Noise Equivalent Level (CNEL) is used
to divide the 24-hour day into three time periods: daytime (7:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m.), evening (7:00 p.m. to
10:00 p.m.), and nighttime (10:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m.). The evening sound levels are assigned a five
decibel penalty (or weighting) and the nighttime sound levels are assigned a 10 decibel penalty (or
weighting) prior to averaging with daytime hourly sound levels. In this way, the CNEL is a noise metric
that, if used to regulate noise, provides for a quieter evening and nighttime environment.
                     Figure NE-1: A-Weighted Sound Pressure Level (in decibels)
Daly City 2030 General Plan | Noise Element                                                            207
Noise Compatibility Guidelines
Because of its ability to account for human sensitivities, the CNEL is used in the implementation of the
Noise Compatibility Guidelines developed by the State Office of Noise Control and first adopted by
the City of Daly City in 1978. These guidelines establish compatibility criteria for common land uses and
are intended to ensure that new development proposals do not introduce excessive noise in a given
location to the detriment of existing uses. Conversely, the guidelines also discourage introducing new
uses to existing noise sources. For example, new residential construction in a location next to a busily
traveled roadway exhibited unacceptably high existing noise levels may be allowed, but only with
proper mitigation.
Figure NE-1 provides a matrix illustrating the compatibility of common land uses and a corresponding
range of noise levels. A “compatible” land use indicates that standard construction methods will
sufficiently attenuate exterior noise to an acceptable indoor noise level and people can carry out
outdoor activities with essentially no noise interference. In general, evaluation of a land use that falls
into the “conditionally compatible” noise environment should include consideration of the type of noise
source, the sensitivity of the noise receptor, and the degree to which the noise source may interfere with
speech, sleep, or other activities characteristic of the land use. Land uses which are normally
acceptable may require the implementation of mitigation measures supported by detailed noise
analyses. If the noise environment exceeds a certain criterion, new construction is prohibited.
     Figure NE-2: Noise Compatibility Guidelines
                                         Community Noise Exposure Level (CNEL)
       Land Use Receiving the Noise
                                       .
                                           55  60    65     70     75     80
                                                                               Normally acceptable
     Residential-Low Density, Single                                           Specified land use is satisfactory,
     Family, Duplex, Mobile Homes                                              based on the assumption that
                                                                               any buildings inv olv ed are of
                                                                               normal construction, without
     Residential -Multifamily                                                  and special noise insulation
                                                                               requirement.
                                                                               Conditionally acceptable
     Transient Lodging, Motels, Hotels
                                                                               New construction should be
                                                                               undertaken only after a de-
                                                                               tailed analysis of the noise
     Schools, Libraries, Churches,
                                                                               reduction requirements is
     Hospitals, Nursing Homes
                                                                               made and needed noise
     Auditoriums, Concert Halls,                                               insulation features included
     Ampitheaters                                                              in the design. Conv entional
                                                                               construction, but with closed
     Sports Arena, Outdoor Spectator                                           windows and fresh air supply
     Sports                                                                    systems will usually suffice.
     Playgrounds, Neighborhood                                                 Normally unacceptable
     Parks                                                                     New construction should
                                                                               generally be discouraged. If
                                                                               new construction does pro-
     Golf Courses, Riding Stables,                                             ceed, a detailed analysis of
     Water Recreation, Cemeteries                                              the noise reduction require-
                                                                               ments must be made and
                                                                               needed noise insulation fea-
                                                                               tures included in the design.
     Office, Business, Retail
     Commercial                                                                Clearly unacceptable
                                                                               New construction should
                                                                               generally not be undertaken.
     Industrial Manufacturing,
     Agirculture, Utilities
     Source: State of California Office of Noise Control
208                                                                                        Daly City 2030 General Plan | Noise Element

Existing Noise Environment
Introduction
This section describes the existing noise environment in Daly City. The section first describes various noise
sources and sensitive receptors in general, and in Daly City. A discussion of the noise monitoring and
modeling program that was used to develop the existing and projected (2035) noise contours in Daly
City closes the section.
Continuous Noise Sources
Noise sources in Daly City include freeways, arterials, and local major streets; noise from aircraft
associated with San Francisco International Airport; BART train operations; and to a lesser extent
commercial and industrial land uses. The level of noise along and nearby a freeway, arterial, or local
street is a function of the traffic volume, the speed of the traffic, and the types of vehicles in the traffic
stream (car, light or heavy truck). Heavier volumes of traffic produce more noise than lighter volumes of
traffic. Slower or congested traffic travelling along a freeway produces more noise than traffic
travelling at the posted freeway speed. Heavy trucks, tractor-trailers, and diesel buses are noisier than
standard passenger cars. Traffic volumes, however, must double over existing volumes for there to be a
perceptible (3 dBA) increase in noise levels. Traffic noise is usually more pronounced during morning
and evening peak commute hours. Major traffic noise sources in Daly City are Interstate 280, Highway
35, and Highway 1; John Daly, Hickey, Serramonte, Callan, Gellert, San Pedro, South Hill, Bayshore, and
Lake Merced Boulevards; Southgate, Eastmoor, St. Francis, Geneva, San Jose, El Camino, and Bellevue
Avenues; East Market, School, Mission, and 87th Streets; and King Drive.
Heliport and airport noise sources tend to be intrusive noise events that are short in duration. Intrusive
noise events resulting from aircraft fly-overs can reach 90-100 dBA, Leq for the brief (few seconds) fly-over
period. Intrusive noise events resulting from aircraft fly-over can raise the hourly noise level to 75 dBA,
Leq. The San Francisco International Airport is the only airport that has an effect on Daly City. Noise from
aircraft fly-overs affects the Serramonte neighborhood in the southeastern tip of the City. Seton
Medical Center was the location of the only heliport in Daly City prior to 2006 when medical transports
to the hospital ceased due to budget constraints.
Rapid transit lines, such as Bay Area Rapid Transit District (BART) are a source of noise. Noise from BART
trains is less intrusive and less intense than aircraft fly-overs. The highest hourly noise level from BART
operations in Daly City is less than 70 dBA, Leq. Bus lines that serve the BART Station are a source of noise
in Daly City. The noise from bus operations drops dramatically after midnight when BART ceases running
for the day.
Commercial and industrial land uses are a source of noise. Commercial land uses generate vehicular
and pedestrian traffic both of which add to the noise environment. Commercial uses, by their nature,
include noise sources such as the delivery of goods to a site; the unloading of the delivery; and
sometimes minor processing of the goods. Commercial uses in Daly City are centered along the Mission
Street corridor, at shopping centers such as Westlake, Serramonte, Skyline Plaza and St. Francis Square,
and pocketed in neighborhood commercial areas that serve an immediate neighborhood.
Industrial noise sources are usually more intrusive in nature than commercial noise sources. Delivery of
raw and finished materials, usually in large tractor-trailers; use of heavy equipment such as saws,
grinders and other machinery; and speaker systems add to the noise environment. Industrial land uses
are minimal in Daly City; are centered in the Bayshore neighborhood; and are of a less intense nature
than typical industrial uses.
Daly City 2030 General Plan | Noise Element                                                               209
Temporary Noise Sources
The noise sources described above are fairly continuous noise sources. The noise levels the uses
generate do vary over a 24-hour period, from business hours to evening hours, and they may cease on
weekends, Sundays or holidays; their pattern, however Is fairly continuous year round. Another type of
noise worthy of mention is temporary noise generated from construction activities.
Construction noise is intrusive and can reach up to 105 decibels at fifty feet from the source for pile
driving. Earthmoving equipment such as compactors, backhoes, tractors, trucks and graders range
from 70 to 95 dBA at 50 feet from the source. Impact equipment such as pneumatic wrenches, jack
hammers and pile drivers generate higher levels of noise. The noise range for this type of equipment is
80 to 105 dBA at 50 feet from the source.
Construction noise is shorter in duration than noise associated with fixed land uses. The typical time
frame for construction noise is three to nine months. Construction noise is regulated in Daly City through
the environmental review process by the Engineering and Planning Divisions. Typically, construction
activities are limited to the daytime hours, 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., and prohibited on weekends and
holidays. The time limitation protects residents near the construction activity from the higher noise levels
during the noise sensitive times of the day (evening and nighttime) and noise sensitive times of the week
(weekends when people are usually home).
Sensitive Receptors
Residential areas, hospitals and extended care facilities, schools, libraries, and parks and open spaces
are land uses that are considered more sensitive to high noise levels and changes in ambient noise
levels. High noise levels and intrusive noise can disrupt relaxation and sleep, convalescing, and the
enjoyment of open space and recreational areas.
Approximately 53 percent of Daly City is residential and of this, approximately 90 percent is low to
medium density and consists of predominantly single-family and duplex units. This land use category
also includes residential care facilities. Residential care facilities serve the elderly and physically and
mentally handicapped individuals in a home setting.
Seton Medical Center is the only hospital in Daly City. Other supervised medical care facilities include
three skilled nursing homes. Additionally there are three retirement communities in Daly City designed
to provide group residential care for the elderly,
Daly City has twenty-seven public elementary and high schools, and four libraries. Approximately
sixteen percent of Daly City is open space. Approximately fourteen percent of the total open space is
public and includes tot lots, and state, regional and local parks. Fifty-three percent of the total is open
space for preservation because of environmental factors that render the site undevelopable such as
soil and slope instability or because of lack of Infrastructure serving the site. Thirty-two percent of the
open space is private and includes golf courses, country clubs, and horse stables. Although there are
different categories of open space, the expected use is primarily relaxation and recreation. The
general location of sensitive receptors in Daly City is shown on the General Plan Land Use Map.
Noise Monitoring, Modeling and Mapping Methodology
State Planning Law (Government Code Section 65302) requires cities to prepare noise contours around
major noise sources. The requirement is designed to identify areas of noise impact. Daly City retained
the services of an acoustical consultant to conduct a noise monitoring program. The program included
six 24-hour noise measurements and thirteen short-term noise measurements. Noise contours were
developed and mapped in four decibel bands using the Community Noise Equivalent Level (CNEL)
metric.
210                                                                 Daly City 2030 General Plan | Noise Element
Existing Noise Levels
Six 48-hour and thirteen short-term noise measurements were taken throughout Daly City in July of 2011.
Freeway and major arterial roadway noise has generally increased by approximately one to two
decibels since noise measurements were taken in 1987 for the 1989 Noise Element. Noise levels in the
Serramonte area due to aircraft fly-overs have increased by approximately five decibels since 1987.
Increases in noise levels for the projected future year, 2035, will be insignificant in most areas. Increases
are expected to occur along freeways and arterials near the Bayshore neighborhood and some
segments of Junipero Serra Boulevard. Increases are projected to be between 0.5 and 7 decibels.
In establishing noise contours for land use planning it is customary to ignore noise attenuation afforded
by buildings, roadway elevations, and depressions, and to minimize the barrier effect of natural terrain
features. The result is a worst-case estimate of the existing and future (projected) noise environment.
The purpose of noise contours is to identify the potential need for more detailed acoustical studies, not
to predict with certainty the noise level throughout the City. The assumption is that it is desirable to
overestimate the potential noise at a future sensitive development site, than to underestimate the noise
environment and allow for potentially incompatible land use development. Buildings may be removed
as a part of future development which would result in eliminating the particular noise attenuation
feature. The noise attenuation provided by existing earthen berms or terrain may also be diminished by
future development.
Two types of noise contours are provided: one set reflecting traffic noise and another set reflecting
aircraft noise. The traffic noise contours, produced by computer modeling, utilize the time tested
Federal Highway Traffic Noise Prediction Model. This model represents more than 40 years of traffic noise
research.
The aircraft noise contours are based on contours produced by the Aircraft Noise Abatement Office of
the San Francisco International Airport (SFO). These contours are based on computer modeling and
validated by a noise monitoring system operated by SFO. This monitoring system includes 29 monitors
located around the Bay Area, one of which is located in the Serramonte area. This method is most
reliable in that it represents actual long term measurement data rather than computer modeling alone.
Results of Noise Monitoring: Existing Conditions
The Environmental Protection Agency has established 70 dBA, Leq as the noise level requisite to protect
the public from the health effects of severe noise exposure year round. This level also assumes a 24-hour
day exposure. The Leq (Noise Equivalent Level) is a fairly constant noise level and is less stringent than
the CNEL. CNEL values are typically three to four decibels higher than the Leq. Daly City meets the 70
dBA, Leq exposure level throughout the City in areas where there are sensitive receptors except for the
second story of homes along Station Avenue (discussed in Location C below), and buildings along
Mission Street and Geneva Avenue setback less than 65 feet from the centerline of the roadway. See
Figure NE-3 on page 222 for a depiction of the noise contours.
Location A: Serramonte Area. The purpose of this measurement was to characterize the noise exposure
in the Serramonte neighborhood from aircraft departing westbound from the San Francisco
International Airport. The background noise in the area is 50 to 55 dBA, Leq which is relatively low. The
maximum noise from aircraft flyovers often reaches 85 to 95 dBA, Lmax for a brief few seconds of the
flyover. As a result, the hourly noise levels fluctuate in this neighborhood depending on airport activity.
Table NE-1 below identifies the maximum noise levels and the time of those noise levels associated with
aircraft activity. The CNEL at this location is 70 dBA and the Leq is 65 dBA.
Daly City 2030 General Plan | Noise Element                                                               211
                                            Figure NE-3
                                            EXISTING
                                            NOISE LEVELS
                                              CITY OF DALY CITY
                                               NOISE ELEMENT
Daly City 2030 General Plan | Noise Element                     212
Table NE-1: Aircraft Events in the Serramonte Area
                       6-Jul-11                    7-Jul-11                       8-Jul-11
                    Time      Lmax      Time    Lmax       Time      Lmax      Time      Lmax
                  1:08 PM       87    1:37 AM    83      1:52 PM      85    12:20 AM       91
                  1:19 PM       83    1:44 AM    92      2:02 PM      93     1:36 AM       82
                  1:33 PM       82    1:54 AM    83      2:23 PM      92     1:45 AM       84
                  1:41 PM       81    1:59 AM    92      2:26 PM      92     2:07 AM       91
                  1:45 PM       81    2:37 AM    86      2:34 PM      86     2:16 AM       92
                  1:49 PM       83    3:02 AM    93      2:50 PM      87     2:41 AM       90
                  2:17 PM       91    7:26 AM    83      3:08 PM      89     8:05 AM       87
                  2:22 PM       93    8:02 AM    86      4:27 PM      86     9:04 AM       84
                  2:24 PM       94    9:04 AM    83      4:41 PM      85     9:11 AM       84
                  2:31 PM       81    9:08 AM    87      4:57 PM      88     9:23 AM       84
                  2:37 PM       85    9:10 AM    84      5:19 PM      86     9:28 AM       87
                  2:43 PM       91    9:22 AM    87      5:25 PM      91    11:04 AM       81
                  3:18 PM       89   11:06 AM    83      6:29 PM      86    11:30 AM       93
                  4:26 PM       86   11:47 AM    93      6:34 PM      88    11:58 AM       92
                  5:16 PM       89   11:59 AM    93      7:07 PM      89    12:00 PM       93
                  7:15 PM       89   12:06 PM    90      7:17 PM      92    12:12 PM       86
                  7:46 PM       88   12:17 PM    86      7:42 PM      90    12:19 PM       88
                  7:48 PM       80    1:00 PM    83      7:45 PM      85    12:54 PM       82
                 11:20 PM       93    1:21 PM    84      9:20 PM      84
                 11:50 PM       89    1:24 PM    82     10:11 PM      89
                                      1:33 PM    83     10:27 PM      84
                                      1:46 PM    93     11:23 PM      95
Location B: Clarinada Drive. The purpose of this measurement is to quantify the noise exposure to the
residents along Clarinada Drive. Homes in the area are somewhat protected from freeway noise as the
freeway is elevated and thus breaks the line of sight from the noise source to the receiver. The
neighborhood is also exposed to aircraft noise and local street traffic on Clarinada Drive. The measured
noise level at this location increased approximately seven decibels from the 1987 measurement due to
aircraft and traffic noise. The CNEL at this location is 70 dBA and the Leq is 66 dBA.
Location C: Station Avenue. The purpose of this measurement is to quantify the noise exposure to the
second story of homes along Station Avenue. The second-story of the homes are exposed to higher
noise levels than the first floor; this is because the first floors are shielded from noise by existing terrain.
The terrain shielding reduces noise exposure on the first floors by 5 to 10 decibels compared to the
second floors.
Environmental noise at this location is primarily generated by Interstate 280 traffic and BART train
operations. The CNEL in this location is 76 dBA and the Leq is 71 dBA. This represents the worst case
exterior noise exposure at the second story. The first story CNEL and Leq levels are 66 dBA and 61 dBA.
Location D: Mission Street. The purpose of this measurement is to quantify the noise exposure to homes
located on the east side of Mission Street behind the commercial frontage. Homes on the west side of
Mission Street are at a lower elevation that street level and are thus shielded from traffic noise. The
extent of the shielding is approximately 10 decibels; so quantification of the east side of Mission Street
represents a worst-case analysis. The CNEL is 70 dBA and the Leq is 64 dBA.
Daly City 2030 General Plan | Noise Element                                                                 213
Location E: Daly City BART. The purpose of this measurement is to quantify the noise exposure to homes
on the east side of the Daly City BART Station along Delong Street. The primary source of noise in the
area is bus traffic rather than BART trains. The noise level in the area drops significantly after bus and
BART train traffic ceases. The CNEL at this location is 68 dBA and the Leq is 64 dBA.
Location F: Geneva Avenue. The purpose of this measurement is to quantify the noise exposure to
buildings along Geneva Avenue generated by normal street traffic. The CNEL at this location is 74 dBA
and the Leq is 70 dBA. Increased noise levels expected along Geneva Avenue reflect the near doubling
of traffic along this arterial projected as a result of increased development in the Bayshore
neighborhood, Brisbane, and southeast San Francisco.
Projected Future Noise Environment
The following section describes the projected future noise environment in Daly City. The projected
future year selected on which to base the noise contours is 2030, the end of the planning period of the
current General Plan. See Figure NE-4 on page 225 for a depiction of future noise contours.
Future Noise Environment Predictions
The increase in CNEL noise exposure levels between the existing conditions and the 2035 future
conditions is low throughout the City. It is generally accepted that a three decibel increase is barely
perceptible.
Arterial roads in the Bayshore neighborhood are expected to increase between three and five decibels.
Bayshore Boulevard is projected to increase by 3 dB (to CNEL 72 dBA), Geneva Avenue by 2 dB (to
CNEL 76 dBA), Carter Street by 4 dB (to CNEL 68 dBA), and Guadeloupe Canyon Parkway by 5 dB (to
CNEL 68 dBA).
Portions of Junipero Serra Boulevard are expected to see a noise increase of 6 dB to 7 dB from new
developments. Hickey Boulevard between Gellert Boulevard and Interstate 280 is expected to increase
by 4 dB.
Portions of Lake Merced Boulevard, Serramonte Boulevard, Skyline Boulevard (Highway 35), Templeton
Avenue, and John Daly Boulevard are expected to have noise levels increase 2 dB. Interstate Highway
280 and State Highways 1 and 82 are expected to see increases of 1 dB. Other roads are expected to
see increases of 1 dB or less.
Generally, aircraft noise is projected to be reduced in the future based on quieter aircraft technology
and stricter regulations surrounding aircraft operations. An absolute prediction, however, cannot be
made due to the lack of data on future airport operations.
San Francisco International Airport Noise Environment
San Francisco International Airport (SFO) is located approximately six miles southwest of the City of Daly
City in a mostly unincorporated area of San Mateo County. The airport serves as the primary air carrier
airport in the San Francisco Bay area and the Northern California region. In 2009, approximately 18.2
million enplaned passengers (37.3 million annual passengers) used the airport, making it the tenth
busiest airport in the country and 20th busiest in the world based on passenger totals. SFO is owned and
operated by the City and County of San Francisco, and is administered by the San Francisco Airport
Commission and the Airport Director.
214                                                               Daly City 2030 General Plan | Noise Element
                                            Figure NE-4
                                            FUTURE
                                            NOISE LEVELS
                                            Sources: Charles Salter and Associates
                                                     City and County of San Francisco
                                                CITY OF DALY CITY
                                                 NOISE ELEMENT
Daly City 2030 General Plan | Noise Element                                           215

Airport Land Use Compatibility Plan
State law requires airport land use commissions to prepare and adopt an Airport Land Use Compatibility
Plan (ALUCP) for airports within their jurisdiction. In San Mateo County, the City/County Association of
Governments (C/CAG) has prepared the ALUCP for SFO in its designated role as the Airport Land Use
Commission (ALUC) for San Mateo County. C/CAG adopted the SFO ALUCP in November 2012. The
Plan identifies the following four areas of concern:
   Aircraft Noise Impact Reduction – To reduce the potential number of future airport area residents
    who could be exposed to adverse noise impacts from airport and aircraft operations.
   Overflight Notification – To establish an area within which aircraft flights to and from the Airport
    occur frequently enough and at a low enough altitude to be noticeable by noise-sensitive residents.
   Safety of Persons on the Ground and in Aircraft in Flight – To minimize the potential number of future
    residents and land use occupants exposed to hazards related to aircraft operations and accidents.
   Height Restrictions/Airspace Protection – To protect the navigable airspace around the Airport for
    the safe and efficient operation of aircraft in flight.
Airport Influence Areas
In compliance with State law, the ALUCP identifies the Airport Influence Areas (AIA) for SFO where
airport-related factors may significantly affect land uses or necessitate restrictions on those uses as
determined by the Airport Land Use Commission. The AIA includes two parts: Area A and Area B (see
SFO ALUCP adopted November 2012). Area A is the larger of the two areas and encompasses all of San
Mateo County. Area B lies within Area A and includes much of westerly Daly City exposed either to
aircraft noise above CNEL 65 dB or lying below critical airspace surfaces. Within Area A, state law
requires that people offering subdivided property for sale or lease to disclose the presence of all existing
and planned airports within two miles of the property. Within Area B, the ALUC reviews proposed land
use policy actions, including new general plans, specific plans, zoning ordinances, plan amendments,
rezonings, and land development proposals for consistency with the relevant land use compatibility
criteria in the plan. Task NE-11.1 requires routing such projects to the ALUC in compliance with this
requirement.
Noise Compatibility Criteria
When reviewing proposed policy actions and/or related development, the ALUC is required to
determine airport/land use compatibility using the safety compatibility criteria, airspace
protection/height limitation criteria, and noise compatibility criteria identified in the ALUCP. Figure NE-4
identifies the area within Daly City where airport noise exposure is great enough to warrant land use
controls to promote noise compatibility. This area is generally where aircraft noise is or is projected in
the year 2020 to be at levels above CNEL 65 dB, and primarily lies within the Serramonte neighborhood.
Within this area, compatibility of proposed land uses shall be determined according to the noise/land
use compatibility criteria shown in Table NE-2, which reflects the compatibility criteria identified in the
ALUCP. These criteria indicate whether a proposed land use is “compatible,” “conditionally
compatible,” or “not compatible” within each zone, designated by the identified CNEL ranges.
Any action that would either permit or result in the development or construction of a land use
considered to be conditionally compatible with aircraft noise of CNEL 65 dB or greater may be required
by the ALUC to record an avigation easement to the benefit of the City and County of San Francisco,
as proprietor of the Airport. Policy NE-11 ensures the City’s continued compliance with the ALUCP, and
provides that the City shall ensure that any ALUC requirement for an avigation easement will be
Daly City 2030 General Plan | Noise Element                                                              217

implemented prior to final approval or, if the project requires construction, prior to building permit
issuance.
Table NE-2: SFO Noise/Land Use Compatibility Criteria
                                                                              COMMUNITY NOISE EQUIVALENT LEVEL (CNEL)
                                 LAND USE                                  < 65 dB       65-70 dB       70-75 dB          > 75 dB
 Residential
     Residential, single family detached                                      Y              C            N (a)              N
     Residential, multi-family and single family attached                     Y              C            N (a)              N
     Transient lodgings                                                       Y              C               C               N
 Public/Institutional
     Public and Priv ate Schools                                              Y              C               N               N
     Hospitals and nursing homes                                              Y              C               N               N
     Places of public assembly, including places of worship                   Y              C               N               N
     Auditoriums, and concert halls                                           Y              C               C               N
     Libraries                                                                Y              C               C               N
     Outdoor music shells, amphitheaters                                      Y              N               N               N
 Recreational
     Outdoor sports arenas and spectator sports                               Y            Y (c)          Y (c)              N
     Nature exhibits and zoos                                                 Y              Y               N               N
     Amusements, parks, resorts and camps                                     Y              Y               Y               N
     Golf courses, riding stables, and water recreation                       Y              Y               Y               Y
 Commercial
     Offices, business and professional, general retail                       Y              Y               Y               Y
     Wholesale; retail building materials, hardware, farm equipment           Y              Y               Y               Y
 Industrial and Production
     Manufacturing                                                            Y              Y               Y               Y
     Utilities                                                                Y              Y               Y               Y
     Agriculture and forestry                                                 Y            Y (b)          Y (d)            Y (d)
     Mining and fishing, resource production and extraction                   Y              Y               Y               Y
 Notes:
 CNEL = Community Noise Equiv alent Lev el, in A-weighted decibels.
 Y (Yes) = Land use and related structures compatible without restrictions.
 C (conditionally compatible) = Land use and related structures are permitted, prov ided that sound insulation is prov ided to
 reduce interior noise lev els from sources to CNEL 45 dB or lower and that an av igation easement is granted to the City and
 County of San Francisco as operator of SFO. See Policy NE-X.exterior
 N (No) = Land use and related structures are not compatible.
 (a) Use is conditionally compatible only on an existing lot of record zoned only for residential use as of the effectiv e date of
     the ALUCP. Use must be sound-insultated to achiev e an indoor noise lev el of CNEL 45 dB or less from exterior sources. The
     property owners shall grant an av igation easement to the City and County of San Francisco prior to issuance of a
     building permit for the proposed building or structure. If the proposed dev elopment is not built, then, upon notice by the
     local permitting authority, SFO shall record a notice of termination of the av igation easement.
 (b) Residential buildings must be sound-insulated to achiev e an indoor noise lev el of CNEL 45 dB or less from exterior sources.
 (c) Accessory dwelling units are not compatible.
 SOURCES: Jacobs Consultancy Team 2010. Based on State of California General Plan Guidelines for noise elements of
 general plans; California Code of
 Regulations, Title 21, Div ision 2.5, Chapter 6, Section 5006; and 14 CFR Part 150, Appendix A, Table 1.
 PREPARED BY; Ricondo & Associates, Inc., June 2012.
218                                                                                          Daly City 2030 General Plan | Noise Element
Noise Goal, Policies, and Tasks
The noise goal reflects the general direction the City wishes to advance. The objectives represent
actions which can be measured over time, that provide a general direction toward achievement of the
goal, while the policies reflect more specific actions that the City will take in order to attain the noise
goal. The City's Noise goal is:
                  "Promote a noise environment that reflects a balance of the various
                  City objectives while providing an environment that maintains a
                  healthy living environment; fosters relaxation and recreation; is
                  conducive to the work environment; and provides pleasant living
                  conditions."
Many factors of this goal must be considered. First of all, objectives that must be considered in
conjunction with noise concerns include the provision of housing for all segments of the City: the
provision of an efficient transportation and infrastructure system; economic and commercial
development in the City; and a safe and pleasant environment within which to work and live. No
element of the General Plan can be considered in isolation from the others and this is particularly true of
the Noise Element. For example, transportation modes are a major source of noise in Daly City. Not
expanding roadways or improving roadway surfaces, when needed, can add to the noise environment
and locating new housing close to major transportation corridors can expose residents to high noise
levels. Take as another example the construction of housing, a City objective addressed in the Housing
Element. Short term noise impacts occur during housing construction and additional people and traffic
also add incrementally to the noise environment. Moreover, potential sites for infill housing must be
carefully evaluated in terms of the location of noise sources that could impact future residents. Various
City goals must be considered as a whole and not incrementally, In order to provide a balanced and
well-functioning City.
Although various City objectives influence the noise environment, the noise goal should not lose sight of
quality of life issues; such as quiet areas for relaxation and recreation. Open spaces, parks and private
backyards should be maintained in a relatively quiet environment. An environment that one can relax
in without intrusive or jarring noise impinging upon the experience is essential to personal well-being and
the quality of life one enjoys in their community.
Conducive work environments and pleasant living conditions are easier to attain than providing quiet
open space areas. A conducive work environment is of primary importance in worker productivity and
physical well-being. Pleasant living conditions are tied to reduced noise levels in the home thus
providing an environment where people can converse, dine, relax, and rest. Noise insulation standards
and alteration of building placement in relationship to noise sources are two common methods utilized
to reduce interior noise levels. Title 24 Noise Insulation Standards and careful site planning shall continue
to be employed in Daly City as a means to reduce interior noise levels.
To implement the noise goal, this element provides for the following policies and tasks:
Noise Identification and Mitigation
Policy NE-1:          Use the future noise contour map to identify existing and potential noise impact
                      areas.
                      Task NE-1.1: Use the existing and projected noise contours in conjunction with the
                      State Office of Noise Control Guidelines (Guidelines) to identify areas where land use
Daly City 2030 General | Noise Element                                                                     219
             incompatibilities exist and to guide future noise sensitive development to appropriate
             and compatible locations.
             Task NE-1.2: Use the existing and projected noise contours to identify existing noise
             impact areas that could benefit from noise insulation programs.
Policy NE-2: Use the State Office of Noise Control Guidelines as a guide to assess development
             that will need additional noise study and mitigations.
             Task NE-2.1: Use the Noise Control Guidelines to assess the suitability of a site for new
             development in combination with the noise contours to accurately identify areas
             that may need additional noise study and mitigation. Noise mitigations include
             additional insulation, double glazing of windows and increasing building setbacks
             from the noise source. Mitigations should also be creative and attractive whenever
             possible and appropriate.         Creative noise mitigation measures can include
             incorporation of fountains using water to mask freeway noise and noise walls of an
             appropriate scale painted with decorative murals.
Policy NE-3  Maintain a CNEL level of not more than 70 dBA Leq in residential areas.
             Task NE-3.1: Continue to enforce the environmental noise requirements of the State
             Building Code (Title 24).
             Task NE-3.2: Encourage noise insulation programs in areas that do not meet the
             current noise standard and ensure that future development is mitigated
             appropriately or avoided in areas where the noise levels exceed or is projected to
             exceed 70 dBA, Leq.
Policy NE-4: Maintain a noise level not in excess of 75 dBA CNEL in open space, parks, and tot
             lots, including outdoor activity areas such as outdoor entertainment or green space
             of multi-family projects.
             Task NE-4.1: When feasible, situate new parks and tot-lots away from busy streets or
             other known noise sources.
Policy NE-5: Maintain the City's current standard of 75 dBA CNEL for office, commercial and
             professional areas.
             Task NE-5.1:     Additional noise studies should be conducted in “Conditionally
             Acceptable” noise environments to ensure adequate mitigation features are
             employed. Usually conventional construction with closed windows and fresh air
             supply systems will maintain a healthy noise environment.
Policy NE-6: Require new development to perform additional acoustical studies in noise
             environments that are identified as 'Conditionally Acceptable' or 'Normally
             Unacceptable' to the Guidelines.
             Task NE-6.1:      Require acoustical studies for new development through the
             discretionary review and California Environmental Quality Act processes, while
             paying particular attention to borderline noise environments. Conditions and
             mitigations, as appropriate, should be attached to projects.
             Task NE-6.2: As part of the development of the new Commercial Mixed-Use zone,
             identify and codify, where possible, noise attenuation measures to assure that noise
             impacts by more intensive development to adjacent residential uses are reduced.
220                                                          Daly City 2030 General Plan | Noise Element

Policy NE-7:        Require proposed intensification of development and proposed new development in
                    noise environments identified as “Clearly Unacceptable” in the Guidelines to reduce
                    ambient interior noise levels to 45 dBA, CNEL.
                    Task NE-7.1: Either discourage new development or mitigate the noise impacts to it
                    in areas identified as “Clearly Unacceptable” in the Noise Compatibility Guidelines.
Policy NE-8:        Discourage noise sensitive land uses from locating in areas of inappropriate or high
                    noise levels.
                    Task NE-8.1: Work to ensure that the outdoor ambient noise levels for uses such as
                    day care centers, extended care facilities, and group care homes in residential
                    neighborhoods not exceed 70 dBA, CNEL. For such uses allowed by right, the City
                    should encourage a potential care provider to maintain an appropriate noise
                    environment.
                    Task NE-8.2: Continue to attach conditions of project approval to residential day
                    care centers in excess of eight children through the administrative use permit process
                    to maintain an appropriate noise environment.
Policy NE-9:        Work to ensure that the expansion of or changes to existing land uses do not create
                    additional noise impacts for sensitive receptors in the vicinity of the project from
                    intensification or alteration of existing land uses by requiring applicants .
                    Task NE-9.1: Depending upon the hours of operation, intensity of use, and the
                    location of sensitive receptors in the area, the expansion or change of use could
                    cause noise impacts. Acoustical studies should be performed, at the applicant's
                    expense, during the discretionary and environmental review processes and
                    conditions should be placed on the project accordingly.
Policy NE-10:       Work with SamTrans and MUNI in the placement of bus stops in order to reduce noise
                    associated with bus activity to noise sensitive receptors.
San Francisco International Airport Noise Environment
Policy NE-11: Require that all future land use actions and/or associated development conforms to the
                relevant height, aircraft noise, and safety policies and compatibility criteria contained in
                the most recently adopted version of the Airport Land Use Compatibility Plan for the
                Environs of San Francisco International Airport.
                Task NE-11.1: Route any proposed land use policy actions, including new specific plans,
                zoning ordinances, general plan amendments, and rezoning involving land
                development to the Airport Land Use Commission in compliance with the Airport Land
                Use Plan.
Daly City 2030 General | Noise Element                                                                  221

                 Task NE-11.2: Require that development involving the construction of one or more
                 dwelling units within the 65 dBA CNEL SFO noise contour to submit an avigation
                 easement to the airport, when required by the Airport Land Use Commission. Specific
                 avigation easement requirements shall be consistent with the Airport Land Use
                 Compatibility Plan for the Environs of San Francisco International Airport. This requirement
                 shall be implemented prior to final project approval or, if the project requires
                 construction, prior to building permit issuance.
                 Task NE-11.3: Require all future development within the Airport Influence Area B
                 boundary for San Francisco International Airport to conform to the relevant
                 height/airspace protection, aircraft noise, and safety policies and land use compatibility
                 criteria contained within the most recent adopted version of the comprehensive
                 airport/land use compatibility plan (ALUCP) for the environs of San Francisco
                 International Airport.
                 Task NE-11.4: Ensure that all future development in Daly City complies with all relevant
                 FAA standards and criteria for safety, regarding flashing lights, reflective building
                 material, land uses that may attract large concentrations of birds, HVAC exhaust vents,
                 thermal plumes, and uses that may generate electrical/electronic interference with
                 aircraft communications and/or instrumentation.
Noise Programs
Noise Programs are action programs defining what Daly City is doing or intends to do to implement the
policies and achieve the Goal and Objectives of the Noise Element. The Noise Programs are organized
into two major categories: Current Programs for Noise Reduction and Proposed Programs for Noise
Reduction. The program identifies the specific action; the existing or anticipated funding source, as
appropriate; the responsible agency; and, the time frame for each component. The following specific
actions have been undertaken by Daly City in response to the needs of the noise environment.
Current Programs for Noise Reduction
Daly City Municipal Code
Chapter 9.22 of the Daly City Municipal Code contains language to protect residents from excessive
noise exposure. Section 9.22.010 prohibits an individual from causing a disturbance such that it disturbs
the public peace off-site. Section 9.22.020 states that no person shall maintain, operate, or conduct
any loudspeaker or amplifier in such a manner as to cause the sound to be projected outside any
building or out of doors in any part of the City without first obtaining a permit to do so, Section 9.22.030
deals more specifically with noise and states that between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. no
person shall cause, create, or permit any noise which may be heard beyond the confines of the
property of origin. The Police Department enforces Chapter 9.22 of the Municipal Code.
Title 24 Noise Insulation Standards for Multi-Family Development
Title 24 of the California Administrative Code requires a particular set of noise insulation features be
incorporated into multi-family residential construction. Additional noise insulation is required because
multi-family development is usually permitted in a slightly noisier environment than single-family and
because adjacent apartments are an additional source of noise in multi-family areas. Title 24 is
prescribed by state law and enforced by the Building Division through the permit process and building
inspection prior to issuance of the Certificate of Occupancy.
222                                                                 Daly City 2030 General Plan | Noise Element
Discretionary Review of Projects
Title 17 Zoning of the Daly City Municipal Code provides for discretionary review of projects through the
use permit and variance process. An application for development is analyzed in light of many
concerns including comparing the proposed use against the noise contours and Noise Compatibility
Guidelines. The Planning Division attaches conditions of project approval to reduce noise impacts to
future occupants of the proposed development as well as conditioning times construction activities
may occur in order to reduce noise impacts to surrounding land uses.
California Environmental Quality Act Review
The California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) mandates an initial study be prepared on all projects
except for those that are categorized as exempt or administrative. Administrative projects are projects
that are allowed by right in a particular zoning district for which an applicant need only apply for a plan
check and a building permit. The courts however, in the recent past, have interpreted the law to
include administrative projects of substantial size or magnitude to be included under the provisions of
CEQA.
An initial study is prepared for such projects and based upon the findings of the study. The project is
conditioned accordingly. If significant potential impacts are identified an environmental impact report
may be required and mitigations are applied to the project accordingly.
Environmental impact reports are an important tool when assessing potential noise impacts from
proposed development projects. A noise study is conducted, if determined necessary. A noise study
usually involves actual noise measurements of the existing noise environment in the vicinity of the
proposed project. Population and traffic projections are used to determine the percent of increased
vehicle trips in the project area, or project region depending on the size or type of the proposal. The
extent that vehicular traffic increases has a direct quantifiable bearing on the potential noise impacts of
a proposed project. Traffic data, including traffic speeds, and percent of trucks present in a traffic
stream, is entered into a computer model. The end result of the modeling is a reasonable projection of
the noise impacts associated with a particular project.
The projected noise environment is then compared to the State Noise Compatibility Guidelines, for the
particular land use in question. A project may go forth without additional noise insulation or mitigation
features if the noise level is within the “Normally Acceptable” range, The “Conditionally Acceptable”
range sometimes requires additional noise reduction requirements while the 'Normally Unacceptable'
and 'Clearly Unacceptable' noise ranges provide a basis to deny a project in terms of noise impacts,
Noise reduction techniques can include additional insulation, double glazing of windows. increasing
building setbacks from the noise source, altering the placement of the buildings in order to utilize noise
reflection in a beneficial manner, and construction of a sound wall, If noise generated from a proposed
project is determined to have a significant unavoidable impact in other areas, and it is an impact that
cannot be mitigated, the project may be denied.
Noise, of course, is not the only consideration when determining the merits of a particular project.
Approval or denial of a project requires weighing all the potential impacts and benefits of a project.
Benefits and impacts may occur in areas such as housing and density; land use compatibilities or
incompatibilities; air quality, circulation, transportation and parking; socio-economics such as the
location of job force, economic impacts or benefits to the city or region; the consideration of public
services and infrastructure available to support the project; the location and extent of natural and man-
made hazards, such as earthquake and slide areas or the presence of hazardous materials.
Daly City 2030 General | Noise Element                                                                  223

Proposed Programs for Noise Reduction
The following specific actions will be undertaken by the City in order to implement the policies outlined
in this element.
Apply Title 24 Noise Insulation Standards to Single-Family Development
Objective:                      Ensure ambient interior noise levels sufficient to protect public health in
                                single-family development
Responsible Agency:             Planning Division, Engineering Division, Building Division
Time Frame:                     [insert timeframe]
Funding Source:                 Developer
Activity:
Title 24 noise insulation standards are required by state law to be applied to multi-family residential
development. These same standards can be applied to single-family development in appropriate
cases to insure that the interior ambient noise levels are sufficient to protect the residents from adverse
noise impacts. Title 24 would not be applied in every case; but in cases where new residential
development is proposed in a noise environment above 60 dBA, CNEL. The Planning and Engineering
Divisions would identify the project, through discretionary or California Environmental Quality Act review,
where this condition or mitigation should be applied, The Building Division, through plan check and
building inspection, would insure that the standards were being incorporated in building design, and
construction.
Program NE-1:                   Apply for Federal Monies to Retrofit Homes Affected
                                by Aircraft Noise
Objective:                      Reduce noise levels to homes affected by airport noise
Responsible Agency:             Department of Economic and Community Development
Time Frame:                     Continuing
Funding Source:                 City and County of San Francisco, Federal Aviation Administration, Private
                                Funds
Activity:                       The City has applied for federal monies to retrofit homes that are affected
                                by aircraft noise. Homes affected by aircraft noise in Daly City are
                                located in the southeastern portion of the City. The program consists of
                                installing additional noise insulation to homes. The City and County of San
                                Francisco would pay 20 percent of the costs and the Federal Aviation
                                Administration (FAA) would supply the remaining 80 percent. Under FAA
                                guidelines retrofit homes must be within the 65 dBA, CNEL contour area.
                                At this time it is questionable if the City falls within this noise contour. A
                                final determination will be made by the FAA.
Program NE-2:                   Amend the Municipal Code to Include Standard
                                Noise Conditions for Construction Activities
Objective:                      Enforce unilateral noise control measures for all construction related noise
Responsible Agency:             Planning Division, Engineering Division, Building Division, City Attorney
Time Frame:                     2015
224                                                                   Daly City 2030 General Plan | Noise Element
Funding Source:                  General Fund
Activity:                        Currently through the Planning and Building Divisions the City enforces
                                 construction related noise by attaching conditions to project approval.
                                 The conditions regulate the time that grading and site preparation
                                 activities may occur; times that machinery may be started up; and the
                                 times that cleaning and shut-down may occur. The conditions protect
                                 surrounding properties from excessive noise after 5:00 P.M. Monday
                                 through Friday, and on the weekends. There are provisions for emergency
                                 work provided the developer or the contractor secure permission from the
                                 City Engineer and certain findings are made.
                                 Amending Chapter 15 Building of the Municipal Code would apply these
                                 types of noise conditions to all construction. The Engineering and
                                 Planning Divisions and the City Attorney would draft language for
                                 adoption. The City would adopt the changes by ordinance and the
                                 provisions would be enforced by the Building Division through the building
                                 permit process.
Daly City 2030 General | Noise Element                                                                  225
Appendix NE-A
Glossary
The following section defines some of these technical terms used in this document in an attempt to
clarify their meaning. Many of the terms described below are also used in other planning documents,
such as environmental impact reports, when estimating the traffic impact of a proposed development
project.
A-Weighted Sound Level (dBA) is the sound pressure in decibels as measured on a sound meter using
the A-filtering network. The A-filtering network de-emphasizes the very low and very high components
of sound in a manner similar to the response of the human ear. The acronym dBA accompanies a
given measurement or calculation and indicates a particular noise level measured with an A-filtering
device.
Absorption reduces (attenuates) noise. Some portions of sound energy that strike a surface are
converted to heat (thermal) energy rather than being reflected as noise; this reduces the amount of
energy that is heard as noise. Absorptive materials include thick glass, spun fiberglass and materials
such as upholstered furniture (as opposed to wood furniture), drapes and carpeting.
Airborne sound is sound that reaches the point of interest by travelling through air.
Ambient Noise Level constitutes the "normal" or "background" noise components and level of noise at a
given location. Ambient noise is a composite from all noise sources that are experienced in a given
location, Ambient noise in a residential area, for example, could consist of sounds of people talking,
dogs barking, children playing and cars passing by. Ambient noise in an office might consist of people
talking, telephones ringing, and the sound of typewriter or computer keyboards clicking. Ambient noise
in a cabinet shop could include saws, grinders, drills, sanders, and people shouting.
Attenuation refers to the lessening or reduction of a noise level, Noise attenuates by travelling a distance
from the source or by other mechanisms such as absorption or reflection. The placement of buildings,
sound walls, and noise insulation features are predicated on noise attenuation. Noise will attenuate at
different levels depending if the noise source originates from a point or line source and if it travels over a
hard or soft surface and if it is absorbed or reflected by a noise mitigation feature. Basically five things
are taken into consideration when calculating noise attenuation: the type of noise; level of noise at the
source; distance the noise travels to the point of interest; type of terrain over which the noise travels;
and the presence or absence of noise barriers.
Building Envelope is a technical term which refers to the components of a building such as the
foundation, walls, windows and insulation and is an important concept in noise attenuation. Portions of
the building envelope will reflect noise, some portions will absorb noise and some noise will be
transmitted through to the interior of the building. This term is discussed further in the following section,
as characteristics of the building envelope have an important impact on noise reduction for residential,
and other, areas.
Community Noise Equivalent Level (CNEL) is the average equivalent A-filtered sound level during a 24-
hour period. The value is obtained after the addition of 5 decibels to sound levels in the evening from
7:00 p.m. to 10:00 p.m. and after the addition of 10 decibels in the night after 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
The CNEL weights the actual noise measurements taken to account for the increased sensitivity people
have to noise during the evening and nighttime hours. Daly City's Noise Element employs this noise
weighting metric.
Cycles per second is a measure of frequency numerically equivalent to hertz.
226                                                                 Daly City 2030 General Plan | Noise Element
Decibel is a logarithmic unit of sound intensity. Sound waves travel out from a source and exert a force
known as sound pressure. The sound pressure level of intensity is measured in decibels and is usually
referred to as the sound level.
Doubling Distance refers to the doubling of a given distance (in feet) from a particular noise source.
Doubling distance is used to calculate the amount noise will attenuate (reduce) from the noise source
to the noise receiver.
Pay Night Average Noise Level (Ldn) is the average equivalent A-filtered sound level during a 24-hour
period obtained after the addition of 10 decibels to sound levels in the night after 10:00 P.M. and
before 7:00 A.M.. The Ldn weights noise measurements taken to account for the increased sensitivity
people have to noise during the nighttime hours.
Energy Equivalent Noise Level (Leg) is the sound level corresponding to a steady state sound level
containing the same total energy over a given period of time.
Environmental noise is a combination of noise from various sources which produce a relatively steady or
ambient noise level. Environmental noise is a term often uses to describe outdoor ambient noise that
one experiences in our daily environment.
Frequency is the number of times per second that the sine-wave of sound repeats itself, or that the
vibrating object repeats itself. Frequency is expressed in hertz (Hz) and was formally expressed in cycles
per second.
Hard surfaces (terrain) include paved surfaces and concrete buildings. Hard surfaces reflect noise and
tend to absorb less noise than do soft surfaces and thus. in the absence of other noise mitigation
features, tend to attenuate noise less than soft surfaces. The importance of hard or soft surfaces comes
into play in absence of other noise attenuation features and are most important when calculating noise
attenuation due to distance from the noise source.
Hertz (Hz) is the unit of measurement of frequency numerically equal to cycles per second.
Intrusive noise is a noise that intrudes over the existing ambient noise in a given location. The relative
intrusiveness of the sound depends upon the amplitude, duration, frequency and time of occurrence of
the intrusive noise as well as the level of the ambient noise.
Line of site is often used when describing the noise source and noise receiver relationship. Basically, if
one can see the noise source then one can hear the noise; if however, the line of sight is broken by a
wall, building, mountain, or other barrier, then the noise source is reduced accordingly. Various features
reduce noise at different levels and these differences are discussed throughout this noise element,
Lmax is the highest noise (sound pressure) level recorded during the measurement period. The Lmax, then
represents one intrusive noise event, there may be others of less intensity, during the measurement
period. Intrusive noise can typically be from such sources as an aircraft flyover, a horn or siren, or
construction activities.
Line source is a noise originating from a line such as a stream of moving traffic, a moving train, conveyor
belt, or even a river. Noise from a line source produces parallel sound waves moving linearly outward
from the source, Noise will attenuate 3 dBA per doubling of distance from a line source in hard terrain
and approximately 4.5 dBA per doubling of distance in soft terrain. The significance in the distinction
between a line and point surface is the rate of attenuation.
Daly City 2030 General | Noise Element                                                                  227
Noise is a sound that is undesirable because it interferes with speech or hearing, or has the intensity or
duration of such to damage hearing, or, is otherwise annoying.
Noise Compatibility Guidelines, developed by the State Office of Noise Control, establish certain criteria
for noise levels with regard to land use compatibility. Each category of land use enjoys a range of noise
levels considered compatible with the use and the noise levels may increase provided certain noise
insulation features are employed. Daly City has adopted the Noise compatibility Guidelines.
Noise exposure contours are lines drawn about a noise source which indicate a constant level of noise
exposure. Noise contours are similar to contours drawn on a topographical map which represent areas
of the same elevation. Noise contours are significant inasmuch as they indicate areas where noise
mitigation measures may be needed and they indicate what types of land uses are subject to
particular noise exposures.
Point source noise originates from a single source such as a horn, motor and machinery. Point source
noise produces spherical waves which travel outward in a circular pattern from the source. Point
source noise attenuates approximately 6 dBA per doubling of distance from the source in hard terrain
and approximately 9 dBA per doubling of distance in soft terrain. The significance in the distinction
between a line and a point source is the rate of attenuation.
Reflection is a method that can reduce noise, Noise strikes a hard surface and is reflected back toward
the source of the noise. Reflection can reduce noise in one area while adding noise in another area.
Sensitive receptor includes people engaging in activities that are sensitive to noise. Residential areas,
hospitals, extended care facilities, schools, libraries and open spaces are land uses sensitive to noise.
Soft surfaces (terrain) include surfaces such as barren earth, soil, landscaped areas, and acoustically
absorptive materials. Soft surfaces absorb more sound energy than hard surfaces and thus more noise is
attenuated in a soft environment. The importance of hard or soft surfaces comes into play in absence
of other noise attenuation features and are most important when calculating noise attenuation due to
distance: the further one is from the noise source the lesser the noise level (sound energy) at that
location.
228                                                                Daly City 2030 General Plan | Noise Element
