
                                     Acknowledgments
                                              City Council
                                    Catherine Carlton, Mayor Pro Tem
                                               Richard Cline
                                                Kirsten Keith
                                             Ray Mueller, Mayor
                                                Peter Ohtaki
                                       Planning Commission
                                              Vincent Bressler
                                            Ben Eiref, Vice Chair
                                                Katie Ferrick
                                            John Kadvany, Chair
                                                John Onken
                                                Henry Riggs
                                              Katherine Strehl
                                        Housing Commission
                                               Sally Cadigan
                                                Lucy Calder
                                           Carolyn Clarke, Chair
                                        Julianna Dodick, Vice Chair
                                                Michele Tate
                      Housing Element Update Steering Committee
                                  Richard Cline, City Council, Co-Chair
                                   Peter Ohtaki, City Council, Co-Chair
                                   Katie Ferrick, Planning Commission
                                 Katherine Strehl, Planning Commission
                                  Carolyn Clarke, Housing Commission
                                   Sally Cadigan, Housing Commission
                                                City Staff
                            Deanna Chow, Senior Planner (Project Manager)
                             Justin Murphy, Development Services Manager
                          Arlinda Heineck, Community Development Director
                            Vanh Malathong, Technical Services Coordinator
                                     Alex D. McIntyre, City Manager
                            Starla Jerome-Robinson, Assistant City Manager
                             Cherise Brandell, Community Services Director
                                     William L. McClure, City Attorney
                                 Leigh F. Prince, Assistant City Attorney
                                       Consultant Assistance
                           Jeffery Baird, Baird + Driskell Community Planning
City of Menlo Park Housing Element — Adopted April 1, 2014                    2

                            Table of Contents
                            Introduction
                            Section I — Introduction
                            A Purpose of the Housing Element                               5
                            B State Law Requirements for Housing Elements                  7
                            C Definitions of Key Housing Terms                             8
                            D Process for Preparing the Housing Element                   14
                            Goals, Policies and Implementing Programs
                            Section II — Housing Goals, Policies and Programs
                            A Why is Housing Important?                                   19
                            B Housing Goals                                               24
                            C Housing Policies and Implementing Programs                  25
                               Goal H1 — Continue to Build Local Government Institutional
                               Capacity and Monitor Accomplishments to Effectively
                               Respond to Housing Needs                                   25
                               Goal H2 — Maintain, Protect and Enhance Existing
                               Housing and Neighborhoods                                  33
                               Goal H3 — Provide Housing for Special Needs
                               Populations that is Coordinated with Support Services      36
                               Goal H4 — Use Land Efficiently to Meet Housing
                               Needs for a Variety of Income Levels, Implement
                               Sustainable Development Practices and Blend
                               Well-Designed New Housing Into the Community               42
                            Section III — Implementation Timeframe
                            A Overview                                                    54
                            B Implementation Summary Table                                55
                            Section IV — Quantified Housing Objectives
                            A Overview                                                    59
                            B Quantified Objectives Summary Table                         60
                            Background
                            Section V — Background Overview
                            A Review of 2007-2014 Housing Element                         61
                            B Consistency with the Menlo Park General Plan                64
City of Menlo Park Housing Element — Adopted April 1, 2014                                   3

                            Section VI — Housing Conditions and Trends
                            A Overall Housing Needs                                          65
                            B Special Housing Needs                                          87
                            C Homeless Needs                                                 98
                            D Assisted Rental Housing “At Risk” of Conversion              106
                            Section VII — Future Housing Needs and Opportunities
                            A Regional Housing Needs Allocation (RHNA)                     108
                            B Summary of Available Land for Housing                        112
                            C Potential Governmental Constraints to Housing                119
                            D Potential Non-Governmental Constraints to Housing            140
                            E Energy                                                       143
                            Technical Appendices
                            A  Available Land Inventory
                            B  Evaluation of Housing Element Programs Contained in the 2007-
                               2014 Housing Element
                            C  Fact Sheet on Housing Element Requirements for Addressing
                               Homelessness
City of Menlo Park Housing Element — Adopted April 1, 2014                                      4

Section I
Introduction
  A       Purpose of the Housing Element
                                      All California cities and counties are required to have a
                                      Housing Element included in their General Plan which
                                      establishes housing objectives, policies and programs in
                                      response to community housing conditions and needs. This
                                      Housing Element has been prepared to respond to current
                                      and near-term future housing needs in Menlo Park and also
                                      provide a framework for the community’s longer-term
                                      approach to addressing its housing needs. The Housing
Element contains goals, updated information and strategic directions (policies and
implementing actions) that the City is committed to undertaking.
Housing affordability in San Mateo County and in the Bay Area as a whole is a critical issue.
Menlo Park’s housing conditions are reflective of many area-wide and even nation-wide
trends. Over the past thirty years, housing costs have skyrocketed out of proportion to many
people’s ability to pay. And, interest rates, construction costs and high land costs have all
increased significantly. This has a number of implications as it becomes more difficult for
employers to fill vacant jobs, roadways are clogged with workers traveling longer distances
into and out of Menlo Park and surrounding areas, and many young people, families, longtime
residents and people with specialized housing needs face relocating because they cannot find
housing they can afford or that meets their needs otherwise (such as downsizing for seniors or
rental housing for younger workers).
The Housing Element touches many aspects of community life. This Housing Element builds
upon the goals, policies and implementing programs contained in the City’s 2007-2014
Housing Element and other City policies and practices to address housing needs in the
community. The overall focus of the Housing Element is to enhance community life, character
and vitality through the provision of adequate housing opportunities for people at all income
levels, while being sensitive to the small-town character of Menlo Park that residents know
and love.
City of Menlo Park Housing Element — Adopted April 1, 2014                                      5

The following are some of the specific purposes of the Housing Element update:
1.        Maintain Quality of Life. Maintain the high quality of life, small town feel and village
          character of Menlo Park, which make it distinctive and enjoyable to its residents.
2.        Assure Diversity of Population. Assess housing needs and provide a vision for
          housing within the City to satisfy the needs of a diverse population.
3.        Provide a Variety of Housing Opportunities. Provide a variety of housing
          opportunities proportionally by income to accommodate the needs of people who
          currently work or live in Menlo Park such as teachers, young people just getting started
          and seniors who want to down-size, who either cannot find homes or cannot afford
          market rate housing in Menlo Park.
4.        Address Regional Housing Needs Allocation (RHNA). Ensure capacity for the
          development of new housing to meet the Regional Housing Need Allocation at all
          income levels for the 2015-2023 planning period.
5.        Assure a Fit with the Look and Feel of the Community. Ensure that housing
          developments at all income levels are sensitive to and fit with adjacent neighborhoods.
6.        Maintain Existing Housing. Maintain the existing housing stock to assure high quality
          maintenance, safety and habitability of existing housing resources.
7.        Address Affordable Housing Needs. Continue existing and develop new programs
          and policies to meet the projected affordable housing need of extremely low, very low,
          low and moderate-income households.
8.        Address the Housing Needs of Special Need Groups. Continue existing and
          develop new programs and policies to meet the projected housing needs of persons
          living with disabilities, seniors and other special needs households in the community.
9.        Remove Potential Constraints to Housing. Evaluate potential constraints to housing
          development and encourage new housing in locations supported by existing or
          planned infrastructure, while maintaining existing neighborhood character. Develop
          design directions for multiple family housing to help eliminate barriers to the
          development of housing for all income levels.
10.       Provide for Special Needs Groups. Provide for emergency shelter, transitional and
          supportive housing opportunities.
11.       Provide Adequate Housing Sites. Identify appropriate housing sites, within specified
          areas proximate to transportation, shopping and schools, and the accompanying
          zoning required to accommodate housing development.
City of Menlo Park Housing Element — Adopted April 1, 2014                                     6

 B        State Law Requirements for Housing Elements
                                   State law requires each city and county to adopt a General Plan
                                   containing at least seven elements, including a Housing Element.
                                   Regulations regarding Housing Elements are found in the
                                   California Government Code Sections 65580-65589. Although
                                   the Housing Element must follow State law, it is by its nature a
                                   local document. The focus of the Menlo Park Housing Element is
                                   on the needs and desires of Menlo Park residents as it relates to
housing in the community. Within these parameters, the intent of the element is also to comply
with State law requirements.
Unlike the other mandatory General Plan elements, the Housing Element requires periodic
updating and is subject to detailed statutory requirements and mandatory review by the State
of California Department of Housing and Community Development — HCD. According to
State law, the Housing Element must:
! Provide goals, policies, quantified objectives and scheduled programs to preserve,
     improve and develop housing.
! Identify and analyze existing and projected housing needs for all economic
     segments of the community.
! Identify adequate sites that will be zoned and available within the Housing Element
     planning period — between 2015 and 2023 — to meet the City’s share of regional
     housing needs at all income levels.
! Be submitted to HCD to determine if HCD “certifies” the Housing Element is in
     compliance with state law.
State law establishes detailed content requirements for Housing Elements and establishes a
regional “fair share” approach to distributing housing needs throughout all communities in the
Bay Area. The law recognizes that in order for the private sector and non-profit housing
sponsors to address housing needs and demand, local governments must adopt land use
plans and implementing regulations that provide opportunities for, and do not unduly
constrain, housing development.
The Housing Element must provide clear policies and direction for making decisions
pertaining to zoning, subdivision approval and capital improvements that relate to housing
needs. The housing action programs are intended to: (1) identify adequate residential sites
available for a variety of housing types for all income levels; (2) focus on the provision of
City of Menlo Park Housing Element — Adopted April 1, 2014                                      7

adequate housing to meet the needs of lower and moderate income households; (3) address
potential governmental constraints to the maintenance, improvement and development of
housing; (4) conserve and improve the condition of the existing affordable housing stock; and,
(5) promote housing opportunities for all persons. Also in accordance with State law, the
Housing Element must be consistent and compatible with other elements (or sections) of the
Menlo Park General Plan.
  C       Definitions of Key Housing Terms
                                     In the context of Housing Elements, “Affordable Housing”
                                     generally focuses on housing for extremely low, very low, low
                                     and moderate-income households. Generally, housing that
                                     costs no more than 30% of household income is considered
                                     affordable to these income groups. The definitions below are
                                     used throughout this Housing Element. The analysis of housing
                                     needs in the Background section of the Housing Element
provides baseline information about who needs housing in Menlo Park.
Definitions
o     Above Moderate Income Households: Defined by California Housing Element law as
      households earning over 120% of the median household income. As of 2013, a family of four
      earning more than $123,600 per year in San Mateo County is considered above moderate income.
o     Accessible Housing: Defined by HCD as units accessible and adaptable to the needs of the
      physically disabled.
o     Affordable Housing: Affordable housing, for the purposes of the Housing Element, refers to
      housing that is affordable to extremely low income, very low income, low income and moderate
      income households.
o     Emergency Shelter: Defined by Health and Safety Code Section 50800-50806.5 as housing with
      minimal supportive services for homeless persons that is limited to occupancy of six months or
      less by a homeless person. No individual or household may be denied emergency shelter because
      of an inability to pay.
o     Extremely Low Income Households: Defined by Government Code Section 65583(a) to require
      local Housing Elements to provide “documentation of projections and a quantification of the
      locality's existing and projected housing needs for all income levels, including extremely low
      income households (GC 65583 (a)(1)).” Extremely low income is a subset of the very low-income
      regional housing need and is defined as households earning less than 30% of the median
      household income –– which, for a family of four as of 2013, would be to earn less than $33,950 per
      year in San Mateo County.
City of Menlo Park Housing Element — Adopted April 1, 2014                                           8

o     Housing Affordability: The generally accepted measure for determining whether a person can
      afford housing means spending no more than 30% of one's gross household income on housing
      costs, including utilities, principal and interest. In the Bay Area, people can pay closer to 50% of
      their income for housing due to the high costs of housing. The two graphics below illustrate
      housing affordability in Menlo Park.
              Source: Baird + Driskell Community Planning, 2013, based on salaries from the Employment Development
              Department and housing costs from Zillow
City of Menlo Park Housing Element — Adopted April 1, 2014                                                         9

o     Housing Density: The number of dwelling units per acre of land. Gross density includes the land
      within the boundaries of a particular area and excludes nothing. Net density excludes certain areas
      such as streets, open space, easements, water areas, etc.
o     Housing First: “Housing First” is an approach that centers on providing homeless people with
      housing quickly and then providing services as needed. What differentiates a “Housing First”
      approach from other strategies is that there is an immediate and primary focus on helping
      individuals and families quickly access and sustain permanent housing. This approach has the
      benefit of being consistent with what most people experiencing homelessness want and seek help
      to achieve. The “Housing First” model offers an alternative to emergency shelter or transitional
      housing for homeless individuals, but does not eliminate the City’s need to zone for such uses.
o     Income Limits: Income limits are updated annually for San Mateo County by the U.S. Department
      of Housing and Urban Development (HUD), State of California HCD and the County of San Mateo.
      The “30% of Median,” “Very Low Income” and “Low Income” schedules are published by HUD, as
      shown below, for 2013. The “Median Income” schedule shown below is based on the 2013 median
      family income of $103,000 for a four-person household, with adjustments for smaller and larger
      household sizes. The “Moderate Income” schedule shown below represents up to 120% of median
City of Menlo Park Housing Element — Adopted April 1, 2014                                         10

      income. For additional information, see the HUD website at www.huduser.org/datasets/il.html and
      San Mateo County Department of Housing website at
      http://www.co.sanmateo.ca.us/portal/site/housingdepartment/. For many State and local programs,
      State Department of Housing and Community Development (HCD) income eligibility limits are used.
      HCD income limits regulations are similar to those used by HUD.
o     Jobs/Housing Relationship: The relationship of the number and types of jobs in a community
      with the availability and affordability of housing. In simplistic terms, an appropriate balance is
      commonly thought to be between 1.0-1.5 jobs for every 1 housing unit. However, the issue is more
      complex when a community strives to reduce in commuting and provide a better match of local
      jobs to employed residents working in those jobs. Other factors include the types of jobs and the
      salaries paid, number of employed people in the community, affordability of housing relative to the
      income of people working in local jobs, and household size and income. Affordable housing
      strategies strive to create opportunities for local workers, especially those employed in service and
      retail jobs, to have a choice in finding local housing to fit their household needs in terms of type,
      affordability, amenities and location.
o     Low Income Households: Defined by California Health and Safety Code Section 50079.5, which
      establishes the low-income limits set by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development
      (HUD) as the state limit for low-income households. HUD limits for low-income household are
      generally households earning 50-80% of the median household income, adjusted for family size,
      with some adjustment for areas with unusually high or low incomes relative to housing costs. As of
      2013, a family of four earning between $56,550 and $90,500 per year in San Mateo County was
      considered low income.
o     Median Household Income: The middle point at which half of the City's households earn more
      and half earn less. Income limits are updated annually by the U.S. Department of Housing and
      Urban Development (HUD) for San Mateo County. The 2013 median household income for a
      family of four in San Mateo County as used for Menlo Park is $103,000.
City of Menlo Park Housing Element — Adopted April 1, 2014                                            11

o     Moderate Income Households: Defined by Section 50093 of the California Health and Safety
      Code as households earning 80-120% of the median household income. A family of four earning
      $90,500 to $123,600 per year in 2013 in San Mateo County is considered moderate income.
o     Overlay Zoning or Zone: Overlay zoning is a regulatory tool that that is placed over an existing
      base zone(s), and which identifies special provisions, in addition to those in the underlying base
      zone. The overlay district can share common boundaries with the base zone or cut across base
      zone boundaries. Regulations or incentives are attached to the overlay district to protect a specific
      resource or guide development within a special area. Examples include the City’s Affordable
      Housing Overlay and Emergency Shelter Overlay zoning.
o     Persons per Household: Average number of persons in each household.
o     Regional Housing Needs Allocation (2014-2022): The RHNA for the 5th cycle of housing
      element updates in the Bay Area identifies the number of housing units needed at various income
      levels for the 2014-2022 timeframe. Housing elements in the Bay Area are required to be updated
      by January 2015 and then again by January 2023. For this reason, the planning period for the
      housing element is from 2015-2023 and all references in the document related to RHNA or the
      Housing Element Planning Period are for the 2015-2023 timeframe.
o     Residential Care Facilities: There are a variety of residential care facilities that address the
      needs of special segments of the population, including special care for the chronically ill, seniors,
      special need adults or youths, etc. The California Department of Social Services, Community Care
      Licensing Division, issues licenses for residential facilities that provide 24-hour non-medical care
      for children, adults and the elderly.
o     Secondary Dwelling Unit: Defined in the Menlo Park Municipal Code as a dwelling unit on a
      residential lot that provides independent living facilities for one (1) or more persons and includes
      permanent provisions for living, sleeping, cooking and sanitation independent of the main dwelling
      on the residential lot.
o     Senior Housing: Defined by California Housing Element law as projects developed for, and put to
      use as, housing for senior citizens. Senior housing is based on: (1) if the U.S. Department of
      Housing and Urban Development (HUD) has determined that the dwelling is specifically designed
      for and occupied by elderly persons under a Federal, State or local government program; (2) it is
      occupied solely by persons who are 62 or older; or (3) or it houses at least one person who is 55
      or older in at least 80 percent of the occupied units, and adheres to a policy that demonstrates
      intent to house persons who are 55 or older. Under Federal law, housing that satisfies the legal
      definition of senior housing or housing for older persons described above, can legally exclude
      families with children.
o     Special Needs Housing: Defined by California housing element law (65583(a)(6)) as populations
      with special needs that must be addressed in a housing element — these include the needs of
      homeless people, seniors, people who are living with disabilities, persons with developmental
      disabilities, large families and female-headed households.
City of Menlo Park Housing Element — Adopted April 1, 2014                                           12

o     Supportive Housing: Defined by California Housing Element law as housing with no limit on
      length of stay, that is occupied by the target population, and that is linked to an onsite or offsite
      service that assists the supportive housing resident in retaining the housing, improving his or her
      health status, and maximizing his or her ability to live and, when possible, work in the community.
o     Target Population: Defined by California Housing Element law as persons with low incomes who
      have one or more disabilities, including mental illness, HIV or AIDS, substance abuse, or other
      chronic health condition, or individuals eligible for services provided pursuant to the Lanterman
      Developmental Disabilities Services Act (Division 4.5 (commencing with Section 4500) of the
      Welfare and Institutions Code) and may include, among other populations, adults, emancipated
      minors, families with children, elderly persons, young adults aging out of the foster care system,
      individuals exiting from institutional settings, veterans, and homeless people.
o     Transitional Housing: Defined by California Housing Element law as buildings configured as
      rental housing developments, but operated under program requirements that require the
      termination of assistance and recirculating of the assisted unit to another eligible program recipient
      at a predetermined future point in time that shall be no less than six months from the beginning of
      the assistance.
o     Very Low Income Households: Defined by California Health and Safety Code Section 50079.5,
      which establishes very low income limits set by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban
      Development (HUD) as the state limit for very low income households, which are households
      earning less than 50% of the median household income, with some adjustment for areas with
      unusually high or low incomes relative to housing costs. A family of four earning less than $56,550
      per year in 2013 in San Mateo County is considered very low income.
o     Workforce Affordable Housing: Housing that is affordable to the workforce in the community.
Acronyms
AARP               American Association of Retired Persons
ABAG               Association of Bay Area Governments
AHO                Affordable Housing Overlay zone
BMR                Below Market Rate housing
CHAS               Comprehensive Housing Affordability Strategy
CCRH               California Coalition for Rural Housing
CAP                Climate Action Plan
DOF                California Department of Finance
DOH                San Mateo County Department of Housing
ECHO               Eden Council for Hope and Opportunity
ECR/DSP            El Camino Real/Downtown Specific Plan
ELI                Extremely Low Income households
GGRC               Golden Gate Regional Center
HCD                California Department of Housing and Community Development
HEART              The Housing Endowment and Regional Trust
City of Menlo Park Housing Element — Adopted April 1, 2014                                             13

HIP                Human Investment Project
HOPE               Housing Our People Effectively: Ending Homelessness in San Mateo County
HUD                U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development
LIHTC              Low Income Housing Tax Credit Program
LTIRC              Landlord and Tenant Information and Referral Collaborative
NPH                Non-Profit Housing of Northern California
PCRC               Peninsula Conflict Resolution Center
R-L-U              Retirement Living Units (Menlo Park zoning for senior housing)
RHNA               Regional Housing Needs Allocation
SRO                Single-Room Occupancy unit
VA                 United States Department of Veterans Affairs
  D       Process for Preparing the Housing Element
                                    Menlo Park’s history of extensive community involvement in
                                    local decision-making makes the community outreach process
                                    for the Housing Element update not only essential and highly
                                    desirable, but also a critical component of the work effort. The
                                    approach for the Housing Element update outlined below is
                                    consistent with State law contained in Government Code
                                    65583(c)(7) — “The local government shall make a diligent
                                    effort to achieve public participation of all economic segments of
                                    the community in the development of the housing element, and
                                    the program shall describe this effort.”
The update effort has built upon the City’s extensive outreach effort undertaken for the City’s
2007-2014 Housing Element, adopted May 21, 2013, and the City’s participation in the
outreach efforts and activities for “21 Elements,” which is a collaborative effort to assist all
jurisdictions in San Mateo County with their housing element updates. The 21 Elements effort
has included presentations and coordination with housing experts and organizations providing
services to lower income and special needs groups throughout San Mateo County. The City
also participated and coordinated with all the other jurisdictions in San Mateo County’s sub-
RHNA process.
On June 13, 2013, the City Council approved a work program for implementation of Housing
Element programs and for the Housing Element update. The implementation programs relate
to compliance with Senate Bill 2 (SB 2), and include the creation of an overlay zone for
emergency shelter for the homeless, zoning for transitional and supportive housing and
establishing procedures for reasonable accommodation for persons with disabilities. In
addition, the Housing Element implementation work included consideration of an Amnesty
Program for illegal secondary dwelling units, which has since been modified to cover
City of Menlo Park Housing Element — Adopted April 1, 2014                                     14

modifications to the secondary dwelling unit ordinance and
accessory buildings structures/structures ordinance to
allow opportunities for accessory buildings and structures
to be converted to legal dwelling units. The timeline for
adoption of these changes is Spring 2014.
The process for the Housing Element update has included
the following activities and approach:
! Provide Information to the Community. Provision of
     information on the City’s website (see link below);
     distribution of information in City-wide mailings;
     preparation of a Housing Element newsletter and other
     FAQ materials; noticing for community workshops;
     City-wide notice; noticing and information to people
     signing up on the Housing Element list-serve; and other handouts. Documentation of
     community comments and summaries of Housing Element Steering Committee meetings
     during review of the Draft Housing Element up through adoption have been available on
     the City’s website at www.menlopark.org/athome. As of November 2013 there were 383
     subscribers to the City’s Housing Element webpage.
! Undertake Housing Element Steering Committee
     Meetings. In June 2013, the City Council
     appointed a Housing Element Steering
     Committee, composed of two members of the
     City Council, two members of the Planning
     Commission and two members of the Housing
     Commission. The Steering Committee conducted
     three public meetings and provided guidance to
     staff on the Housing Element implementing programs and the Housing Element update. All
     meetings of the Steering Committee were noticed to the City’s mailing list and all material,
     including agendas, meeting packets and meeting summaries have been made available
     on the City’s website. All meetings were publicly noticed and included opportunities for
     community participants to ask questions and provide comments to enhance the Steering
     Committee’s discussion.
! Conduct Community Workshops. The process included a community workshop, conducted
     on September 10, 2013 at the Menlo Park Senior Center located at 110 Terminal Avenue,
     to provide the community with an opportunity to identify: (1) standards and locations for
     zoning for facilities serving the homeless and people with special housing needs;
City of Menlo Park Housing Element — Adopted April 1, 2014                                15

     (2) approaches to dealing with illegal second units; (3) procedures to obtain an exception
     to regulations to make reasonable property improvements for people with disabilities; and,
     (4) overall housing policies and implementing programs to address housing needs in
     Menlo Park. Workshop materials were provided at the meeting and were available on the
     City’s website.
                                                           Noticing for the workshop was extensive in
                                                           an effort to involve the community. Besides
                                                           materials available on the City’s website,
                                                           notification was sent to the Housing Element
                                                           subscriber’s list. In addition, a newsletter
                                                           was prepared announcing the workshops,
                                                           and a postcard for the workshops was sent
                                                           to all households in Menlo Park. A total of 40
                                                           people attended the workshop and
                                                           approximately 50 comment responses were
     received either at the workshop or via email after the workshop. A compilation and
     documentation of the comments were available for review on the City’s website, and were
     provided to the Steering Committee and City decision-makers through the process.
How the Public Involvement Was Considered
in the Draft Housing Element
Modifications and directions as a result of the community
involvement process have resulted in revisions to the
City’s secondary dwelling unit program to reduce the
minimum lot size and changes to the City’s secondary
dwelling unit amnesty program to refocus on accessory
buildings and uses. Other community comments have
helped to identify areas for possible location(s) for the
emergency shelter for the homeless overlay zone and
performance standards required of shelters. Five areas
were considered for the homeless overlay zone — (Area
A) an area along Haven Avenue; (Area B) the VA site and
surrounding areas; (Area C) St. Patrick’s Seminary; (Area
D) the area north of the train station and east of El Camino Real in downtown; and (Area E)
the area south of Menlo Avenue and west of El Camino Real. Based on guidance from the
Housing Element Steering Committee, which considered community comments over a
number of meetings, Area B, as modified, was selected as the most suitable location for the
homeless overlay. A summary of community workshop comments and all meeting comments
are available on the City’s website.
City of Menlo Park Housing Element — Adopted April 1, 2014                                         16

                                                                        Community outreach activities
                                                                        also have included community
                                                                        meetings to review the
                                                                        Preliminary Draft Housing
                                                                        Element — Menlo Park
                                                                        Housing Commission
                                                                        (November 6, 2013), Menlo
                                                                        Park Planning Commission
(November 18, 2013) and Menlo Park City Council (December 10, 2013). Following review
and direction on the Preliminary Draft Housing Element, the Draft Housing Element will
prepared and forwarded to the California Department of Housing and Community
Development (HCD) in December 2013 for their review and comments as required by State
law. Noticed public hearings on the Draft Housing Element will occur through adoption.
                                          In addition to review of the Preliminary Draft Housing
                                          Element, the November and December meetings of the
                                          Menlo Park Housing Commission, Planning Commission
                                          and City Council provide an opportunity to review the
                                          potential areas for the emergency shelter for the homeless
                                          overlay zone, the preliminary drafts of the proposed Zoning
                                          Ordinance amendments related to emergency shelter for
                                          the homeless, transitional and supportive housing, and
                                          reasonable accommodation, and a summary table and
                                          approach for modifications to the secondary dwelling unit
                                          and accessory buildings/structures ordinances.
                                          The schedule and process graphic on the next page shows
                                          the sequence of steps and timing for the Housing Element
                                          update process. The approach conforms to the City’s
                                          Community Engagement Model (CEM), which has been
                                          used effectively by the City in the past as a guide for
                                          comprehensive community involvement in important City
decisions, and has provided outreach to all economic segments of the community. Following
the submittal of the Draft Housing Element to HCD, the City also notified approximately 60 key
Housing Element Stakeholders, including affordable housing developers, advocacy groups,
and the building trades based on the stakeholders list prepared through the 21 Elements
process.
City of Menlo Park Housing Element — Adopted April 1, 2014                                      17

City of Menlo Park Housing Element — Adopted April 1, 2014 18
Section II
Housing Goals, Policies and Programs
  A       Why is Housing Important?
                                    The Housing Element’s intent with respect to housing
                                    needs in Menlo Park is expressed in two ways. The first
                                    is in the form of goals and objectives sought by the
                                    community. A goal is an ideal to strive for –– or the
                                    desired state of things at some point in the future.
                                    Objectives are defined steps toward a goal, which
                                    measure progress and should be expressed in quantified
terms or targets. State law requires that the City’s housing objectives establish the
maximum number of housing units that the City will strive to be constructed,
rehabilitated or conserved between 2015-2023.
The second, and more specific aspect of the Housing Element, are policy statements
and implementation programs. These describe the way citizens, local government and
other involved agencies or organizations can achieve objectives, and move closer to
the City’s goals. Policies establish a recognized community position on a particular
subject. Implementing programs are more detailed actions that the City, or other
identified entity, will implement to ensure the attainment of the Housing Element’s goal
and objectives. The discussion below provides summary information on key trends and
issues facing the City of Menlo Park as they relate to the Housing Element.
Critical questions facing the community are:
! What Kind of Housing Do We Need? What kind of housing (size, type, and price)
     best fits our housing needs, including the needs of our workforce, our growing
     senior population, young families, etc., and their ability to pay for housing?
! How Can We Effectively Help Special Needs Groups? Where can specialized
     housing be located and what can be done to assist those households with special
     needs, including, but not limited to the elderly, homeless, people living with physical
     or emotional disabilities?
! How Can We Effectively Work Together? What can the City do –– in
     collaboration with the community, community organizations, other agencies, non-
     profits and for-profit developers –– to encourage the construction of needed
     workforce, affordable and special needs housing?
City of Menlo Park Housing Element — Adopted April 1, 2014                                  19

! Where Can We Appropriately Put New Housing? Where in our community
     should additional residential units be accommodated, especially those that can
     meet future housing needs?
Below are some of the key regional and national trends affecting Menlo Park now and
into the future. The intent of the Housing Element is to strive to respond to these trends
as they affect housing choices in the community.
                      THE MILLENNIAL GENERATION WILL INCREASINGLY DEFINE
                      THE HOUSING MARKET
                      The Millennial generation (individuals between the ages of 20 and 34
                      years old) will increasingly define the housing market over the coming
                      decade.
                      The Millennial generation is a growing force in the housing and job
market and their preferences will shape our communities in the future. Millenials have
consistently expressed a preference for dense, mixed-use, walk-able and bike-able
communities, according to studies by the Urban Land Institute. They want to be near
work, near schools for their children, and be close to public transportation. These
amenities, along with safety and schools, are the top priorities for the Millenial
generation. Menlo Park, with the multiple activities and transit available in downtown
and new jobs at Facebook and other locations, is a prime location for Millenials.
Due to this generation’s age and the recent recession, Millenials have been less likely
to live on their own or own a home, but this is now changing. As the economy improves,
there will likely be a pent-up demand for housing among Millennials. Many studies have
shown that Millennials rent apartments and buy homes at a rate less than previous
generations. Instead, many Millennials have moved in with their parents or choose to
live with roommates. Many have speculated that Millenials may be a “generation of
renters,” but as the economy picks back up and aging occurs, this conclusion may
change. Approximately 69 percent of Millenials expect their next move to be to a house
they own.
Millennials are also value-conscious. They have less money than their older
counterparts, in part because they have not had time to build up savings. They also
must contend with higher rates of debt and a slow job market.
City of Menlo Park Housing Element — Adopted April 1, 2014                                  20

                               THERE WILL BE INCREASES IN SENIOR HOUSING AND
                               INCREASES IN SINGLE-PERSON HOUSEHOLDS
                               As baby boomers age, there will be a “silver tsunami.”
                               Ensuring safe, desirable options for aging seniors will require
                               advance planning. Over the next decade about one-third of the
                               new households created in Menlo Park are expected to be
                               single-person households due to the aging of the population
                               and personal choices.
The number of seniors in San Mateo County will increase dramatically over the next
decade and a half, as the large baby boomer generation ages. According to studies by
the American Association of Retired Persons (AARP), the vast majority of seniors want
to “age in place,” or remain in their current home or in their community, as long as
possible.
Seniors have special housing needs as a result of limited income and mobility issues,
which should be explicitly addressed to accommodate this growing population. Many
seniors live on fixed incomes, which limits their housing options and also puts them at
risk of being displaced. Seniors who are renters are at particularly high risk for being
displaced by increasing rents. Seniors in San Mateo County typically see their income
reduce by half as they age from their 50’s to their 80’s. Further, seniors who own their
home are often house rich but income poor.
Assuming national trends hold and 90 percent of seniors stay in their home, a large
number, more than ten thousand San Mateo County seniors, will be looking to move in
the coming years. Many seniors prefer to trade down to a smaller home with less
upkeep. Safety is also a significant concern for seniors. Additionally, many seniors do
not enjoy driving, and walkability and the availability of nearby public transit are very
important.
                               THERE WILL CONTINUE TO BE A SHORTAGE IN
                               WORKFORCE HOUSING AND A HIGH NUMBER OF
                               LOCAL WORKERS WHO COMMUTE DAILY INTO MENLO
                               PARK
                               San Mateo County has a workforce housing shortage caused
                               by years of rapid economic growth and slow housing growth.
This trend is exacerbated by the number of lower-wage jobs, which account for more
than one-third of all jobs.
City of Menlo Park Housing Element — Adopted April 1, 2014                                     21

For many years, job growth has been faster than housing production. This has caused
a shortage in workforce housing. As Silicon Valley has grown, smart, hard working,
talented people from all over the world have flocked to the area for the opportunities,
promise and culture of innovation. However, by and large, new workers have had to
move to other counties to live. While for many years Silicon Valley has led California in
job growth, the opposite is true for housing. Of California’s 58 counties, San Mateo
County was last in terms of percent of housing growth from 2000 to 2010. Santa Clara
County was only slightly better, ranking 40th out of 58. From 1990 to 2000, San Mateo
County was 54th and Santa Clara was 26th (1990, 2000 and 2010 US Census).
Job growth in San Mateo County has been picking up steadily since the recession, and
is anticipated to be strong through the coming five years. According to the Association
of Bay Area Governments, job growth is anticipated to average 1.7 percent annually
(5,800 new jobs) in San Mateo County from 2010-2020. In contrast, the number of new
homes grew four percent over ten years (2000 and 2010 U.S. Census). Job growth over
the past decade has also been largely in the lower-income sectors.
In San Mateo County, the demand for housing will far outstrip the supply, with the
problem being much more acute for affordable housing. While San Mateo County has a
steadily climbing median income among residents, it also has a growing income
disparity between its higher income residents and lower-income workers who live
outside the county. According to the San Mateo Housing Needs Study (San Mateo
County Department of Housing), by 2025 the housing supply will only meet one-third to
one-half of the demand for housing. This growing housing shortage is particularly a
problem for lower-income families and individuals, who currently cannot find affordable
housing in San Mateo County. Projections show that this will continue to develop into a
deficit of 21,000 units by 2025 (San Mateo Housing Needs Study).
                              THERE WILL BE INCREASED DIVERSITY
                              San Mateo County, like California as a whole, is diversifying
                              rapidly.
                              According to 2010 U.S. Census data, San Mateo County is a
                              “majority-minority” county — that is, no one racial group makes
                              up over 50 percent of the population. The two racial groups
                              growing the most rapidly in San Mateo County are Asians and
                              Latinos. According to the regional Plan Bay Area, adopted on
July 18, 2013, Latinos will emerge as the largest ethnic group, increasing from 23
percent to 35 percent of the total population in the Bay Area by 2040. According to the
California Department of Finance, as referenced in the regional Plan Bay Area, both
City of Menlo Park Housing Element — Adopted April 1, 2014                                   22

Asian and Latino families are more likely to live in multigenerational households, though
this trend diminishes as people have been in the United States for a longer period of
time. In addition, recent immigrants are more likely to be linguistically isolated, which
can create problems for the provision of services.
                            SUSTAINABILITY AND CLIMATE ACTION PLANNING
                            STRONGLY RELATE TO PLANNING FOR HOUSING
                            Sustainability generally means living in a way that does not
                            compromise the ability of future generations to enjoy the same
                            quality of life.
                            Housing affects sustainability in many ways including water
                            quality, air quality, use of resources and climate change. Housing
                            has both direct effects (heating, cooling and powering homes)
and indirect effects (transportation patterns). Additionally, housing patterns influence
the amount people drive.
Climate change, caused in part by the release of carbon dioxide and other gases, is an
important issue in California and in San Mateo County. Major concerns include potential
for rising sea levels and decreased water supplies due to smaller snow packs. Based
on maps that assume one meter (a little over three feet) of sea level rise this century,
which is expected, San Mateo County is likely to suffer flooding from the Bay and the
Ocean.
Housing affects climate change in two ways. The houses themselves take energy to
heat, cool and power, and the energy production contributes to climate change.
Additionally, housing patterns affect how often and how far people have to drive. Since
vehicles contribute over 40 percent of climate change gases in California, and over 50
percent in the Bay Area, finding ways to allow people to drive fewer miles is important.
Menlo Park published a Climate Action Plan (CAP) in 2009 that included measures to
reduce greenhouse gas emissions. In June 2013, the City Council adopted a
greenhouse gas reduction target to achieve a 27 percent reduction below the 2005
levels by 2020.
City of Menlo Park Housing Element — Adopted April 1, 2014                                   23

  B       Housing Goals
The overarching goal of the City of Menlo Park Housing Element is to:
Address community needs for housing by providing a range of housing
choices that blend new development into the community consistent with
environmental, infrastructure and services needs.
Goal H1 — IMPLEMENTATION RESPONSIBILITIES
Continue to Build Local Government Institutional Capacity and Monitor
Accomplishments to Respond Effectively to Housing Needs.
Goal H1 is intended to: (1) define the City’s role and responsibilities in
implementing the Housing Element; (2) provide information and outreach
opportunities for the community; and (3) promote housing opportunities for all
persons regardless of age, race, color, sex, sexual orientation, marital status,
disability, ancestry, national origin and other barriers that prevent choice in
housing.
Goal H2 — EXISTING HOUSING AND NEIGHBORHOODS
Maintain, Protect and Enhance Existing Housing and Neighborhoods.
Goal H2 is intended to encourage the maintenance, improvement and
rehabilitation of the City’s existing housing stock, the preservation of the City’s
affordable housing stock and the enhancement of community stability.
Goal H3 — SPECIALIZED HOUSING NEEDS
Provide Housing for Special Needs Populations that is Coordinated with
Support Services.
Goal H3 is intended to proactively address the special housing needs of the
community, including seniors, disabled individuals and the homeless.
Goal H4 — NEW HOUSING
Use Land Efficiently to Meet Community Housing Needs at a Variety of Income
Levels, Implement Sustainable Development Practices and Blend Well-Designed
New Housing into the Community.
Goal H4 is intended to: (1) promote the development of a balanced mix of housing
types and densities for all economic segments throughout the community, (2)
remove governmental and non-governmental constraints on the production,
rehabilitation and/or cost of housing where appropriate, and (3) to encourage
energy efficiency in both new and existing housing.
City of Menlo Park Housing Element — Adopted April 1, 2014                          24

 C        Housing Policies and Implementing Programs
                                              Goal H1 — IMPLEMENTATION
                                              RESPONSIBILITIES
                                              CONTINUE TO BUILD LOCAL
                                              GOVERNMENT INSTITUTIONAL
                                              CAPACITY AND MONITOR
                                              ACCOMPLISHMENTS TO EFFECTIVELY
                                              RESPOND TO HOUSING NEEDS.
Policies
H1.1      Local Government Leadership. Recognize affordable housing as an
          important City priority and the City will take a proactive leadership role in
          working with community groups, other jurisdictions and agencies, non-profit
          housing sponsors and the building and real estate industry in following through
          on identified Housing Element implementation actions in a timely manner.
H1.2      Community Participation in Housing and Land Use Plans. Strengthen a
          sense of community by providing opportunities for community participation,
          developing partnerships with a variety of groups and providing community
          leadership to effectively address housing needs. The City will undertake
          effective and informed public participation from all economic segments and
          special needs groups in the community in the formulation and review of housing
          and land use policy issues.
H1.3      Neighborhood Responsibilities within Menlo Park. Seek ways, specific to
          each neighborhood, to provide additional housing as part of each
          neighborhood’s fair share responsibility and commitment to help achieve
          community-wide housing goals. This may range from in-lieu fees, secondary
          dwelling units, higher density housing sites, infill housing, mixed-use or other
          new housing construction.
H1.4      Neighborhood Meetings. Encourage developers of major housing projects will
          be encouraged to conduct neighborhood meetings with residents early in the
          process to undertake problem solving and facilitate more informed, faster and
          constructive development review.
City of Menlo Park Housing Element — Adopted April 1, 2014                                 25

H1.5      Inter-Jurisdictional Strategic Action Plan for Housing. Coordinate housing
          strategies with other jurisdictions in San Mateo County as appropriate to
          meeting the City’s housing needs.
H1.6      Equal Housing Opportunity. Actively support housing opportunities for all
          persons to the fullest extent possible. The City will ensure that individuals and
          families seeking housing in Menlo Park are not discriminated against on the
          basis of race, color, religion, marital status, disability, age, sex, family status
          (due to the presence of children), national origin, or other arbitrary factors,
          consistent with the Fair Housing laws.
H1.7      Local Funding for Affordable Housing. Seek ways to reduce housing costs
          for lower income workers and people with special needs by developing ongoing
          local funding resources and continuing to utilize other local, state and federal
          assistance to the fullest extent possible. The City will also maintain the Below
          Market Rate (BMR) housing program requirements for residential and non-
          residential developments.
H1.8      Organizational Effectiveness. Seek ways to organize and allocate staffing and
          community resources effectively and efficiently to implement the programs of the
          Housing Element. In recognition that there are limited resources available to the
          City to achieve housing goals in implementing this policy, the City will, to the
          extent practical:
          a.        Provide technical and administrative support, as well as assist in finding
                    outside funding, to agencies and private sponsors in developing and/or
                    rehabilitating housing to accommodate special housing needs.
          b.        Provide representation on committees, task forces, or other forums
                    addressing housing issues at a local, regional or state level.
H1.9      Housing Element Monitoring, Evaluation and Revisions. Establish a regular
          monitoring and update process to assess housing needs and achievements,
          and to provide a process for modifying policies, programs and resource
          allocations as needed in response to changing conditions.
Implementing Programs
H1.A      Establish City Staff Work Priorities for Implementing Housing Element Programs.
          As part of the annual review of the Housing Element (see Program H1.B), establish work
          priorities to implement the Housing Element related to community outreach, awareness
          and input on housing concerns and striving to ensure that all City publications, including
City of Menlo Park Housing Element — Adopted April 1, 2014                                          26

          the City’s Activity Guide, include information on housing programs. City staff work
          priorities specific to Housing Element implementing programs include:
          a.        Conduct the annual review of the Housing Element (Program H1.B).
          b.        Review options for funding housing affordable to extremely low, very low, low
                    and moderate income households (Program H4.Q).
          c.        Make recommendations to City Commissions on strategies for housing
                    opportunity sites and for funding (Program H1.B).
          d.        Provide follow-up on housing opportunity sites and funding based on directions
                    provided by the City Council, including working with the community and
                    implementing Housing Element programs (Program H4.H).
          e.        Conduct community outreach and provide community information materials
                    through an open and non-advocacy process (Program H1.E).
          f.        Engage property owners in identifying opportunities for the construction of
                    affordable housing affordable to extremely low, very low, low and moderate
                    income households (Program H4.H).
          g.        Pursue unique opportunities where the City can participate in the construction of
                    affordable housing, either on City-owned sites, or through funding or regulatory
                    means (Program H4.J).
          h.        Develop ongoing and annual outreach and coordination with non-profit housing
                    developers and affordable housing advocates (Program H1.I).
          i.        Continue to participate in ongoing regional activities related to housing,
                    including participation in ongoing efforts as part of the Countywide 21 Elements
                    effort.
          Responsibility:             City Commissions; Planning Division; City Manager; City
                                      Council
          Financing:                  General Fund
          Objectives:                 Establish staff priorities for implementing Housing Element
                                      programs.
          Timeframe:                  Participate in ongoing regional planning activities throughout
                                      the Housing Element planning period and develop a work
                                      program as part of the annual review of the Housing Element
                                      (see Program H1.B).
H1.B      Review the Housing Element Annually. As required by State law, review the status of
          Housing Element programs by April of each year, beginning April 2014. As required by
          statute, annual review will cover:
          a.        Consistency between the Housing Element and the other General Plan
                    Elements. As portions of the General Plan are amended, this Housing Element
                    will be reviewed to ensure that internal consistency is maintained. In addition, a
                    consistency review will be implemented as part of the annual general plan
                    implementation report required under Government Code Section 65400.
          b.        Statistical summary of residential building activity tied to various types of
                    housing, household need, income and Housing Element program targets.
City of Menlo Park Housing Element — Adopted April 1, 2014                                            27

          Responsibility:            City Commissions; Planning Division; City Council
          Financing:                 General Fund
          Objectives:                Review and monitor Housing Element implementation; conduct
                                     public review with the Housing Commission, Planning
                                     Commission and City Council, and submit Annual Report to
                                     HCD.
          Timeframe:                 April 2014 and annually thereafter.
H1.C      Publicize Fair Housing Laws and Respond to Discrimination Complaints. Promote
          fair housing opportunities for all people and support efforts of City, County, State and
          Federal agencies to eliminate discrimination in housing by continuing to publicize
          information on fair housing laws and State and federal anti-discrimination laws. Below
          are specific aspects of this program:
          a.       The City Manager shall designate an Equal Opportunity Coordinator in Menlo
                   Park with responsibility to investigate and deal appropriately with complaints.
          b.       Discrimination complaints will be referred to the appropriate agency.
                   Specifically, the City will continue to work with Eden Council for Hope and
                   Opportunity (ECHO) and the San Mateo County Department of Housing in
                   handling fair housing complaints. Calls to the City are referred to ECHO for
                   counseling and investigation. ECHO also provides direct fair housing education
                   to Menlo Park residents.
          c.       Enforce a non-discrimination policy in the implementation of City approved
                   housing programs.
          d.       The City will provide public information materials and referrals to the Peninsula
                   Conflict Resolution Center (PCRC) and the Landlord and Tenant Information
                   and Referral Collaborative (LTIRC) to assist tenants and landlords in resolving
                   conflicts and understanding their respective rights and obligations.
          e.       Information regarding the housing discrimination complaint referral process will
                   be posted on the City’s website and available for the public and City staff
                   consistent with Program 1H.D.
          f.       As needed, the City will outreach to lenders to increase flow of mortgage funds
                   to city residents.
          Responsibility:            Planning Division; City Manager; City Attorney
          Financing:                 General Fund
          Objectives:                Obtain and distribute materials (see Program 1H.D).
          Timeframe:                 2014 and ongoing thereafter and in response to complaints.
H1.D      Provide Information on Housing Programs. Promote the availability of San Mateo
          County programs for housing construction, homebuyer assistance, rental assistance and
          housing rehabilitation through the following means: (a) creating a link on the City’s
          website that describes programs available in the City of Menlo Park and provides direct
          links to County agencies that administer the programs; (b) including contact information
City of Menlo Park Housing Element — Adopted April 1, 2014                                           28

          on County programs in City mail-outs and other general communications that are sent to
          residents; (c) maintaining information on programs at the City’s public counters; (d)
          training selected City staff to provide referrals to appropriate agencies; (e) distributing
          information on programs at public locations (library, schools, etc.); and (f) using the
          activity calendar and public information channel.
          Examples of specific information would include:
          a.        Fair Housing Laws
          b.        Rehabilitation loan programs
          c.        San Mateo County Housing Authority information
          d.        Housing programs, including rental assistance programs such as Section 8
          e.        Code enforcement
          f.        Homebuyer assistance
          g.        Information about affordable housing
          Responsibility:            Planning Division
          Financing:                 General Fund
          Objectives:                Review and obtain materials by June 2014; distribute and post
                                     materials, conduct staff training by December 2014; annually
                                     update as needed thereafter.
          Timeframe:                 Distribute educational materials at public locations and make
                                     public service announcements through different media at least
                                     two times a year.
H1.E      Undertake Community Outreach When Implementing Housing Element Programs.
          Coordinate with local businesses, housing advocacy groups, neighborhood groups and
          others in building public understanding and support for workforce, special needs housing
          and other issues related to housing, including the community benefits of affordable
          housing, mixed use and pedestrian-oriented development. The City will notify a broad
          representation of the community to solicit ideas for housing strategies when they are
          discussed at City Commissions or City Council meetings. Specific actions should be
          linked to the preparation and distribution of materials as identified in Programs H1.D.
          Specific outreach activities include:
          a.        Maintain the Housing Element mailing list and send public hearing notices to all
                    interested public, non-profit agencies and affected property owners.
          b.        Post notices at City Hall, the library, and other public locations.
          c.        Publish notices in the local newspaper.
          d.        Post information on the City’s website.
          e.        Conduct outreach (workshops, neighborhood meetings) to the community as
                    Housing Element programs are implemented.
          f.        Assure that Housing Commission meetings are publicized and provide
                    opportunities for participation from housing experts, affordable housing
                    advocates, special needs populations, and the community as a whole.
City of Menlo Park Housing Element — Adopted April 1, 2014                                            29

          g.       Provide public information materials concerning recycling practices for the
                   construction industry, as well as use of recycled materials and other
                   environmentally responsible materials in new construction, consistent with
                   Chapter 12.48, Salvaging and Recycling of Construction and Demolition Debris,
                   of the City of Menlo Park Municipal Code and California Building Code
                   requirements.
          h.       Provide public information materials about available energy conservation
                   programs, such as the PG&E Comfort Home/Energy Star new home program,
                   to interested property owners, developers and contractors.
          i.       Promote and help income-eligible households to access federal, state and utility
                   income qualifying assistance programs.
          j.       Provide public information materials to developers, contractors and property
                   owners on existing federal, state and utility incentives for installation of
                   renewable energy systems, such as rooftop solar panels, available to property
                   owners and builders.
          Responsibility:           Planning Division
          Financing:                General Fund
          Objectives:               Conduct community outreach and distribute materials (see
                                    Programs H1.C and 1H.D).
          Timeframe:                Consistent with implementing programs.
H1.F      Work with the San Mateo County Department of Housing. Continue to coordinate
          with the San Mateo County Department of Housing (DOH) for management of the
          affordable housing stock in order to ensure permanent affordability, and implement
          resale and rental regulations for very low, low and moderate-income units, and assure
          that these units remain at an affordable price level.
          Responsibility:           Planning Division; City Manager
          Financing:                General Fund
          Objectives:               Coordinate with County efforts to maintain and support
                                    affordable housing.
          Timeframe:                Ongoing
H1.G      Adopt an Anti-Discrimination Ordinance. Adopt an Anti-Discrimination Ordinance to
          prohibit discrimination based on the source of a person’s income or the use of rental
          subsidies, including Section 8 and other rental programs.
          Responsibility:           City Commissions; Planning Division; City Attorney; City
                                    Council
          Financing:                General Fund
          Objectives:               Undertake Municipal Code amendment and ensure effective
                                    implementation of anti-discrimination policies and enforcement
                                    as needed.
          Timeframe:                2016
City of Menlo Park Housing Element — Adopted April 1, 2014                                         30

H1.H      Utilize the City’s Below Market Rate (BMR) Housing Fund. Administer and no longer
          than every two years advertise the availability of funds in the Below Market Rate (BMR)
          Housing Fund as it applies to residential, commercial and industrial development
          projects.
          Responsibility:           City Commissions; Planning Division; City Attorney; City
                                    Manager; City Council
          Financing:                Below Market Rate Housing Fund and General Fund
          Objectives:               Accumulate and distribute funds for housing affordable to
                                    extremely low, very low, low and moderate income households.
          Timeframe:                Ongoing
H1.I      Work with Non-Profits on Housing. Continue to work with non-profits to assist in
          achieving the City’s housing goals and implementing programs. Coordination should
          occur on an ongoing basis, and as special opportunities arise as the Housing Element is
          implemented. Participation of non-profits in an advisory role when implementing housing
          programs would be desirable to help understand the needs and opportunities for non-
          profit housing development in the community. The City currently works with and
          provides partial funding support for Human Investment Project (HIP Housing), Center for
          Independence of the Disabled (CID), Eden Council for Hope and Opportunity (ECHO),
          Rebuilding Together; HEART memberships and Peninsula Conflict Resolution Center.
          Responsibility:           Planning Division; City Manager
          Financing:                General Fund
          Objectives:               Maintain a working relationship with non-profit housing
                                    sponsors.
          Timeframe:                Ongoing
H1.J      Update the Housing Element. In coordination with other jurisdictions in San Mateo
          County, update the Menlo Park Housing Element to be consistent with State law
          requirements and to address the City’s RHNA 5 for the 2015-2023 planning period.
          Responsibility:           City Commissions; Planning Division; City Council
          Financing:                General Fund
          Objectives:               Assure consistency with SB375 and Housing Element law.
          Timeframe:                Update the Housing Element by 2023.
H1.K      Address Rent Conflicts. Provide for increased use and support of tenant/landlord
          educational and mediation opportunities and continue the City’s financial contribution to
          and encourage resident use of the Peninsula Conflict Resolution Center as a vehicle to
          resolve rental disputes between renters and property owners.
          Responsibility:           Planning Division; City Manager; City Attorney
          Financing:                General Fund
          Objectives:               Resolve rent issues as they arise.
          Timeframe:                Ongoing
City of Menlo Park Housing Element — Adopted April 1, 2014                                          31

H1.L      Update Priority Procedures for Providing Water Service to Affordable Housing
          Developments. At least once every five years, update written policies and procedures
          that grant priority for service allocations to proposed developments that include housing
          units affordable to lower income households consistent with SB 1087 (Government
          Code Section 65589.7).
          Responsibility:            Planning Division; Department of Public Works (Menlo Park
                                     Municipal Water District); City Manager; City Council
          Financing:                 Water Fund
          Objectives:                Comply with Government Code Section 65589.7.
          Timeframe:                 2015 and 2020 (as part of Urban Water Management Plan
                                     updates)
H1.M      Lobby for Changes to State Housing Element Requirements. In coordination with
          other jurisdictions in San Mateo County, as appropriate, lobby for modifications to State
          Housing Element requirements to address unfunded State mandates and enable a more
          community-driven process and more local control in developing appropriate housing
          policies and programs. Specific modifications to State requirements include, but are not
          limited to, the following:
          a.       Enable State projections and the development of regional housing needs to be a
                   more transparent process, subject to public hearings and peer review.
          b.       Enable more consideration of local issues such as water supply, infrastructure
                   needs, schools, roadway improvements, as well as the fiscal demands that
                   come with providing additional city services to new residents.
          c.       Address unfunded mandates and expenses local governments must incur to
                   comply with State requirements, especially when rezoning of sites to meet State
                   mandated densities is required.
          d.       Assist local governments in meeting their affordable housing requirements and
                   the resulting need for additional schools and infrastructure required (water,
                   waste water, etc.).
          e.       Recognize the importance of second units as a particularly viable mechanism to
                   address housing needs in providing housing for family members, students, the
                   elderly, in-home health care providers, the disabled and others at below market
                   prices, and allow jurisdictions to use GIS to count illegal second units, and if an
                   amnesty plan is adopted, allow cities to count a high percentage of the illegal
                   units toward the housing need.
          f.       Provide greater flexibility to allow a city to mix affordable housing with
                   community serving retail, like a grocery store, that may make development of
                   affordable housing a more financially attractive to local developers and may
                   increase the likelihood that affordable housing will be built (and in a sustainable
                   fashion where dependence on the automobile is reduced).
          g.       Recognize that in high housing cost localities, like Menlo Park, higher density
                   zoning may not necessarily produce affordable housing and results in incentives
                   for developers to build market rate housing rather than affordable housing.
City of Menlo Park Housing Element — Adopted April 1, 2014                                             32

                   Modify Government Code Section 65583.2 that requires cities to zone sufficient
                   property at 30 units/acre as the major mechanism to define affordable housing
                   and for jurisdictions to provide their share of the regional housing need.
          Responsibility:            Planning Division; City Commissions; City Attorney; City
                                     Council; City Manager
          Financing:                 General Fund
          Objectives:                Work with other San Mateo County jurisdictions, as appropriate,
                                     and lobby for modifications to Housing Element law.
          Timeframe:                 Identify possible lobbying efforts as part of Program H1.B
                                     (Review the Housing Element Annually).
                                   Goal H2 — EXISTING HOUSING AND
                                   NEIGHBORHOODS
                                   MAINTAIN, PROTECT AND ENHANCE EXISTING
                                   HOUSING AND NEIGHBORHOODS.
Policies
H2.1      Maintenance, Improvement and Rehabilitation of Existing Housing.
          Encourage the maintenance, improvement, and rehabilitation of the City’s
          existing housing stock, the preservation of the City’s affordable housing stock,
          and the enhancement of community stability to maintain and improve the
          character and stability of Menlo Park’s existing residential neighborhoods while
          providing for the development of a variety of housing types. The provision of
          open space and/or quality gathering and outdoor spaces shall be encouraged.
H2.2      Preservation of Residential Units. Limit the conversion of residential units to
          other uses and regulate the conversion of rental developments to non-
          residential uses unless there is a clear public benefit or equivalent housing can
          be provided to ensure the protection and conservation of the City’s housing
          stock to the extent permitted by law.
H2.3      Condominium Conversions. Assure that any conversions of rental housing to
          owner housing accommodate the tenants of the units being converted,
          consistent with requirements to maintain public health, safety and welfare. The
          City will also encourage limited equity cooperatives and other innovative
          housing proposals that are affordable to lower income households.
City of Menlo Park Housing Element — Adopted April 1, 2014                                         33

H2.4      Protection of Existing Affordable Housing. Strive to ensure that affordable
          housing provided through government incentives, subsidy or funding, and deed
          restrictions remains affordable over time, and the City will intervene when
          possible to help preserve such housing.
H2.5      Maintenance and Management of Quality Housing and Neighborhoods.
          Encourage good management practices, rehabilitation of viable older housing,
          and long-term maintenance and improvement of neighborhoods.
H2.6      Renewable Energy/Energy Conservation in Housing. Encourage energy
          efficiency and/or renewable energy in both new and existing housing and
          promote energy conservation and/or renewable energy in the design of all new
          residential structures and promote incorporation of energy conservation and/or
          renewable energy and weatherization features in existing homes. In addition,
          the City will support the actions contained in the City’s Climate Action Plan
          (CAP).
Implementing Programs
H2.A      Adopt Ordinance for “At Risk” Units. While there are currently no “at risk” subsidized
          units in Menlo Park, prepare an ordinance requiring a one‑year notice to residents, the
          City and the San Mateo County Department of Housing of all proposed conversions of
          subsidized housing units to market rents. In addition, the City will establish regular
          contact with the owners of potential “at risk” units to assure long-term coordination. If
          the units appear to be in danger of conversion or being lost as affordable housing, the
          City will establish contact with public and non-profit agencies who may be interested in
          managing or purchasing the units to inform them of the project’s status and inform
          tenants of any assistance available. In working with other agencies, the City will ensure
          that funding sources are identified and timelines for action are executed.
          Responsibility:           City Commissions; Planning Division; City Attorney; City
                                    Council
          Financing:                General Fund
          Objectives:               Protect existing affordable housing.
          Timeframe:                2016
H2.B      Promote Energy Efficient/Renewable Programs. Develop local policy and/or
          programs that promote and/or increase energy efficiency/renewable energy in the
          community. Promote county, state (Energy Upgrade California), federal and PG&E
          energy programs for energy assessments and improvements. Seek grants and other
          funding to supplement City energy conservation/renewable activities.
City of Menlo Park Housing Element — Adopted April 1, 2014                                          34

          Responsibility:            Environmental Division; Building Division; PG&E
          Financing:                 Energy Conservation and PG&E Program Funding
          Objectives:                50 or more homes and businesses participating in a program
          Timeframe:                 Establish policy and programs by 2017; Participation rate by
                                     2022
H2.C      Amend the Zoning Ordinance to Protect Existing Housing. Consistent with State
          law, amend the Zoning Ordinance to reflect the Housing Element policy of limiting the
          loss of existing residential units or the conversion of existing residential units to
          commercial or office space (see Policy H2.2). Zoning Ordinance changes and City
          activities should address residential displacement impacts, including the following:
          a.        Avoid contradicting the Ellis Act.
          b.        Consider regulations used in other communities.
          c.        Consider a modified replacement fee on a per unit basis, or replacement of a
                    portion of the units, relocation assistance, etc. to the extent consistent with the
                    Ellis Act.
          d.        Collaborate with the San Mateo County Department of Housing, Mid-Pen
                    Housing Corporation and others, as needed, to ensure protection of affordable
                    units in Menlo Park.
          e.        Consider rezoning of properties for consistency to match and protect their
                    existing residential uses.
          Responsibility:            City Commissions; Planning Division; City Attorney; City
                                     Council
          Financing:                 General Fund
          Objectives:                Protect existing rental housing as part of infill implementation
                                     and other Zoning Ordinance changes.
          Timeframe:                 Consider as part of the City’s General Plan Update (2014-
                                     2017).
H2.D      Assist in Implementing Housing Rehabilitation Programs. Continue to target Belle
          Haven as a primary area for rehabilitation to prevent existing standard units, both single
          family and apartments, from becoming deteriorated and to significantly reduce the
          number of seriously deteriorated units. Emphasis will be placed on the rehabilitation of
          apartments along Pierce Road. In addition, the City will:
          a.        Continue to work with and refer people to the San Mateo County Department of
                    Housing/ Programs including the Single Family Ownership Rehabilitation
                    Program and the Multi-Family Rental Rehabilitation program.
          b.        Encourage private sponsors to develop and maintain housing units using state
                    and federal housing assistance programs for emergency and other repairs.
          c.        Work with San Mateo County to compete for Community Development Block
                    Grant funds to ensure continuation of the Single Family Ownership
                    Rehabilitation Program for low- and very low-income families in the community.
          d.        Investigate possible use of housing rehabilitation loans to assist homeowners in
                    implementing the City’s secondary dwelling unit programs.
City of Menlo Park Housing Element — Adopted April 1, 2014                                              35

          Responsibility:           Planning Division; Building Division.
          Financing:                Outside subsidy
          Objectives:               Apply to the County for CDBG funds to provide loans to
                                    rehabilitate very low and low income housing (20 loans from
                                    2015-2023).
          Timeframe:                2015-2023
                              Goal H3 — SPECIALIZED HOUSING NEEDS
                              PROVIDE HOUSING FOR SPECIAL NEEDS
                              POPULATIONS THAT IS COORDINATED WITH
                              SUPPORT SERVICES.
Policies
H3.1      Special Needs Groups. Encourage non-profit organizations and private
          developers to build and maintain affordable housing for groups with special
          needs, including the needs of seniors, people living with disabilities, the
          homeless, people with HIV/AIDS and other illnesses, people in need of mental
          health care, single-parent families, large families and other persons identified as
          having special housing needs.
H3.2      Health and Human Services Programs Linkages. Assist service providers to
          link together programs serving the needs of special populations to provide the
          most effective response to homelessness or persons at risk of homelessness,
          youth needs, seniors, persons with mental or physical disabilities, substance
          abuse problems, HIV/AIDS, physical and developmental disabilities, multiple
          diagnoses, veterans, victims of domestic violence and other economically
          challenged or underemployed workers.
H3.3      Incentives for Special Needs Housing. Use density bonuses and other
          incentives to assist in meeting special housing needs, including housing for
          lower income elderly and disabled.
H3.4      Adaptable/Accessible Units for the Disabled. Ensure that new multi-family
          housing includes units that are accessible and adaptable for use by disabled
          persons in conformance with the California Building Code. This will include
City of Menlo Park Housing Element — Adopted April 1, 2014                                      36

           ways to promote housing design strategies to allow seniors to “age in place” or
           in the community.
H3.5       Transitional and Supportive Housing. Recognize the need for and desirability
           of transitional and supportive housing and treat transitional and supportive
           housing as a residential use that will be subject to the same restrictions that
           apply to other residential uses of the same zone.
H3.6       Rental Assistance Programs. Continue to publicize and create opportunities
           for using available rental assistance programs, such as the project-based and
           voucher Section 8 certificates programs, in coordination with the San Mateo
           County Department of Housing (DOH) and other entities.
H3.7       Emergency Housing Assistance. Participate and allocate funds, as
           appropriate, for County and non-profit programs providing disaster
           preparedness and emergency shelter and related counseling services.
H3.8       Coordination with Other Agencies in Housing the Homeless. Engage other
           jurisdictions in San Mateo County to support long-term solutions for homeless
           individuals and families in San Mateo County, and to implement the Shelter Plus
           Care Program1 or similar activities. The City will allocate funds, as appropriate,
           for County and non-profit programs providing emergency shelter and related
           support services.
H3.9       Local Approach to Housing for the Homeless. Support a “housing first”
           approach to addressing homeless needs, consistent with the Countywide HOPE
           Plan. “Housing first” is intended to provide homeless people with housing quickly
           and then provide other services as needed, with a primary focus on helping
           individuals and families quickly access and sustain permanent housing. The City
           also recognizes the need for and desirability of emergency shelter housing for
           the homeless and will allow a year-round emergency shelter as a permitted use
           in specific locations to be established in the Zoning Ordinance.
           In addition, the following would apply:
           a. In recognition that homeless veterans are a special need in San Mateo
                County, the City will work with the U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs in
1
  Shelter Plus Care Program provides rental assistance that, when combined with supportive services,
provides housing to homeless people with disabilities, primarily those with serious illness, chronic problems
with alcohol and/or drugs, and acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS) or related diseases. The goals
of the Shelter Plus Care Program are to assist the participants to achieve residential stability, to increase
their skill levels and/or income, and to be involved in making decisions that affect their lives.
City of Menlo Park Housing Element — Adopted April 1, 2014                                                    37

               Menlo Park to identify possible programs and locations for housing and
               support services for homeless veterans.
          b. The City will encourage positive relations between neighborhoods and
               providers of permanent or temporary emergency shelters. Providers or
               sponsors of emergency shelters, transitional housing programs and
               community care facilities shall be encouraged to establish outreach
               programs within their neighborhoods and, when necessary, work with the
               City or a designated agency to resolve disputes.
          c. It is recommended that a staff person from the provider agency be
               designated as a contact person with the community to review questions or
               comments from the neighborhood. Outreach programs may also designate
               a member of the local neighborhood to their Board of Directors. Neighbors
               of emergency shelters shall be encouraged to provide a neighborly and
               hospitable environment for such facilities and their residents.
          d. Development standards for emergency shelters for the homeless located in
               Menlo Park will ensure that shelters would be developed in a manner which
               protects the health, safety and general welfare of nearby residents and
               businesses, while providing for the needs of a segment of the population as
               required by State law. Shelters shall be subject only to development, design
               review and management standards that apply to residential or commercial
               development in the same zone, except for the specific written and objective
               standards as allowed in State law.
Implementing Programs
H3.A      Zone for Emergency Shelter for the Homeless. Establish an overlay zone to allow
          emergency shelters for the homeless to address the City’s need for providing at least 16
          beds to address homeless needs in the community. Appropriate locations for the overlay
          zoning will be evaluated based on land availability, physical or environmental constraints
          (e.g., flooding, chemical contamination, slope instability), location (e.g., proximity to
          services, jobs, and transit), available acreage (i.e., vacant or non-vacant sites),
          compatibility with surrounding uses and the realistic capacity for emergency shelters. In
          reviewing potential non-vacant sites, the potential for reuse or conversion of existing
          buildings to emergency shelters will be considered. The City will also investigate the use
          of local churches providing temporary shelter for the homeless. In addition, the City will
          establish written and objective standards in the Zoning Ordinance covering:
          a.        Maximum number of beds;
          b.        Off-street parking based upon demonstrated need;
          c.        Size and location of on-site waiting and intake areas;
City of Menlo Park Housing Element — Adopted April 1, 2014                                           38

          d.         Provision of on-site management;
          e.         Proximity to other shelters;
          f.         Length of stay;
          g.         Lighting; and
          h.         Security during hours when the shelter is open.
          Responsibility:              Planning Division; City Attorney; City Commissions; City
                                       Council
          Financing:                   General Fund
                                                                         2
          Objectives:                  Amend the Zoning Ordinance.
          Timeframe:                   2014; concurrent with RHNA 5 Housing Element Update.
                                                                    3
H3.B      Zone for Transitional and Supportive Housing. Amend zones to specifically allow
          residential care facilities, transitional and supportive housing (see definitions), as
          required by State law. Transitional and supportive housing shall be considered a
          residential use subject only to those restrictions that apply to other residential dwellings
          of the same type in the same zone.
          Responsibility:              City Commissions; Planning Division; City Attorney; City
                                       Council
          Financing:                   General Fund
          Objectives:                  Amend the Zoning Ordinance.
          Timeframe:                   2014; concurrent with RHNA 5 Housing Element Update.
H3.C      Adopt Procedures for Reasonable Accommodation. Establish internal review
          procedures and/or ordinance modifications to provide individuals with disabilities
          reasonable accommodation in rules, policies, practices and procedures that may be
          necessary to ensure equal access to housing. The purpose of these procedures and/or
          ordinance modifications is to provide a process for individuals with disabilities to make a
          request for reasonable accommodation in regard to relief from the various land use,
          zoning, or building laws, rules, policies, practices and/or procedures of the City.
2
  There must be a realistic potential for redevelopment or reuse within the proposed zone and it must be an
appropriate location for a shelter, with access to transportation and services. Within this zone, shelters
must be permitted without a conditional use permit or other discretionary action and shelters must be
subject to the same development and management standards as other residential or commercial uses
within the same zone.
3
  (See definitions beginning on page 8) Supportive housing is housing with no limit on length of stay, that
is occupied by the target population, and that is linked to an onsite or offsite service that assists the
supportive housing resident in retaining the housing, improving his or her health status, and maximizing his
or her ability to live and, when possible, work in the community. Transitional housing is made up of
buildings configured as rental housing developments, but operated under program requirements that
require the termination of assistance and recirculating of the assisted unit to another eligible program
recipient at a predetermined future point in time that shall be no less than six months from the beginning of
the assistance. Transitional housing is a type of supportive housing used to facilitate the movement of
homeless individuals and families to permanent housing. A homeless person may live in a transitional
apartment for up to two-years while receiving supportive services that enable independent living.
City of Menlo Park Housing Element — Adopted April 1, 2014                                                   39

          Responsibility:             City Commissions; Planning Division; City Attorney; City
                                      Council
          Financing:                  General Fund
          Objectives:                 Amend the Zoning Ordinance and/or modify administrative
                                      procedures; create public handout.
          Timeframe:                  2014; concurrent with RHNA 5 Housing Element Update.
H3.D      Encourage Rental Housing Assistance Programs. Encourage the use of federal,
          state and local rental housing programs for special needs populations. Continue to
          publicize programs and work with the San Mateo County Department of Housing to
          implement the Section 8 Rental Assistance Program and, as appropriate, assist similar
          non-profit housing sponsor rental assistance programs. Information will be provided
          through implementation of Housing Element Program H1.D.
          Responsibility:             Planning Division; City Manager; San Mateo County
                                      Department of Housing and non-profit housing sponsors; U.S.
                                      Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD).
          Financing:                  Outside subsidy
          Objectives:                 Provide assistance at current Section 8 funding levels to assist
                                      220 extremely low and very low-income households per year
                                                                                     4
                                      (assumes continued funding of program).
          Timeframe:                  2015-2023
H3.E      Investigate Possible Multi-Jurisdictional Emergency Shelter. Pursuant to State law
          requirements, and as the opportunity arises, consider participation in a multi-
                                                                                          5
          jurisdictional emergency shelter, should one be proposed in the future.
          Responsibility:             City Commissions; Planning Division; City Manager; City
                                      Attorney; City Council
          Financing:                  General Fund; other sources
          Objectives:                 Coordinate in the construction of a homeless facility (if
                                      determined feasible)
          Timeframe:                  Since there currently are no plans for a specific facility, this is a
                                      longer-term implementing program.
H3.F      Assist in Providing Housing for Persons Living with Disabilities. Continue to
          contribute financial support for the programs of the Center for the Independence of the
          Disabled and other non-profit groups that improve housing opportunities for disabled
          persons, including people with developmental disabilities.
          Responsibility:             City Commissions; Planning Division; City Manager; City
                                      Attorney; City Council
4
  Source of data Housing Leadership Council of San Mateo County (http://www.hlcsmc.org/data/affordable-
housing) from the San Mateo County Department of Housing (Housing Authority)
5
  State law allows adjacent jurisdictions to collaborate on the provision of a homeless facility that meet
homeless needs in both communities.
City of Menlo Park Housing Element — Adopted April 1, 2014                                                  40

          Financing:                  General Fund; other sources
          Objectives:                 Provide housing and services for disabled persons.
          Timeframe:                  Ongoing
H3.G      Develop Incentives for Special Needs Housing. Initiate a Zoning Ordinance
          amendment, including review of the R-L-U (Retirement Living Units) Zoning District, to
          ensure it is consistent with Housing Element policies and fair housing laws, and to
          develop density bonus and other incentives for needed senior housing, senior care
          facilities and other special needs housing for persons living with disabilities in the
          community, including people with developmental disabilities. Emphasis will also be
          placed on ways to facilitate the development of housing for seniors with very low, low
          and moderate incomes. Below are specifics:
          a.        The regulations should address the changing needs of seniors over time,
                    including units for independent living and assisted living as well as skilled
                    nursing facilities.
          b.        The City will continue to allow the development and expansion of housing
                    opportunities for seniors and special needs persons through techniques such as
                    smaller unit sizes, parking reduction and common dining facilities when units are
                    sponsored by a non-profit organization or when developed under the Retirement
                    Living Unit (RLU) District provisions of the Zoning Ordinance.
          c.        The City will coordinate with the Golden Gate Regional Center to ensure that
                    the needs of the developmentally disabled are considered as part of the
                    program.
          Responsibility:             City Commissions; Planning Division; City Manager; City
                                      Attorney; City Council
          Financing:                  General Fund; other sources
          Objectives:                 Amend the Zoning Ordinance to provide opportunities for
                                      housing and adequate support services for seniors and people
                                      living with disabilities.
          Timeframe:                  Consider as part of the City’s General Plan Update (2014-2017)
H3.H      Continue Support for Countywide Homeless Programs. Support activities intended
          to address homeless needs in San Mateo County. Below are specifics:
          a.        The City will work with and support the Veteran’s Administration and Haven
                    House emergency shelter programs.
          b.        The City will continue to support Human Investment Project (HIP Housing)
                               6
                    programs.
6
  HIP Housing programs include home sharing, rental subsidies and case management for individuals and
families. Home Sharing is a living arrangement in which two or more unrelated people share a home or
apartment. Each has his/her private room and shares the common living areas. The Self-Sufficiency
Program (SSP) provides housing assistance and support services to low-income families with career and
educational goals and motivation to become financially self-reliant within 12-24 months. Participants
City of Menlo Park Housing Element — Adopted April 1, 2014                                            41

          Responsibility:           City Commissions; Planning Division; City Manager; City
                                    Council; HIP Housing; Veteran’s Administration;
                                    InnVision/Shelter Network; HEART (The Housing Endowment
                                    and Regional Trust)
          Financing:                General Fund; other sources
          Objectives:               Support housing and services for the homeless and at risk
                                    persons and families.
          Timeframe:                Ongoing
H3.I      Work with the Department of Veterans Affairs on Homeless Issues. Work with the
          Department of Veterans Affairs to identify possible programs and locations for housing
          and support services for the homeless, including homeless veterans.
          Responsibility:           Planning Division; City Manager; City Council, U.S. Department
                                    of Veterans Affairs
          Financing:                General Fund and outside
          Objectives:               Coordination in addressing the needs of the homeless.
          Timeframe:                2014; ongoing thereafter
                                           Goal 4 — NEW HOUSING
                                           USE LAND EFFICIENTLY TO MEET
                                           HOUSING NEEDS FOR A VARIETY OF
                                           INCOME LEVELS, IMPLEMENT
                                           SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT PRACTICES
                                           AND BLEND WELL-DESIGNED NEW
                                           HOUSING INTO THE COMMUNITY.
Policies
H4.1      Housing Opportunity Areas. Identify housing opportunity areas and sites
          where a special effort will be made to provide affordable housing consistent with
          other General Plan policies. Given the diminishing availability of developable
          land, Housing Opportunity Areas should have the following characteristics:
          a.       The site has the potential to deliver sales or rental units at low or below
                   market rate prices or rents.
receive subsidized rents or a housing scholarship while they complete an education or job training program
and find employment with an adequate income to support their families. While in the program, HIP Housing
provides monthly case management and life skills workshops to encourage continued progress.
City of Menlo Park Housing Element — Adopted April 1, 2014                                                42

          b.       The site has the potential to meet special housing needs for local
                   workers, single parents, seniors, small families or large families.
          c.       The City has opportunities, through ownership or special development
                   review, to facilitate provision of housing units to meet its housing
                   objectives.
          d.       The site scores well for Low Income Housing Tax Credits (LIHTC)
                   subsidy or has unique opportunities due to financing and/or financial
                   feasibility.
          e.       For sites with significant health and safety concerns, development may
                   be tied to nearby physical improvements, and minimum density
                   requirements may be reduced.
          f.       Site development should consider school capacity and the relationship to
                   the types of residential units proposed (i.e., housing seniors, small units,
                   smaller workforce housing, etc. in school capacity impact areas).
          g.       Consider incorporating existing viable commercial uses into the
                   development of housing sites.
H4.2      Housing to Address Local Housing Needs. Strive to provide opportunities for
          new housing development to meet the City’s share of its Regional Housing
          Needs Allocation (RHNA). In doing so, it is the City’s intent to provide an
          adequate supply and variety of housing opportunities to meet the needs of
          Menlo Park’s workforce and special needs populations, striving to match
          housing types, affordability and location, with household income, and
          addressing the housing needs of extremely low income persons, lower income
          families with children and lower income seniors.
H4.3      Housing Design. Review proposed new housing in order to achieve excellence
          in development design through an efficient process and will encourage infill
          development on vacant and underutilized sites that is harmonious with the
          character of Menlo Park residential neighborhoods. New construction in existing
          neighborhoods shall be designed to emphasize the preservation and
          improvement of the stability and character of the individual neighborhood.
          The City will also encourage innovative design that creates housing
          opportunities that are complementary to the location of the development. It is the
          City’s intent to enhance neighborhood identity and sense of community by
          ensuring that all new housing will (1) have a sensitive transition with the
          surrounding area, (2) avoid unreasonably affecting the privacy of neighboring
          properties, or (3) avoid impairing access to light and air of structures on
          neighboring properties.
City of Menlo Park Housing Element — Adopted April 1, 2014                                     43

H4.4       Variety of Housing Choices. Strive to achieve a mix of housing types,
           densities, affordability levels and designs in response to the broad range of
           housing needs in Menlo Park. Specific items include:
           a.       The City will work with developers of non-traditional and innovative
                    housing approaches in financing, design, construction and types of
                    housing that meet local housing needs.
           b.       Housing opportunities for families with children should strive to provide
                    necessary facilities nearby or on site.
           c.       The City will encourage a mix of housing types, including: owner and
                    rental housing, single and multiple-family housing, housing close to jobs
                    and transit, mixed use housing, work force housing, special needs
                    housing, single-room occupancy (SRO) housing, shared living and co-
                    housing, mobile-homes, manufactured housing, self-help or “sweat-
                    equity” housing, cooperatives and assisted living.
           d.       The City will support development of affordable, alternative living
                    arrangements such as co-housing and “shared housing” (e.g., the
                    Human Investment Project’s — HIP Housing — shared housing
                    program).
H4.5       Density Bonuses and Other Incentives for Affordable Housing
           Development. Use density bonuses and other incentives to help achieve
           housing goals while ensuring that potential impacts are considered and
           mitigated. This will include affordable housing overlay zoning provisions as an
           alternative to State Density Bonus Law.7
H4.6       Mixed Use Housing. Encourage well-designed mixed-use developments
           (residential mixed with other uses) where residential use is appropriate to the
           setting and to encourage mixed-use development in proximity to transit and
           services, such as at shopping centers and near to the downtown to support
           Downtown businesses (consistent with the El Camino Real/Downtown Specific
           Plan).
7
   State density bonus law, Government Code Section 65915, was first enacted in 1979. The law requires
local governments to provide density bonuses and other incentives to developers of affordable housing
who commit to providing a certain percentage of dwelling units to persons whose incomes do not exceed
specific thresholds. Cities also must provide bonuses to certain developers of senior housing
developments, and in response to certain donations of land and the inclusion of child care centers in some
developments. Essentially, state density bonus law establishes that a residential project of five or more
units that provides affordable or senior housing at specific affordability levels may be eligible for a “density
bonus” to allow more dwelling units than otherwise allowed on the site by the applicable General Plan Land
Use Map and Zoning. The density bonus may be approved only in conjunction with a development permit
(i.e., tentative map, parcel map, use permit or design review). Under State law, a jurisdiction must provide
a density bonus, and concessions and incentives will be granted at the applicant’s request based on
specific criteria.
City of Menlo Park Housing Element — Adopted April 1, 2014                                                       44

H4.7      Redevelopment of Commercial Shopping Areas and Sites. Encourage the
          development of housing in conjunction with the redevelopment of commercial
          shopping areas and sites when it occurs as long as adequate space for retail
          services remain.
H4.8      Retention and Expansion of Multi-Family Sites at Medium and Higher
          Density. Strive to protect and expand the supply and availability of multi-family
          and mixed-use infill housing sites for housing. When possible, the City will avoid
          re-designating or rezoning multi-family residential land for other uses or to lower
          densities without re-designating equivalent land for multi-family development
          and will ensure that adequate sites remain at all times to meet the City’s share
          of the region’s housing needs.
H4.9      Long-Term Housing Affordability Controls. Apply resale controls and rent
          and income restrictions to ensure that affordable housing provided through
          incentives and as a condition of development approval remains affordable over
          time to the income group for which it is intended. Inclusionary units shall be
          deed‑restricted to maintain affordability on resale to the maximum extent
          possible (at least 55 years).
H4.10 Inclusionary Housing Approach. Require residential developments involving
          five (5) or more units to provide units or an in-lieu fee equivalent for very low,
          low and moderate-income housing. The units provided through this policy are
          intended for permanent occupancy and must be deed restricted, including but
          not limited to single-family housing, multi‑family housing, condominiums,
          townhouses or land subdivisions. In addition, the City will require larger non-
          residential developments, as job generators, to participate in addressing
          housing needs in the community through the City’s commercial in-lieu fee
          requirements.
H4.11 Secondary Dwelling Units. Encourage the development of well-designed new
          secondary dwelling units (e.g., carriage houses, attached independent living
          units, small detached living units) and the legalization of existing secondary
          dwelling units or conversion of accessory buildings or structures to safe and
          habitable secondary dwelling units as an important way to provide affordable
          housing in combination with primary residential uses on low-density lots.
H4.12 Fair Share Distribution of Housing throughout Menlo Park. Promote the
          distribution of new, higher density residential developments throughout the city,
          taking into consideration compatibility with surrounding existing residential uses,
          particularly near public transit and major transportation corridors in the city.
City of Menlo Park Housing Element — Adopted April 1, 2014                                   45

H4.13 Preferences for Affordable Housing. Implement BMR housing preferences for
          people who live or work in Menlo Park to the extent consistent with Fair Housing
          laws.8
H4.14 Infill Housing Adjacent to Downtown. Create opportunities for a limited
          number of new housing units in areas adjacent to the El Camino
          Real/Downtown Specific Plan area to meet the City’s share of its Regional
          Housing Needs Allocation (RHNA), support downtown retail activities, and to
          locate new housing near jobs and transit. New housing opportunities are not
          intended to significantly change the character of these areas but would allow
          larger properties to redevelop at higher densities with design review to assure a
          fit of new housing with the character of the area and adjacent uses.
Implementing Programs
H4.A      Modify R-2 Zoning to Maximize Unit Potential. Modify R-2 zoning to tie floor area to
          dwelling units to minimize underutilization of R-2 zoned lots and maximize unit potential,
          unless unique features of a site prohibit additional units being constructed. In addition,
          allow secondary dwelling units on R-2 lots that are less than 7,000 square feet with
          approval of a use permit.
          Responsibility:           Planning Division; City Attorney; City Commissions; City
                                    Council
          Financing:                General Fund
          Objectives:               Amend the Zoning Ordinance to minimize underutilization of R-
                                    2 development potential.
          Timeframe:                Consider as part of the City’s General Plan Update (2014-
                                    2017).
H4.B      Implement Inclusionary Housing Regulations. Continue to administer the Below
          Market Rate (BMR) Housing Program for Commercial and Industrial Developments and
          the Below Market Rate (BMR) Housing Program for Residential Developments.
          Responsibility:           Planning Division; City Attorney; City Commissions; City
                                    Council
          Financing:                General Fund
          Objectives:               Implement requirements to assist in providing housing
                                    affordable to extremely low, very low, low and moderate income
                                    households in Menlo Park.
          Timeframe:                Ongoing
8
  Link to Menlo Park BMR Guidelines:
http://www.menlopark.org/departments/hsg/CurrentBMRGuidelinesMay2011.pdf
City of Menlo Park Housing Element — Adopted April 1, 2014                                           46

H4.C      Modify BMR Guidelines. Review and amend the Zoning Ordinance to reduce the cost
          of providing BMR units and to encourage new BMR units to be built, and to identify ways
          to construct housing affordable for lower income households, including family housing.
          As part of the BMR program evaluation the City will establish clear policy and criteria for
          the allocation of funds from the City’s BMR housing fund that prioritizes non-profit
          development of workforce rental housing affordable to low and very-low
          income households on sites the City has determined to be viable for Low Income
          Housing Tax Credits (LIHTC) funding by setting aside a substantial portion of the
          uncommitted BMR fund balance and of future BMR fees received by the City for
          such development. The City will also modify provisions regarding rental housing to be
          consistent with the Costa-Hawkins Act.
          Responsibility:            Planning Division; City Attorney; City Commissions; City
                                     Council
          Financing:                 General Fund
          Objectives:                Amend the Zoning Ordinance to require affordable units in
                                     market rate developments.
          Timeframe:                 Modify the BMR program by 2015.
H4.D      Update the BMR Fee Nexus Study. Coordinate the update of the BMR nexus fee study
          with other jurisdictions in San Mateo County as part of the Countywide 21 Elements
          project, which is a collaborative effort among all 21 jurisdictions in San Mateo County to
          provide assistance and collaborate on housing element implementation. Modify fees
          accordingly following the nexus study.
          Responsibility:            Planning Division; City Attorney; City Commissions; City
                                     Council
          Financing:                 General Fund; collaborative funding effort with other
                                     jurisdictions
          Objectives:                Update to fees consistent with the nexus of potential impacts on
                                     affordable housing need.
          Timeframe:                 2015.
H4.E      Modify Secondary Dwelling Unit Development Standards and Permit Process.
                                                                9
          Continue to encourage secondary dwelling units, and modify the City’s current
          regulations to reduce the minimum lot size, and consider allowances for larger
          secondary dwelling units, flexibility in height limits, reduced fees (possible reduction in
          both Planning/Building fees and impact fees as a result of the small size of the units),
          flexibility in how parking is provided on site and a greater City role in publicizing and
9
  Studies conducted on secondary dwelling units conclude that many new secondary dwelling units will be
affordable to lower income individuals, regardless of whether they are deed restricted. Some units are
made available free of charge to employees or relatives, helping meet the need for extremely low-income
households. In other cases, secondary dwelling units are often rented, below the market price typically
charged for larger apartments.
City of Menlo Park Housing Element — Adopted April 1, 2014                                              47

          providing guidance for the approval of secondary dwelling units as part of the General
          Plan update. Specifics would be developed as part of program implementation.
          Responsibility:            City Commissions; Planning Division; City Attorney; City
                                     Manager; City Council
          Financing:                 General Fund
          Objectives:                Amend the Zoning Ordinance to reduce the minimum lot size to
                                     create greater opportunities for new second units to be built.
                                     Achieve Housing Element target for new second units (40 new
                                     secondary dwelling units between 2015-2023, with 5 per year)
                                     — 18 very low, 18 low and 4 moderate income second units.
          Timeframe:                 2014; ongoing thereafter
H4.F      Establish a Process and Standards to Allow the Conversion of Accessory
          Buildings and Structures to a Secondary Dwelling Unit. Allow converted accessory
          buildings/structures that do not comply with the current secondary dwelling unit
          ordinance to be reviewed through a new process that establishes an allowance for one
          or more exceptions from the secondary dwelling unit development regulations. Modify
          the existing development regulations of accessory buildings/structures to more clearly
          distinguish how accessory buildings/structures can be used (such as modifying the
          regulations to prohibit living areas without main dwelling unit setbacks and/or the
          number of plumbing fixtures) and consider reduction or waiver of fees. Reevaluate the
          effectiveness of this program in producing secondary dwelling units and consider other
          options, such as a secondary dwelling unit amnesty program, after one year from
          adoption of the ordinance.
          Responsibility:            Planning Division; Building Division; City Manager; City
                                     Attorney; City Council; Fire District; Department of Public Works
                                     (Menlo Park Municipal Water District); California Water Service;
                                     O’Connor Tract Coop Water District; West Bay Sanitary District
          Financing:                 General Fund
          Objectives:                Adopt procedures and requirements to allow conversion of
                                     accessory structures and buildings (15 new secondary dwelling
                                     units — 6 very low income, 6 low income and 3 moderate
                                     income units).
          Timeframe:                 2014; review the effectiveness of the ordinance in 2015
H4.G      Implement First-Time Homebuyer Program. Continue to work with agencies and
          organizations offering first-time, moderate income-homebuyers down-payment
          assistance loans for homes purchased in the city.
          Responsibility:            Planning Division
          Financing:                 HEART; Union Bank (or other bank affiliated with the program)
          Objectives:                Provide referrals.
          Timeframe:                 2015-2023
City of Menlo Park Housing Element — Adopted April 1, 2014                                           48

H4.H      Work with Non-Profits and Property Owners on Housing Opportunity Sites. Work
          with non-profits and property owners to seek opportunities for an affordable housing
          development. Undertake the following actions on sites zoned R-4-S and/or AHO to
          encourage development of multi-family housing affordable to extremely low, very low,
          low and moderate income households:
          a. Work closely with non-profit housing developers and property owners to identify
               housing development opportunities, issues and needs.
          b. On larger sites with multiple properties the City will strive to identify opportunities for
               parcel consolidation to ensure a minimum density of 20 units/acre is achieved and
               integrated site planning occurs by (1) identifying sites where common ownership
               occurs, (2) contacting property owners of contiguous vacant and underutilized sites,
               (3) conducting outreach to affordable housing developers, and (4) offering the
               incentives contained in the R-4-S and AHO zoning to promote lot consolidation.
          c. Undertake community outreach as part of the rezoning and, as appropriate, in
               coordination with the potential developer and property owner.
          d. Use the affordable housing overlay zone (when adopted — see Program H4.C) to
               incentivize housing affordable to extremely low, very low, low and moderate income
               households and lot consolidation on specific sites.
          e. Complete site-planning studies, continue community outreach, and undertake
               regulatory approvals in coordination with the development application.
          f. Facilitate development through regulatory incentives, including the establishment of
               housing as a “permitted use,” the reduction or waiver of City fees, enable the
               processing of affordable housing development proposals to, as best as possible, fit
               with the varied financing requirements for housing affordable to extremely low, very
               low, low and moderate income households, use of affordable housing funds,
               implementation of other Housing Element Programs, and other assistance by City
               Planning staff in development review.
          g. Target sites in Downtown and surrounding infill areas and, especially properties
               where lot consolidation is possible and provide incentives for lot consolidation and
               property redevelopment with housing.
          h. Investigate the potential for development of new housing on underutilized
               commercial and industrial sites, including the creation of residential overlay zoning,
               to allow for residential development in selected, underutilized industrial areas.
          i. Establish specific mechanisms to expedite processing of permits for housing
               projects that include on-site residential units affordable to persons of lower or
               moderate income. This may include granting priority in scheduling such proposals
               for public review and priority in plan check and subsequent issuance of building
               permits.
          j. Encourage the use of funding techniques such as mortgage revenue bonds,
               mortgage credit certificates, and low-income housing tax credits to facilitate the
               development of housing affordable to extremely low, very low, low and moderate
               income households.
               Responsibility:     City Commissions; Planning Division; City Attorney; City Council
               Financing:          General Fund
City of Menlo Park Housing Element — Adopted April 1, 2014                                              49

               Objectives:        Identify incentives and procedures to facilitate development of
                                  housing affordable to extremely low, very low, low and moderate
                                  income households on higher density housing sites.
               Timeframe:         Ongoing
H4.I      Create Multi-Family and Residential Mixed Use Design Guidelines. Provide more
          specific guidance in the appropriate design of multiple family and mixed-use housing
          development outside of the El Camino Real/Downtown Specific Plan boundary area.
          The intent would be to more clearly establish City expectations to make the design
          review process as efficient as possible.
          Responsibility:           City Commissions; Planning Division; City Attorney; City
                                    Council
          Financing:                General Fund
          Objectives:               Adopt design guidelines for multi-family and mixed use housing
                                    developments.
          Timeframe:                Consider as part of the City’s General Plan Update (2014-2017)
H4.J      Consider Surplus City-Owned Land for Housing. Promote the development of
          housing on appropriate surplus City-owned land.
          Responsibility:           Planning Division; City Attorney; City Commissions; City
                                    Council
          Financing:                General Fund
          Objectives:               Identify opportunities for housing as they arise.
          Timeframe:                Consider as part of the City’s General Plan Update (2014-2017)
H4.K      Work with the Fire District. Work with the Fire District on local amendments to the
          State Fire Code to pursue alternatives to standard requirements that could otherwise be
          a potential constraint to housing development and achievement of the City’s housing
          goals.
          Responsibility:           Fire District; Planning Division; Public Works; Building Division;
                                    City Attorney; City Commissions; City Council
          Financing:                General Fund
          Objectives:               Undertake local amendments to the State Fire Code and
                                    approve City Council Resolution ratifying the Fire District’s local
                                    amendments.
          Timeframe:                2014 (in progress)
H4.L      Coordinate with School Districts to Link Housing with School District Planning
          Activities. Work with the four school districts in Menlo Park to coordinate demographic
          projections and school district needs as the Housing Element is implemented and
          housing is developed. Consistent with Policy H4.1, site development should consider
          school capacity and the relationship to the types of residential units proposed.
City of Menlo Park Housing Element — Adopted April 1, 2014                                             50

          Responsibility:           Planning Division; School Districts; City Manager; City
                                    Commissions; City Council
          Financing:                General Fund
          Objectives:               Coordinate with local school districts in planning for future
                                    housing in consideration of each school districts long-range
                                    planning, resources and capacity.
          Timeframe:                Ongoing with Housing Element program implementation.
                                    Consider as part of the City’s General Plan Update (2014-
                                    2017).
H4.M      Review the Subdivision Ordinance. Review the Subdivision Ordinance to assure
          consistency with Housing Element policies and implementing actions and update the
          Ordinance to fully comply with the current Subdivision Map Act and streamline the
          review and approval process.
          Responsibility:           Planning Division; Public Works; Building Division; City
                                    Attorney; City Commissions; City Council
          Financing:                General Fund
          Objectives:               Modify to the Subdivision Ordinance as needed.
          Timeframe:                Consider as part of the City’s General Plan Update (2014-
                                    2017).
H4.N      Create Opportunities for Mixed Use Development. Study modifications to zoning to
          allow residential uses in commercial zones dependent on proximity to other services and
          transit and the preservation of viable local-serving commercial uses.
          Responsibility:           Planning Division; Public Works; Building Division; City
                                    Attorney; City Commissions; City Council
          Financing:                General Fund
          Objectives:               Conduct study and establish regulations to allow housing in
                                    commercial zones.
          Timeframe:                Consider as part of the City’s General Plan Update (2014-
                                    2017).
H4.O      Review Transportation Impact Analysis Guidelines. Review the City’s Transportation
          Impact Analysis (TIA) Guidelines to reduce the processing time for projects that are not
          exempt from CEQA.
          Responsibility:           Planning Division; Public Works; Building Division; City
                                    Attorney; City Commissions; City Council
          Financing:                General Fund
          Objectives:               Modify Transportation Impact Analysis (TIA) guidelines.
          Timeframe:                Consider as part of the City’s General Plan Update (2014-
                                    2017).
City of Menlo Park Housing Element — Adopted April 1, 2014                                         51

H4.P      Update Parking Stall and Driveway Design Guidelines. Review and modify Parking
          Stall and Driveway Design Guidelines, including driveway widths, back-up distances,
          and turning templates to provide greater flexibility in site planning for multi-family
          residential housing.
          Responsibility:           Planning Division; Public Works; City Commissions; City
                                    Council; OA
          Financing:                General Fund
          Objectives:               Modify Parking Stall and Driveway Design Guidelines
          Timeframe:                2014
H4.Q      Achieve Long-Term Viability of Affordable Housing. Work with non-profits and other
          project sponsors to implement the City’s Preferences for Affordable Housing policy
          (Policy H4.13), as appropriate, and to assure a fair tenant selection process, appropriate
          project management, high level of project maintenance and upkeep, and coordination
          with the City departments (such as Planning, Public Works, Police, etc.) and other
          agencies on an ongoing basis as needed. The City will also encourage project sponsors
          to conduct outreach with the neighborhood and City decision-makers to identify project
          design and other concerns.
          Responsibility:           Planning Division; City Attorney; Public Works; Police; Fire
                                    District
          Financing:                General Fund
          Objectives:               Establish project management and other ongoing project
                                    coordination needs.
          Timeframe:                As developments are proposed and ongoing thereafter.
H4.R      Modify Overnight Parking Requirements to Include the R-4-S Zoning District.
          Work with other City staff and the City Attorney to review and modify Section 11.24.050
          [Night Parking Prohibited] of the Municipal Code to incorporate the R-4-S Zoning District
          as needed.
          Responsibility:           Planning Division; City Attorney; Police Department; Public
                                    Works
          Financing:                General Fund
          Objectives:               Modify Section 11.24.050 [Night Parking Prohibited] of the
                                    Municipal Code as needed.
          Timeframe:                2014
H4.S Explore Creation of a Transportation Management Association. Explore the creation
         of a Transportation Management Association focused on the Haven Avenue/Bayfront
         Expressway area to coordinate grants, shuttles and other forms of transportation to the
         area as part of the City’s comprehensive General Plan update.
City of Menlo Park Housing Element — Adopted April 1, 2014                                         52

         Responsibility:            City Commissions; Public Works, Planning Division; City
                                    Attorney; City Council
         Financing:                 General Fund
         Objectives:                Explore creation of a Transportation Management Association
         Timeframe:                 Consider as part of the City’s General Plan Update (2014-
                                    2017).
H4.T     Explore Pedestrian and Bicycle Improvements. Coordinate with the City of Redwood
         City to explore a pedestrian and bicycle overpass over Highway 101 between Marsh
                      th
         Road and 5 Avenue in Redwood City as part of the City’s comprehensive General Plan
         update.
         Responsibility:            City Manager; Public Works, City Attorney; City Council, City of
                                    Redwood City
         Financing:                 General Fund, Outside Funding Source
         Objectives:                Coordinate with Redwood City on potential pedestrian and
                                    bicycle improvements
         Timeframe:                 Consider as part of the City’s General Plan Update (2014-
                                    2017).
City of Menlo Park Housing Element — Adopted April 1, 2014                                          53

Section III
Implementation Timeframe
 A        Overview
The Menlo Park Housing Element is built
around preserving and enhancing residential
neighborhoods, sustaining the community's
character and environmental resources, and
fulfilling unmet housing needs. The
implementing programs in the Housing
Element, as described in the previous section,
are intended to address these concerns. In
reviewing the list of programs, it is important to
recognize several other concerns: (1) there is limited staffing and budget resources to
undertake all of the programs listed immediately; (2) some programs require other
funding or actions to occur first; and (3) HCD can offer expedited review for the Draft
2015-2023 Housing Element if certain programs are implemented, such as programs
related to zoning for emergency shelters, supportive and transitional housing and
zoning for reasonable accommodation.
This section covers all of the implementing programs described in the Housing Element,
and represents the City’s commitment to take an active leadership role in assuring the
implementation of the programs described. It is also the City’s intent to: (1) encourage
public review and effective participation in all aspects of the planning process; and (2)
assure annual review of the Housing Element in order to periodically revise and update
this Action Plan as necessary to keep it effective.
City of Menlo Park Housing Element — Adopted April 1, 2014                                54

 B        Implementation Summary Table
City of Menlo Park Housing Element — Adopted April 1, 2014 55

City of Menlo Park Housing Element — Adopted April 1, 2014 56
City of Menlo Park Housing Element — Adopted April 1, 2014 57
City of Menlo Park Housing Element — Adopted April 1, 2014 58
Section IV
Quantified Housing Objectives
 A        Overview
State law requires the Housing Element to include
quantified objectives for the maximum number of units
that the City will strive to be constructed, rehabilitated
or conserved between 2015-2023. Policies and
programs establish the strategies to achieve these
objectives. The City’s quantified objectives are
described under each program, and represent the
City’s best effort in implementing each of the programs. Assumptions are based on
past program performance and funding availability, construction trends, land availability,
and future programs that will enhance program effectiveness and achieve full
implementation of the City’s housing goals.
 B        Quantified Objectives Summary Table
The table below summarizes the City’s quantified objectives for housing for the 2015-
2023 Housing Element planning period. The objectives below should be viewed in light
of potential program resources, historical development trends and market conditions.
“New Construction” quantified objectives include anticipated new units over the 2015-
2023 planning period based on historic development trends and the available land
supply described in Section VII.B (units include secondary dwelling units, infill housing,
housing within the El Camino Real/Downtown Specific Plan Area, potential higher
density housing sites, BMR units and other market rate housing). “Rehabilitation”
quantified objectives are based on the very limited availability of rehabilitation loan
program funding, energy weatherization loan programs and replacement of 48 units as
part of MidPen’s Gateway Apartments development. “Conservation and Preservation”
quantified objectives include programs to preserve existing “at risk” affordable housing
and continuation of rental housing assistance programs (Section 8 rental vouchers) at
current program levels.
City of Menlo Park Housing Element — Adopted April 1, 2014                                 59

Menlo Park Quantified Objectives Summary (2015-2023)
                                                             Conservation
         Income                New
                                             Rehabilitation      and
        Category          Construction
                                                             Preservation
 Extremely Low
 Income                             20                     5         25
 Very Low Income                    60                    25        130
 Low Income                         100                   20        135
 Moderate Income                    140                    0         60
 Above Moderate
 Income                             480                    0         0
 Total                              800                   60        350
City of Menlo Park Housing Element — Adopted April 1, 2014                60

Section V
Background Overview
  A       Review of the 2007-2014 Housing Element
The City’s 2007-2014 Housing Element was adopted in May of 2013. The element was
developed through an extensive, one-year long process that involved numerous
community meetings and discussions of housing strategies. The 2007-2014 Housing
Element contains a comprehensive set of policies and implementing programs intended
to address effective implementation of the Housing Element, protection and
enhancement of existing housing and neighborhoods, strategies to address special
housing needs in the community and ways to provide an adequate supply of new
housing.
Key Accomplishments of the 2007-2014 Housing Element
The focus on implementation of the current Housing Element was to rezone adequate
sites for housing and to create regulatory incentives for housing consistent with State
law. As a result, the City accomplished the following in June 2013, immediately
following adoption of the 2007-2014 Housing Element:
a. Adoption of an Affordable Housing Overlay (AHO) Zone. The Affordable
     Housing Overlay zone establishes affordable housing percentage requirements for
     a project to qualify for a density bonus and other incentives. In addition, the AHO
     establishes objective design standards for Community Development Director level
     approval. Specific incentives include:
     (1) Density Bonus — a density bonus between 36.5 percent and 60 percent
            above the base unit density of the property.
     (2) Floor Area Ratio — a minimum increase in FAR in proportion to the density
            bonus for the property.
     (3) Stories/Height — allowances for either four (48 feet) or five (60 feet) story
            projects allowed depending on the density bonus.
     (4) Parking — reduced vehicular and bicycle parking standards and allowances
            for uncovered and tandem parking for the affordable units.
     (5) Lot Coverage, Setbacks, Open Space and Maximum Façade Height —
            flexibility in requirements to accommodate the increased density in the
            development.
     (6) Fee Waivers — waiver of processing fees for projects that provide at least 50
            percent of the units for low income households or 20 percent of the units for
            very low income households.
City of Menlo Park Housing Element — Adopted April 1, 2014                                61

     (7)    Reduced Fees — reduction in other fees in the amount that corresponds to
            the increase in allowable density.
b. Adoption of High Density Residential, Special (R-4-S) Zone. The new R-4-S
     zoning was adopted to facilitate the development of multi-family housing and
     housing affordable to lower-income households. The sites rezoned allow primarily
     residential uses with possible ancillary commercial uses, and a minimum of 30 units
     per acre. In addition, objective and advisory design standards are included in the
     Zoning Ordinance for projects proposed under this zoning.
c. Rezoning. The City Council approved the following rezoning to assure adequate
     sites for a variety of housing: (1) 1200 and 1300 blocks of Willow Road rezoned to
     R-4-S (AHO); (2) the 600, 700 and 800 blocks of Hamilton Avenue rezoned to R-4-
     S; and (3) the 3600 block of Haven Avenue rezoned to R-4-S (AHO). The
     Affordable Housing Overlay Zone has also been applied to housing opportunity
     sites in the El Camino Real/Downtown Specific Plan area as a tool to achieve the
     public benefit densities for affordable housing.
d. Adoption of Zoning Consistent with State Density Bonus Law. The City Council
     amended the Zoning Ordinance to be consistent with State Density Bonus Law
     requirements.
e. Adoption of Modifications to the R-3 (Apartment) Zoning District. The City
     Council amended the Zoning Ordinance to create opportunities for higher density
     housing in infill locations around the El Camino Real/Downtown Specific Plan area
     in proximity to where services and transit are available.
f.   Implementation of the Recently Adopted El Camino Real/Downtown Specific
     Plan. The recently adopted El Camino Real/Downtown Specific Plan contains
     opportunities for 680 units to be built. Based on current zoning, densities of over 30
     units per acre are permitted on the majority of the sites. Appendix A, Table 2 lists
     the Assessor Parcel Numbers of opportunity sites. There is also the opportunity for
     a significant number of affordable units to be built. The Affordable Housing Overlay
     Zone has been applied to the entire Specific Plan area and is a tool to achieve the
     public benefit densities for affordable housing.
Other Accomplishments of the 2007-2014 Housing Element
The City has continued to implement programs intended to address housing needs in
the community and to comply with State law requirements. As part of the 2015-2023
Housing Element update process, the City has also undertaken a process to develop
zoning for emergency shelter for the homeless, transitional and supportive housing,
reasonable accommodation procedures and the establishment of a process and standards
City of Menlo Park Housing Element — Adopted April 1, 2014                                  62

to allow the conversion of accessory buildings and structures to a secondary dwelling unit.
Zoning Ordinance changes for emergency shelter for the homeless, transitional and
supportive housing and reasonable accommodation procedures are in draft form and
are critical to Housing Element certification. The secondary dwelling unit zoning
modifications are more preliminary and a draft ordinance is currently being prepared for
review. The intent is to undertake environmental review and adopt the homeless,
transitional and supportive housing and reasonable accommodation ordinances
concurrently with adoption of the updated Housing Element, anticipated in April 2014.
Specifics and policy direction for the draft ordinances include:
a. Emergency Shelter for the Homeless Overlay Zone — identifies the location of
     the overlay zone to allow an emergency shelter for the homeless for up to 16 beds
     as a use by right (see later discussion in the Housing Element) and includes
     standards consistent with State law as established in SB2.
b. Transitional and Supportive Housing — updates the definitions of transitional
     and supportive housing to be consistent with State law and adds transitional and
     supportive housing as part of the definition of a “dwelling” in the Zoning
     Ordinance so these uses are treated the same way as other residential uses as
     required by State law under SB2.
c. Reasonable Accommodation — establishes procedures, criteria and findings for
     enabling individuals with disabilities to make improvements and overcome barriers
     to their housing.
d. Secondary Dwelling Units and Accessory Buildings/Structures — The
     Secondary Dwelling Unit modifications, similar to the Reasonable Accommodation
     and SB2 compliance ordinances, are in draft form and the intent is to process the
     changes concurrently with adoption of the updated Housing Element. The proposed
     regulations would prohibit living areas without an increased setback and would limit
     the number and/or type of plumbing fixtures within accessory buildings/structures.
     This change will make the conversion of an accessory structure into a living unit
     more difficult, which could then encourage the development of legal secondary
     dwelling units from the outset. In addition, the proposed ordinance amendment
     would allow the conversion of legally constructed and permitted accessory buildings
     into secondary dwelling units if they meet certain criteria.
     The proposed modifications to the secondary dwelling unit ordinance would also
     include a reduction in the minimum lot area threshold for when a use permit is
     required for a secondary dwelling unit. The minimum lot size was recently changed
     as part of the recent last Housing Element update and is currently a minimum lot
     area of 6,000 square feet). The proposed lot size reduction would capture a number
City of Menlo Park Housing Element — Adopted April 1, 2014                                63

     of single-family lots located within the Belle Haven area, which is a change a
     number of area residents support.
When the Redevelopment Agency and redevelopment funding for housing programs
was eliminated by the State of California in 2012, the City continued to fund some
programs through its General Plan. In addition, the City issued a Notice of Funding
Availability (NOFA) for availability for approximately $3.2 million in Below Market Rate
housing funds to support the acquisition, rehabilitation or new construction of housing
that will provide long-term affordability. The funding is intended to fill the financing gap
between the projected total development costs and other available funding sources.
Conclusion
The goals, policies and implementing programs contained in the City’s 2007-2014
Housing Element are still valid and effective ways to address housing needs in Menlo
Park and comply with State law requirements. Minor modifications to policies and
programs are needed to assure they are up-to-date for the 2015-2023 planning period.
  B       Consistency with the Menlo Park General Plan
The Menlo Park General Plan serves as the ‘constitution’ for development in the city. It
is a long-range planning document that describes goals, policies and programs to guide
decision-making. All development-related decisions must be consistent with the City of
Menlo Park General Plan, of which the Housing Element is but one part. If a
development proposal is not consistent with a city’s general plan, it must be revised or
the plan itself must be amended. State law requires a community’s general plan to be
internally consistent. This means that the Housing Element, although subject to special
requirements and a different schedule of updates, must function as an integral part of
the overall Menlo Park General Plan, with consistency between it and the other General
Plan elements.
As part of the 2007-2014 Housing Element update and Environmental Assessment of
the update a series of consistency modifications were made to the City of Menlo Park
General Plan. The consistency modifications ensure that any potential impediments to
implementation of the Housing Element are addressed in the other elements of the
General Plan. In addition, the City will be undergoing a more comprehensive update of
its General Plan over the next several years. The General Plan update will provide an
opportunity to investigate and assist in implementing several programs as noted in the
2015-2023 Housing Element.
City of Menlo Park Housing Element — Adopted April 1, 2014                                   64

Section VI
Housing Conditions and Trends
  A       Overall Housing Needs
Population and Jobs Growth
Menlo Park’s population was estimated at 32,679 in January 2013 (CA Department of
Finance). The population grew about three percent from 2000 to 2010, well below the
peak growth of 9.8 percent in the 1990’s. In contrast, the three percent growth rate was
slightly more than the overall growth rate for San Mateo County, but less than half the
growth rate of the state. Santa Clara County’s population growth rate was 5.9 percent
from 2000 to 2010. Bay Area Plan projections for Menlo Park and other Bay Area cities
will be available in 2014. However, population projections from the Bay Area Plan are
available now on a county level. The projections show San Mateo County’s population
is projected to increase from 718,450 in 2010 to 904,430 in 2040, which is a 26%
increase over 30 years, or about a 1% increase in population per year over that time
span. Population growth trends are shown in the tables below.
 Population Growth
                                    Number                            Percent Change
                       Menlo Park    County             State   Menlo Park    County      State
 1990                        28,040  649,623     29,760,021
 2000                        30,785  707,163     33,871,648            10%          9%     14%
 2010                        31,700  718,450     37,253,956             3%          2%     10%
 2013                        32,679  735,678                            3%          2%
 2020 (Projected)            33,800  775,100                            3%          5%
 2030 (Projected)            35,800  836,100                            6%          8%
 2040 (Projected)            38,100  904,400                            6%          8%
 Source: Association of Bay Area Governments, Projections 2013; CA Department of Finance (2013);
 US Census SF1 1990-2010
City of Menlo Park Housing Element — Adopted April 1, 2014                                       65

 Population Change
                                                                                           Projected
                                                                              Percent         Percent
                                                               Projected      Change         Change
                              2000      2010            2013         2020   2000-2010      2010-2020
 Atherton                     7,194     6,914           6,893       7,200          3%              4%
 Belmont                     25,123    25,835         26,316       27,000          2%              5%
 Brisbane                     3,597     4,282           4,379       4,500          8%              5%
 Burlingame                  28,158    28,806         29,426       31,700          1%             10%
 Colma                        1,187     1,454           1,458       1,700         35%             17%
 Daly City                  103,625   101,072        103,347     107,100           2%              6%
 East Palo Alto              29,506    28,155         28,675       30,800         11%              9%
 Foster City                 28,803    30,567         31,120       31,600          5%              3%
 Half Moon Bay               11,842    11,324         11,581       11,700         10%              3%
 Hillsborough                10,825    10,825         11,115       11,200          3%              3%
 Menlo Park                  30,785    32,026         32,679       33,800          3%              6%
 Millbrae                    20,718    21,532         22,228       24,200          4%             12%
 Pacifica                    38,390    37,234         37,948       38,200          2%              3%
 Portola Valley               4,462     4,353           4,448       4,500          1%              3%
 Redwood City                75,402    76,815         79,074       84,000          1%              9%
 San Bruno                   40,165    41,114         42,828       45,900          7%             12%
 San Carlos                  27,718    28,406         28,931       30,100          2%              6%
 San Mateo City              92,482    97,207         99,061     106,000           3%              9%
 South San Francisco         60,552    63,632         65,127       71,000          4%             12%
 Woodside                     5,352     5,287           5,441       5,400          7%              2%
 San Mateo County           707,163   718,451        735,678     775,100           4%              8%
 Source: CA Department of Finance (2010, 2013); Association of Bay Area Governments, Projections 2013
According to the U. S. Census, about 9% of the people who currently work in the City of
Menlo Park also live in the City of Menlo Park, and 10% of Menlo Park residents
currently work in Menlo Park. The percentages differ because there are close to twice
as many jobs in Menlo Park as employed residents but, regardless, the share is low
compared to most other cities in the Bay Area and is attributable to a range of factors
such as affordability and availability of housing that limits the ability to find housing
within the City. Another contributing factor is the location and boundary configuration of
the City making many other jurisdictions a short commute distance.
City of Menlo Park Housing Element — Adopted April 1, 2014                                            66

 Local Workers Commuting
                             Employed                       Percent of  Percent of
                            Jurisdiction                    Workforce   Population
                             Population              In-           In-       Out-
                                   2010  Commuters         Commuting   Commuting
 Atherton                          1,789         1,996            96%         96%
 Belmont                           9,253         4,853            91%         95%
 Brisbane                          2,083         5,889            97%         90%
 Burlingame                      13,318        31,586             95%         88%
 Colma                               786         3,564            99%         96%
 Daly City                       46,030        13,337             83%         94%
 East Palo Alto                    7,737         2,525            87%         95%
 Foster City                     18,257        17,202             93%         93%
 Half Moon Bay                     4,369         3,195            78%         79%
 Hillsborough                      4,081         1,077            91%         97%
 Menlo Park                      13,616        24,549            95%          90%
 Millbrae                          7,599         3,924            90%         94%
 Pacifica                        16,176          2,667            67%         92%
 Portola Valley                    1,640            945           96%         98%
 Redwood City                    32,153        42,906             91%         87%
 San Bruno                       17,159        10,351             91%         94%
 San Carlos                      12,212        10,955             91%         91%
 San Mateo City                  40,968        32,665             87%         88%
 South San Francisco             30,618        37,691             91%         89%
 Woodside                          2,428         1,639            95%         96%
 San Mateo County               302,934       184,544             61%         61%
 Source: 2011 U.S. Census, On The Map
The tables below show projections for population, households and jobs from 2010-2040
for the Bay Area, San Mateo County and the City of Menlo Park’s City limits and Sphere
of Influence (labeled as the City’s Planning Area).
City of Menlo Park Housing Element — Adopted April 1, 2014                           67

City of Menlo Park Housing Element — Adopted April 1, 2014 68
Employment, Income and Poverty
Menlo Park residents tend to be well educated. Over 93 percent of residents had at
least a high school or college degree in 2010 (almost 70 percent had at least a college
degree). Approximately 68 percent of residents who are age 16 and older were in the
work force in 2010, nearly identical to the county rate and a few percentage points
higher than the state rate.
Most residents who are in the workforce, 66 percent, were in “management, business,
science and arts occupations” significantly more than the rate in San Mateo County or
the state. The Census Bureau also analyzes employment by industry. Many Menlo Park
residents (28 percent) work in education, heath care or social assistance. The next
most common category, with 23 percent of residents, is professional, scientific and
management industries.
City of Menlo Park Housing Element — Adopted April 1, 2014                              69

The median household income for residents in 2011 was $118,022 according to the
Association of Bay Area Governments. Slightly over six percent of households were
below the poverty line in 2010. Two of the groups most likely to be poor are seniors and
single mothers. Single mothers with children had a poverty rate of more than 18
percent. Seniors had a poverty rate of six or seven percent, depending on their age.
Only about one percent of households received food stamps.
 Workforce Age, Salary and Education
                                                  Menlo Park      County
 Jobs by Worker Age
 Age 29 or Younger                                        16%         19%
 Age 30 to 54                                             65%         61%
 Age 55 or Older                                          19%         20%
 Salaries Paid by Jurisdiction Employers
 $1,250 per Month or Less                                   7%        14%
 $1,251 to $3,333 per Month                               18%         27%
 More than $3,333 per Month                               75%         59%
 Jobs by Worker Educational Attainment
 Less than High School                                      7%         9%
 High school or Equivalent, No College                    10%         13%
 Some College or Associate Degree                         20%         23%
 Bachelor's Degree or Advanced Degree                     47%         36%
 Educational Attainment Not Available                     16%         19%
 Total Workers                                         25,903     303,529
 Source: 2011 U.S. Census On The Map
 Note: Educational Attainment Not Available is for workers 29 and
 younger
 Household Income
                                Menlo Park    County            State
 Under $25,000                          10%       12%            21%
 $25,000 to $34,999                       6%       6%              9%
 $35,000 to $49,999                       7%      10%            13%
 $50,000 to $74,999                     11%       16%            17%
 $75,000 to $99,999                     10%       12%            12%
 $100,000+                              55%       44%            28%
 Poverty Rate                          5.2%      7.4%            16%
 Total                               12,883   256,305     12,433,049
 Median Income 2000                $114,222   $95,606        $64,116
 Median Income 2011                $118,022   $91,958        $63,816
 Source: Association of Bay Area Governments
 Note: Adjusted for inflation to 2013 dollars
City of Menlo Park Housing Element — Adopted April 1, 2014                              70

Distribution of Menlo Park Households by Income (2012)
Income Distribution of All Households in Menlo Park (12,388 households)
Source: Claritas, 2012 and California Department of Finance, 2012
Distribution of Menlo Park Households by Age and Income (2012)
Young Adult Households Up to Age 34 (17% of all households)
Middle Age Households Ages 35 to 64 (60% of all households)
City of Menlo Park Housing Element — Adopted April 1, 2014              71

   Senior Households Over Age 65 (23% of all households)
 Source: Claritas, 2012
Employee Demographics
It is interesting to look at the characteristics of people who work in Menlo Park. The
workforce is diverse and does not fit neatly into stereotypes. One pronounced
difference between Menlo Park residents and employees is that the workforce is made
up of people of all economic levels, while Menlo Park tends to be significantly higher
income. Overall, the workforce is more diverse (less likely to be white and more likely to
be Asian). While still well educated, the work force is less likely to have a college
degree (18% of employees had a high school degree or less). The workforce is made
up of people of all ages. Approximately, 18 percent of the workforce was under 30, 63
percent are 30-54 and 20 percent are over 55.
In Menlo Park in 2010, eleven percent of the work force made less than $15,000 a year.
Twenty percent made between $15,000 and $40,000 and 68 percent made more than
$40,000. Between 2005 and 2025, 40 percent of new homes in San Mateo County
should be provided at levels affordable to lower income residents to match the need
created by new jobs (San Mateo County Department of Housing, San Mateo County
Housing Needs Study, 2008).
   Distribution of Workforce Salaries in Menlo Park (2010)
                                                               Percent of
  Salary                                                       Workforce
  Under $15,000                                                       11%
  $15,000-$39,999                                                     20%
  Over $40,000                                                        68%
Source: US Census Bureau, Longitudinal Employer-Household Dynamics Survey.
City of Menlo Park Housing Element — Adopted April 1, 2014                                72

Population Age
                                 Menlo Park, like the state and nation as a whole, has an
                                 increasing senior population as baby boomers near
                                 retirement age. From 2000 to 2011, the median age in Menlo
                                 Park increased from 37.4 to 40 years of age, slightly older
                                 than the median age in California, which was 35 years of
                                 age in 2011. Presented another way, in 2000, 39 percent of
                                 the population was between the age of 20 and 44. However,
by 2010, this number had dropped to 34 percent of the population. Correspondingly, the
number of residents between the ages of 45 and 65 increased from 21 to 26 percent of
the population.
 Age of Residents
                                2000                        2011
                         Menlo Park     Menlo Park           County        State
 Under 5 years                    7%             6%               6%          7%
 5 to 19 years                   17%           17%              18%         21%
 20 to 34 years                  22%           18%              19%         22%
 35 to 44 years                  17%           17%              15%         14%
 45 to 59 years                  18%           23%              22%         20%
 60 to 74 years                  10%           12%              13%         11%
 75 years and over                9%             7%               6%          5%
 Median age                        37             40              39          35
 Total population             30,785         32,084          720,143  37,330,448
 Source: 2000 US Census SF1, 2009-2011 American Community Survey
Families and Household Size
In 2000, 56 percent of the population was made up of families. By 2010, that number
had increased to 61 percent of the population. This was significantly lower than the
state, where 68 percent of households were families, which is the same as San Mateo
County as a whole, where 68 percent of households were families in 2010.
 Household Type
                               Menlo Park     County            State
 Single person                         34%        25%            24%
 Family no kids                        28%        37%            35%
 Family with kids                      28%        31%            33%
 Multi-person, nonfamily               10%          7%             7%
 Total households                   12,883   256,305       12,433,049
 Source: 2009-2011 American Community Survey
City of Menlo Park Housing Element — Adopted April 1, 2014                                   73

 Household Growth
                                        Number                                Percent Change
                       Menlo Park         County              State   Menlo Park      County    State
 1990                       11,881        242,348       10,381,206
 2000                       12,387        254,104       11,502,870             4%           5%   10%
 2010                       12,347        257,837       12,577,498             0%           4%     9%
 2020 (Projected)           13,070        277,200                              6%           8%
 2030 (Projected)           13,790        296,280                              6%           7%
 2040 (Projected)           14,520        315,100                              5%           6%
 Source: Association of Bay Area Governments, Projections 2013; US Census SF1 1990-2010 for
 the Menlo Park City Limits
The average household size in Menlo Park was 2.4 in 2000, 2.4 in 2011 and, according
to the California Department of Finance, 2.6 persons per household in 2013. This is
smaller than the state and county average. A single person lived in 22 percent of owner
occupied homes and 39 percent of renter occupied homes. There were fewer large
households, with five or more people, in Menlo Park than in county or state. Almost 29
percent of owner occupied homes were large households while only 17 percent of
renter occupied homes were large households in 2010 according to the U.S. Census.
Comparison of Household Size and Percent of Single-Person and Large Households (2010)
                                                        Menlo Park      San Mateo County       California
 Average Household Size 2010                                     2.5                     2.8           2.9
 Single Person Households                                       30%                    25%            23%
 Large Households (5+ people)                                   10%                    13%            16%
 Source: 2010 U.S. Census
 Household Size & Owners Versus Renters
                                                 Menlo Park        County    State
 2000      Average Household Size                           2.4       2.7       2.9
           Percent Owners                                  57%       61%       57%
           Percent Renters                                 43%       39%       43%
 2011      Average Household Size                           2.4       2.7       2.9
           Owners Average Household Size                    2.7       2.8       3.0
           Renters Average Household Size                   2.1       2.7       2.9
           Percent Owners                                  54%       59%       56%
           Percent Renters                                 46%       41%       44%
 Source: 2010 US Census SF1, 2009-2011 American Community Survey
People Moving
Menlo Park is an attractive location for families because of the good school districts and
for Silicon Valley workers because of proximity to jobs. Consequently, many young
people have moved into the city. According to the U.S. Census, between 2000 and
2010, about 1,875 people in their 20’s and 30s have moved to Menlo Park.
City of Menlo Park Housing Element — Adopted April 1, 2014                                             74

Older families are more likely to move out of Menlo Park. This may be because their
children finish school and they are looking to trade down to a smaller home. Older
families may also want to cash out the equity they have in their homes. According to the
U.S. Census, about 1,740 people in their 40’s, 50’s and 60’s moved out of Menlo Park
between 2000 and 2010, with more than half of this number coming from people in their
40s.
Women in their 80’s also were particularly likely to move out, with approximately 200
people in that age group who moved out between 2000 and 2010. Percentage wise,
according to the U.S. Census, 17 percent of the women in their 80’s moved out of
Menlo Park between 2000-2010.
Race and Ethnicity
In 2010, Menlo Park was approximately 74 percent White, 13 percent Asian, and less
than six percent African American. Approximately 18 percent of Menlo Park’s
population is Latino/Hispanic (which is measured separately and not considered a race
by the US Census). Statewide, the Latino/Hispanic population was 38 percent in 2010.
 Race and Ethnicity
                            Menlo Park     County            State
 White                             75%        59%             62%
 Black                              6%         3%               6%
 Asian                             11%        25%             13%
 Other                              5%         8%             14%
 More than one Race                 4%         5%               4%
 Hispanic                          16%        25%             38%
 Not Hispanic                      84%        75%             62%
 Total population               32,084    720,143       37,330,448
 Source: 2009-2011 American Community Survey
Almost one quarter of residents, 24 percent, were born in a different country. Some of
these residents, approximately five percent of households, are linguistically isolated,
where no one over the age of 14 speaks English well. The language spoken by these
families varies greatly, with Spanish, Asian languages and other European languages
the most common.
General Housing Characteristics
According to the California Department of Finance there were 13,124 homes in Menlo
Park as of January 2013. This is about a three percent increase from 2000. This rate is
lower than the five percent growth rate for San Mateo County but significantly less than
the eleven percent growth rate for the state as a whole. However, it is important to
City of Menlo Park Housing Element — Adopted April 1, 2014                               75

remember that the housing growth rate for San Mateo County was the lowest in the
entire state from 2000 to 2013.
 Comparison of General Housing Characteristics
                                                           Menlo Park San Mateo County California
 Number of Homes 2013                                          13,124          272,477 13,552,624
 Number of Homes 2000                                          12,738          260,576 12,214,549
 Percent Change 2000-2010                                         3%               5%        11%
 Single family (detached)                                        55%              57%        58%
 Single family (attached)                                         8%               9%         7%
 2 units                                                          3%               2%         3%
 3 - 4 units                                                     10%               4%         6%
 5 - 9 units                                                      7%               6%         6%
 10 -19 units                                                     6%               6%         5%
 20+ units                                                       11%              13%        11%
 Mobile homes                                                    <1%               1%         4%
 Homeowner vacancy rate                                           1%               1%         2%
 Rental vacancy rate                                              3%               4%         5%
 Ownership rate                                                  57%              61%        58%
 Source: 2010 ACS and California Department of Finance (2013)
Approximately 55 percent of homes were single family detached in 2010. Ten percent
of homes were in buildings with three or four units. Another 11 percent were in large
complexes, with 20 or more units. The rest were between 5 and 19 units. In 2010, 57
percent of homes in Menlo Park were owner-occupied, the same rate as 2000. This is
slightly lower than the rate for San Mateo County (61 percent) and the state (58
percent). Vacancy rates in Menlo Park are low. Approximately 4.0 percent of rental
units were vacant in 2011, which is considered a tight market based on routine turnover
of apartments.
 Vacancy Rate
                      Menlo Park       County           State
 2000     Owner               0.3%         0.5%          1.4%
          Renter              1.5%         1.8%          3.7%
 2011     Owner               0.8%         1.2%          2.2%
          Renter              4.0%         4.0%          5.5%
 Source: 2009-2011 American Community Survey, 2000 US Census
Year Structures Built and Potential Housing Problems
Menlo Park has many neighborhoods, some newer and some older. Overall, almost 30
percent of Menlo Park homes were built in the 1950s. Approximately 19 percent were
built between 1980 and today. Ten percent of homes are at least 80 years old.
City of Menlo Park Housing Element — Adopted April 1, 2014                                     76

 Year Structure Built
                                    Menlo Park       County          State
 Built in 2000 or more recently             6%          5.4%          12%
 Built in 1990s                             7%            6%          11%
 Built in 1980s                             6%            9%          15%
 Build in 1970s                            15%           17%          18%
 Built in 1960s                            11%           17%          14%
 Built 1950s or Earlier                    56%           45%          30%
 Total                                  13,623      271,140     13,688,351
 Source: 2009-2011 American Community Survey
As can be seen in the table below, slightly over half of the housing units in Menlo Park
are 3-bedroom units or larger, with 20% being studio and one-bedroom units. With an
average household of 2.6 persons, as of 2013, there is somewhat of a mismatch
between the size of the housing available and the need for housing in the community.
This situation is indicative of an aging population with seniors living in housing larger
than their needs.
 Bedrooms
                            Menlo Park    County            State
 No bedroom                         3%         4%              4%
 1 bedroom                         17%        16%            14%
 2 bedrooms                        29%        26%            28%
 3 bedrooms                        31%        34%            33%
 4 bedrooms                        15%        16%            16%
 5 or more bedrooms                 5%         5%              4%
 Total                          13,623    271,140      13,688,351
 Source: 2009-2011 American Community Survey
The U.S. Census defines housing problems as either physical defects, overcrowded
units or households that are considered cost burdened and paying more than 30% of
their income for housing. The table below shows housing problems in Menlo Park by
the income of the household based on the income categories defined under State
housing element law. As can be seen in the table, a significant number of households
are considered cost burdened.
City of Menlo Park Housing Element — Adopted April 1, 2014                                77

 Housing Problems
                                              Total        Total       Total
                                           Renters     Owners    Households
 Extremely Low Income
 Percent with any housing problems              0%           0%          0%
 Cost Burden >30% to 49% of income             13%           8%         11%
 Cost Burden >50% of income                    66%          67%         67%
 Total                                         640          495        1135
 Very Low Income
 Percent with any housing problems              0%           0%          0%
 Cost Burden >30%                              78%          91%         83%
 Total                                         630          475        1105
 Low Income
 Percent with any housing problems              0%           0%          0%
 Cost Burden >30%                              67%          54%         62%
 Total                                         910          680        1590
 Source: CHAS Data 2006-2010
Home Sales Prices and Rents
The median single-family home price in Menlo Park in 2012 was $1,468,433.This is
about a ten percent increase from the previous year, when the median single-family
home price in Menlo Park was $1,339,314. The median price of a condominium was
(relatively) more affordable, at $903,950 in 2012, but that was a 24 percent increase
from 2011, when the median price of a condominium was $726,150. The median home
in Menlo Park has regained all of its value since 2007. At the high point in 2007, the
median Menlo Park home was worth $1,910,000. Adjusted for inflation to 2013 dollars,
this translates to $1,310,000, about equal to the value today (sales data from the San
Mateo County Association of Realtors, SAMCAR and inflation data from Bureau of
Labor Statistics). Below are sales prices for single-family homes and common interest
development homes for 2012 in San Mateo County (data from the San Mateo County
Association of Realtors, SAMCAR). Home values are determined by Zillow based on
generalized sales for a given area and type of house, while sales prices are the actual
price paid for a specific property.
City of Menlo Park Housing Element — Adopted April 1, 2014                              78

 Median Home Value
                       Single Family                           Multi Family
           Menlo Park        County           State  Menlo Park     County        State
 2003        $1,080,072 $733,320         $401,940      $651,294   $465,318     $353,682
 2004        $1,127,541 $802,821         $477,486      $701,961   $512,910     $413,895
 2005        $1,296,743 $939,148         $576,436      $772,905   $586,432     $498,848
 2006        $1,366,545 $961,170         $636,410      $792,925   $625,140     $534,980
 2007        $1,337,952 $935,536         $594,272      $763,168   $600,432     $493,920
 2008        $1,320,084 $865,512         $485,784      $739,260   $554,364     $412,776
 2009        $1,234,764 $749,304         $365,580      $686,772   $465,696     $337,716
 2010        $1,233,496 $762,910         $359,948      $718,933   $449,507     $333,733
 2011        $1,168,947 $691,439         $330,527      $622,635   $390,576     $300,142
 2012        $1,149,986 $660,944         $305,727      $596,001   $360,065     $271,185
 2013        $1,423,600 $764,000         $338,200      $713,900   $413,300     $297,700
 Source: Zillow Real Estate median home price, based on January estimate of each year,
 supplemented with median sales price from San Mateo County Association of Realtors.
 Note: Adjusted for inflation to 2013 dollars
 Median Home Sale Prices
                      Single Family                           Multi Family
          Menlo Park        County          State   Menlo Park     County        State
 2005      $1,710,011 $939,148         $576,436       $987,700  $586,432      $498,848
 2006      $1,686,835 $961,170         $636,410       $881,978  $625,140      $534,980
 2007      $1,608,688 $935,536         $594,272       $767,200  $600,432      $493,920
 2008      $1,675,877 $865,512         $485,784     $1,066,500  $554,364      $412,776
 2009      $1,338,999 $749,304         $365,580       $837,000  $465,696      $337,716
 2010      $1,401,584 $762,910         $359,948       $873,120  $449,507      $333,733
 2011      $1,339,314 $691,439         $330,527       $726,150  $390,576      $300,142
 2012      $1,468,433 $660,944         $305,727       $903,950  $360,065      $271,185
 Source: San Mateo County Association of Realtors, based on actual sales of each year;
 State based on Zillow/MLS
 Note: Adjusted for inflation to 2013 dollars
The median single-family home price in San Mateo County in 2012 was $660,944 and
for California as a whole it was $305,727. In Santa Clara County, the median home
price was $588,000. Menlo Park’s home prices have increased in real dollar terms over
the last ten years, while the prices for the state and the county as a whole have not.
Several sources of data have been used to assess rental housing costs — U.S.
Census, Craigslist and RealFacts, a private firm that surveys asking rents in the Bay
Area. The median rental price for single-family homes was $4,239 per month in June
2012 according to the Census. For multi-family apartments, the price was $2,803.
Adjusted for size, the median price was $2.27 per square foot. The US Census listed
the median rent figure as $1,710 in 2010. The census listed San Mateo County median
rent as $1,443 and the California’s median rent as $1,147.
City of Menlo Park Housing Element — Adopted April 1, 2014                              79

Information from RealFacts and Craigslist are shown in the tables below for various size
units in Menlo Park.. Rents have been rising recently, although over the past year
average rental prices have decreased slightly.
 Average Rents in Menlo Park from RealFacts
               1 Bed 1 Bath               2 Bed 1 Bath              3 Bed 2 Bath
                        Percent                    Percent                 Percent
            Price Increase              Price Increase           Price Increase
 2005     $1,971                      $1,934               x   $3,628
 2006     $2,082               6%     $1,916            -1%    $3,820             5%
 2007     $2,209               6%     $1,996             4%    $3,866             1%
 2008     $2,224               1%     $2,031             2%    $3,830            -1%
 2009     $2,242               1%     $2,102             3%    $3,803            -1%
 2010     $2,130              -5%     $2,094             0%    $3,572            -6%
 2011     $2,302               8%     $2,466           18%     $3,894             9%
 2012     $2,531              10%     $2,843           15%     $4,442            14%
 2013     $2,495              -1%     $2,725            -4%    $4,177            -6%
 Source: RealFacts Annual Trends Report, based on reporting from large
 apartment complexes of 50 or more units
 Note: Adjusted for inflation to 2013 dollars
 Average Rents in Menlo Park from Craigslist
                                            Menlo Park        Survey Size
 Studio                                            $1,666                 4
 One Bedroom                                       $2,202                18
 Two Bedroom                                       $3,202                20
 Three Bedroom                                     $5,537                17
 Four Bedroom                                      $7,065                 6
 Average Square Footage                             1,419                52
 Average Number of Bedrooms                            2.3               70
 Average Rent                                      $4,409                70
 Average Rent per Sq. Foot                          $3.11                52
 Source: Craigslist Rental Survey conducted in June and July of
 2013
 Summary of 2013 Rents
                                Menlo Park                      County
                           RealFacts Craigslist          RealFacts Craigslist
 Studio                               -      $1,666          $1,463       $1,429
 One Bedroom                   $2,495        $2,202          $2,004       $1,990
 Two Bedroom                   $2,725        $3,202          $2,285       $2,660
 Three Bedroom                 $4,177        $5,537          $3,400       $3,758
 Four Bedroom                         -      $7,065                -      $6,418
 Source: RealFacts Annual Trends Report, based on reporting from large apartment
 complexes, Craigslist Survey conducted in June and July 2013
 Note: County Craigslist information derived from average of municipal sampling.
City of Menlo Park Housing Element — Adopted April 1, 2014                             80

 Median County Rents from San Mateo County
 Department of Housing
                         Yearly                 Yearly
             1 Bed    Increase         2 Bed  Increase
 2003       $1,580         -9.2%      $1,916      -7.9%
 2004       $1,503         -4.9%      $1,806      -5.8%
 2005       $1,472         -2.1%      $1,698      -6.0%
 2006       $1,523          3.4%      $1,714       0.9%
 2007       $1,628          7.0%      $1,840       7.4%
 2008       $1,715          5.3%      $1,957       6.3%
 2009       $1,672         -2.5%      $1,871      -4.4%
 2010       $1,555         -7.0%      $1,760      -5.9%
 2011       $1,600          2.9%      $1,818       3.3%
 2012       $1,824          14%       $2,087       15%
 2013       $1,954          7.1%      $2,234       7.1%
 Source: San Mateo Department of Housing
 Note: Adjusted for inflation to 2013 dollars
                                                            Affordability
                                                            Because Menlo Park’s
                                                            housing is so expensive,
                                                            many people have to stretch
                                                            to make their monthly rent
                                                            payment. Also, many people
                                                            who work in Menlo Park
                                                            cannot afford to live in the
                                                            city. There are a number of
                                                            consequences of the lack of
                                                            affordable housing in Menlo
                                                            Park and Silicon Valley.
                                                            People who work in the
community are forced to commute long distances. Children and senior citizens may not
be able to afford to live in the community where they grew up or grew old. And the long
commutes clog our highways and contribute to climate change.
To afford the median priced home in Menlo Park, a family would need to make more
than $260,000. To afford a home that rents at $3,000 a month, a family would need to
make more than $125,000. Most jobs in Menlo Park and the region do not pay this
amount. The difference between what the workforce and the community can pay for
housing based on household income and what the prices are for homes in the
community is called an affordability gap – and this gap is significant in Menlo Park.
City of Menlo Park Housing Element — Adopted April 1, 2014                               81

The general rule of thumb is that a household should not
spend more than 30 percent of its income on housing. If they
do, they are referred to as cost burdened. Many people in
Menlo Park are cost burdened to some degree, but it is
worse for certain groups. Seniors, large families, low and
moderate-income households, and single parent households
are most at risk. Households who are cost burdened may be
forced to move from their communities or be unable to pay
for necessities.
The tables below show the sales and rental affordability gap
between household incomes for 2013 established for San
Mateo County (see definitions) compared to actual sales and
rental costs. As can be seen in the table, sales prices and
market rents are not affordable to households earning moderate incomes or below.
 Ability to Pay for For-Sale Single Family Detached Homes in Menlo Park
                                                         Median Priced
                                            Maximum       Single Family    Affordability
                                Annual      Affordable       Detached    Gap for Single
                               Income      Home Price            Home     Family Home
 Single Person
 Extremely Low Income         $23,750         $97,114       $1,468,433     -$1,371,319
 Very Low Income              $39,600        $161,925       $1,468,433     -$1,306,508
 Low Income                   $63,350        $259,039       $1,468,433     -$1,209,394
 Median Income                $72,100        $294,818       $1,468,433     -$1,173,615
 Moderate Income              $86,500        $353,699       $1,468,433     -$1,114,734
 Four Person
 Extremely Low Income         $33,950        $138,822       $1,468,433     -$1,329,611
 Very Low Income              $56,550        $231,233       $1,468,433     -$1,237,200
 Low Income                   $90,500        $347,655       $1,468,433     -$1,120,778
 Median Income               $103,000        $370,055       $1,468,433     -$1,098,378
 Moderate Income             $123,600        $505,402       $1,468,433       -$963,031
 Source: Baird + Driskell Community Planning; San Mateo County Association of Realtors;
 www.hsh.com/calc-howmuch.html
City of Menlo Park Housing Element — Adopted April 1, 2014                               82

 Ability to Pay for For-Sale Condominiums or Townhomes in Menlo Park
                                                Maximum         Median Priced      Affordability
                                  Annual        Affordable       Townhouse or           Gap for
                                 Income       Home Price        Condominium              Condo
 Single Person
 Extremely Low Income            $23,750          $97,114            $903,950         -$806,836
 Very Low Income                 $39,600         $161,925            $903,950         -$742,025
 Low Income                      $63,350         $259,039            $903,950         -$644,911
 Median Income                   $72,100         $294,818            $903,950         -$609,132
 Moderate Income                 $86,500         $353,699            $903,950         -$550,251
 Four Person
 Extremely Low Income            $33,950         $138,822            $903,950         -$765,128
 Very Low Income                 $56,550         $231,233            $903,950         -$672,717
 Low Income                      $90,500         $347,655            $903,950         -$556,295
 Median Income                  $103,000         $370,055            $903,950         -$533,895
 Moderate Income                $123,600         $505,402            $903,950         -$398,548
 Source: Baird + Driskell Community Planning; San Mateo County Association of Realtors;
 www.hsh.com/calc-howmuch.html
 Note: Maximum Affordable House Price is based on the following assumptions: 4.5%
 interest rate; 30-year fixed loan; 50% Yearly Salary as Down Payment; 1% property tax;
 PMI, .5% insurance rate; and no other monthly payments/debt.
 Ability to Pay for Rental Housing
                                                Maximum
                                               Affordable          2012
                                  Annual          Monthly         Market   Affordability
                                 Income               Rent          Rent            Gap
 Single Person
 Extremely Low Income             $23,750             $594        $2,495         -$1,901
 Very Low Income                  $39,600             $990        $2,495         -$1,505
 Low Income                       $63,350           $1,584        $2,495           -$911
 Median Income                    $72,100           $1,803        $2,495           -$693
 Moderate Income                  $86,500           $2,163        $2,495           -$333
 Four Person
 Extremely Low Income             $33,950             $849        $4,177         -$3,328
 Very Low Income                  $56,550           $1,414        $4,177         -$2,763
 Low Income                       $90,500           $2,263        $4,177         -$1,915
 Median Income                  $103,000            $2,575        $4,177         -$1,602
 Moderate Income                $123,600            $3,090        $4,177         -$1,087
 Source: Baird + Driskell Community Planning; RealFacts (2013)
 Note: Estimates based upon upper end of income bracket. Single person analysis
 based upon 1 bedroom 1 bath unit, four-person estimate is based on 3 bedroom 2
 bath unit. Ability to pay is based upon 30% of income devoted to housing.
City of Menlo Park Housing Element — Adopted April 1, 2014                                       83

 Households Overpaying for Housing
                       Income                         Menlo Park             County      State
                                                 Number Percent
 Owner-occupied        Less than $35,000               580          71%          68%       68%
                       $35,000-$74,999                 498          51%          53%       54%
                       $75,000+                      1,376          27%          33%       27%
 Renter-occupied       Less than $35,000               998          88%          95%       90%
                       $35,000-$74,999                 698          57%          61%       49%
                       $75,000+                        309          10%          11%        9%
 Source: 2009-2011 American Community Survey
 Note: Excludes Households with no income or cash rent.
Based on 2009-2011 American Community Survey (U.S. Census) data, there were
2,005 renter households and 2,454 owner households (total of 4,459 households)
overpaying for housing in Menlo Park in 2011. Of those overpaying households, 2,774
were lower income (1,696 renter and 1,078 homeowner lower-income households
overpaying). Further, of the lower income households overpaying for housing, there
were 998 renter and 580 homeowner extremely low-income (ELI) households.
Approximately 68 percent of senior renters, 57 percent of large family renters, and 33
percent of the general Menlo Park population, are cost burdened. Using the 30 percent
rule, below is an estimate how much people can afford to spend on housing.
 How Much Can People Afford to Pay for Housing
                                                                  Income           Maximum         Maximum
                                                                    Level       Affordability   Rental Price
 Income Level Name                                                 Range         Sales Price
 Extremely Low Income                                   Under $30,481              $125,600              $762
 Very Low Income                                      $30,481-$53,400              $220,200            $1,335
 Low Income                                         $53,401 - $85,450              $309,900            $2,136
 Moderate Income                                   $85,451 - $111,750              $405,300            $2,794
 Above Moderate Income                                       $111,750 +
Assumptions: Mortgage at 4% interest, 30 year fixed rate loan, property tax at 1% and homeowners insurance at
0.25% of home value, down payment based on 50% of annual salary, and maximum front-end ratio of 28%.
At this price, homes are not affordable to many people in the local workforce. Based on
the jobs expected in San Mateo County, the workforce housing needs to accommodate
all income levels are shown in the table below.
City of Menlo Park Housing Element — Adopted April 1, 2014                                                    84

 Housing Need Based on New Jobs in San Mateo County (2012)
                                                                                             Percent of
                                                                                         Recently Sold
                                                            New Housing Need          Homes Available
                                                        Based on New Jobs in                to Different
 Income Level Name                                           San Mateo County           Income Levels
 Extremely Low Income                                                        8%                      0%
 Very Low Income                                                           13%                      <1%
 Low Income                                                                22%                       5%
 Moderate Income                                                           14%                      12%
 Above Moderate Income                                                     44%
Source: Zillow database of 1,540 recently sold homes accessed on September 4, 2012. Homes not sold “at
arms length” (e.g. sold for $1) not included.
Overcrowding
One consequence of high housing prices is overcrowding. The U.S. Census uses a
standard of more than 1 person per room resulting in a home that is considered
overcrowded. If there are more than 1.5 people per room it is considered severely
overcrowded. Because this standard uses rooms10 (not bedrooms), two people can
share a one-bedroom apartment and not be overcrowded. Menlo Park had an
overcrowding rate of 2.8 percent and a severe overcrowding rate of 1.5 percent in 2010.
Overcrowding was significantly worse for renters. According to the U.S. Census there
are 211 overcrowded owner households and 323 overcrowded renter households in
Menlo Park.
 Number of Overcrowded Units
                                              Occupied Homes                    Percent
                                                     Menlo Park     Menlo Park County          State
 Owner                Not overcrowded                      6,775            97%        96%       96%
                           Overcrowded                       187           2.7%          3%        3%
              Extremely overcrowded                            24          0.3%          1%        1%
 Renter               Not overcrowded                      5,574            95%        86%       86%
                           Overcrowded                       230           3.9%          8%        8%
              Extremely overcrowded                            93          1.6%          5%        6%
 Source: 2009-2011 American Community Survey
 Note: 0-1 people per room is not overcrowded, 1-1.5 people per room is overcrowded, more
 than 1.5 people per room is extremely overcrowded
Housing Stock Condition
The condition of the housing stock in Menlo Park is generally good, with the exception
of individual units that are scattered around the city and a small concentration of units in
poor condition within the Belle Haven neighborhood.
10
   Kitchens, bathrooms and hallways are excluded from the calculations.
City of Menlo Park Housing Element — Adopted April 1, 2014                                               85

The best way to learn about the condition of homes is to do a physical survey of a
neighborhood. Additionally, sometimes jurisdictions use census data to look at homes
that do not have complete plumbing or kitchen facilities. In Menlo Park, the 2010 ACS
survey found no homes that lacked complete plumbing facilities and 22 homes (0.2%)
that lacked complete kitchens. According to the U.S. Census, complete kitchens include
a sink with piped water, range or cook stove and a refrigerator. Sometimes, older
homes are more at risk for disrepair. The age of homes is detailed above, but because
many homes in Menlo Park have been updated, there is not much connection between
age and condition.
The map to the right
shows the results of a
housing condition survey
conducted in the Belle
Haven community in
October 2008. This
survey is still considered
relevant today as a
means of identifying
housing conditions and
needs in the Belle Haven
neighborhood. The San
Mateo County
Department of Housing
operates several
rehabilitation loan programs to address housing conditions. In addition, organizations
such as the Center for Independence of Individuals with Disabilities, El Concilio of San
Mateo County and Rebuilding Together Peninsula offer rehabilitation assistance. Of
1,009 housing units surveyed in the neighborhood, 492 (48.76%) were judged to be in
good condition. This number included the 47 newly completed homes from the Hamilton
Park development.
Five hundred and four homes (50 percent) were determined to need repairs, often fairly
extensive. The methodology for classifying these homes was based on some exterior
clues that suggested the extent to which they had been maintained or updated over the
years. The first exterior clue was the size of the mast and weather head through which
electrical service enters the home. The original mast was a one-inch pipe. If the original
weather head was still in service, it suggests that the home still has the original knob
and tube wiring and an antiquated electrical service. If the electrical service has been
upgraded to accommodate the load capacity requirements for a modern house, the
City of Menlo Park Housing Element — Adopted April 1, 2014                               86

weather head would likely have been replaced with a new, larger mast and weather
head. Also, if the old wiring has not been replaced, it is likely that the home has no
insulation in the walls. Poorly insulated homes are not energy efficient and can lead to
conditions that can result in the cultivation of mold on or in the walls, which can have
impacts on the health of the occupants.
The second exterior clue that was employed was the type of windows on the unit. The
original single-glaze wood or metal-framed windows are not energy efficient and
condensation forms on the inside during cold weather. The condensation can pool on
the window stool, eventually causing rot in the wood and mold growth around the
window and in the walls below it. Where windows have been replaced with double–
glaze, condensation is less common.
Thirteen homes were classified as dilapidated, suggesting the need for major
rehabilitation or demolition. Several vacant lots were also identified in the
neighborhood.
  B      Special Housing Needs
                                                    In addition to overall housing needs, cities
                                                    and counties must plan for the special
                                                    housing needs of certain groups. State law
                                                    (65583(a)(6)) requires that several
                                                    populations with special needs be addressed
                                                    — homeless people, seniors, people living
                                                    with disabilities, large families and
                                                    female-headed households. The Housing
                                                    Element should take into account any local
                                                    factors that create an extraordinary need for
                                                    housing, and should quantify those needs as
well as possible. Farmworker housing is also required by State law to be addressed in
local Housing Elements if it is a local need. In Menlo Park, less than one-tenth of one
percent of the population is employed in agriculture combined (ABAG). While there is a
need for farmworker housing in San Mateo County (primarily in west County areas),
there is no need for farmworker housing in Menlo Park so it is not included in this
analysis.
City of Menlo Park Housing Element — Adopted April 1, 2014                                        87

Seniors
As described earlier, Menlo Park has a higher percentage of seniors than the county or
the state. In 2010, there were approximately 4,580 seniors (age 65 plus) in Menlo Park.
Approximately 920 were 85 or older. This is a decrease from 2000, when there were
approximately 4,890 senior households. Approximately nine percent of Menlo Park
residents are in their 60’s, 5.5 percent are in their 70’s and 5.1 percent are in their 80’s
or older.
Seniors’ income tends to decline as they age. Young seniors often have some
retirement savings or employment income that can supplement social security. More
than 42 percent of seniors in the 65-74 year age bracket worked in the past year, while
only 10 percent of seniors age 75 or more worked. Older seniors are more likely to use
up their savings and therefore are more likely to live in poverty. The graph below shows
the significant increase in the senior population in the United States.
Number of People Projected to Turn 65 Each Year in the United States
Source: Pew Research Center, 2010
Younger seniors tend to need less support. Most prefer to stay in their home for as long
as they can. They may benefit from programs to help them rehabilitate their homes to
make them better for people to age in place. Older seniors often are unable to maintain
a single family home and look to move to a smaller home or some type of senior living
development. Senior renters are particularly at risk for displacement because their
incomes are decreasing while their housing expenses are increasing.
City of Menlo Park Housing Element — Adopted April 1, 2014                                   88

 Senior Households Renting Versus Owning by Tenure
                              Menlo Park      County           State
 All Ages         Owners             56%         60%             57%
                  Renters            44%         40%             43%
                  Total            12,726    256,423      12,433,172
 Age 65-74        Owners             80%         79%             75%
                  Renters            20%         21%             25%
                  Total             1,483      27,053      1,265,873
 Age 75-84        Owners             80%         81%             75%
                  Renters            20%         19%             25%
                  Total               900      18,014        823,750
 Age 85 +         Owners             74%         75%             69%
                  Renters            26%         25%             31%
                  Total               538       9,136        342,029
 Source and Notes: 2009-2011 American Community Survey, Seniors
 are age 65 +
 Seniors and Income
                             Menlo Park       County          State
 Below Poverty Level                  5%           6%          10%
 Income under $30,000               28%          28%           38%
 $30000-$49,000                     16%          19%           20%
 $50,000-$74,999                    13%          16%           16%
 $75,000-$99,999                      8%         11%             9%
 $100,000+                          34%          26%           17%
 Total Seniors                     3,032       55,093     2,474,879
 Source and Notes: 2009-2011 American Community Survey, Seniors
 are age 65+
 Seniors by Income, Tenure and Age
                          Extremely                                            Above
                                 Low    Very Low           Low    Moderate  Moderate
                             <30% of        50% of      80% of
                             Median       Median      Median        120% of  >120% of
                             Income       Income      Income        Median    Median
 All Ages       Owner            42%          43%          43%         54%       66%
                Renter           58%          57%          57%         46%       34%
                Total            980         1,110       1,595         955      7,815
 Age 62-74      Owner            43%          86%          82%         42%       94%
                Renter           58%          14%          18%         58%         6%
                Total            200           185         305         130      1,190
 Age 75+        Owner            62%          69%          67%         90%       88%
                Renter           38%          31%          33%         10%       12%
                Total            265           225         275         195        690
 Sources: CHAS Data 2006-2010
City of Menlo Park Housing Element — Adopted April 1, 2014                            89

Distribution of Households by Age and Income in Menlo Park (2012)
Source: Claritas, 2012
Persons Living with Disabilities
Approximately seven percent of residents in Menlo
Park had a disability, as defined by the US Census.
The Census Bureau defines disability as, “A long-
lasting physical, mental, or emotional condition.
This condition can make it difficult for a person to
do activities such as walking, climbing stairs,
dressing, bathing, learning, or remembering. This
condition can also impede a person from being able
to go outside the home alone or to work at a job or
business.” Not surprisingly, people over 65 are
much more likely to have a disability. Over 29
percent of seniors have some type of disability.
City of Menlo Park Housing Element — Adopted April 1, 2014        90

Age and Type of Disability
                                                       Number                         Percent
                                        Menlo Park       County       State Menlo Park County   State
Under 18 with Disability                         102        3,270   280,649        1%        2%    3%
Age 18-64 with Disability                        884      23,231  1,843,497        3%        5%    8%
Age 65 + with Disability                       1,081      28,703  1,547,712       25%       31%  37%
Any Age with Any Disability                    2,067      55,204  3,671,858        7%        8%  10%
Any Age with Hearing Disability                  616      15,651  1,022,928        2%        2%    3%
With Vision Disability                           308        8,199   685,600        1%        1%    2%
With Cognitive Disability                        615      19,549  1,400,745        2%        3%    4%
With Ambulatory Disability                       932      29,757  1,960,853        3%        4%    5%
With Self Care Disability                        435      12,819    862,575        1%        2%    2%
With Independent Living Disability               872      22,735  1,438,328        3%        3%    4%
Source: 2009-2011 American Community Survey
Note: Some people may have multiple disabilities
    People with disabilities may have unique housing needs. Fair housing laws and
    subsequent federal and state legislation require all cities and counties to further housing
    opportunities by identifying and removing constraints to the development of housing for
    individuals with disabilities, including local land use and zoning barriers, and to also
    provide reasonable accommodation as one method of advancing equal access to
    housing.
    The Fair Housing laws require that cities and counties provide flexibility or even waive
    certain requirements when it is necessary to eliminate barriers to housing opportunities
    for people with disabilities. An example of such a request might be to place a ramp in a
    front yard to provide access from the street to the front door. The State Attorney
    General, in a letter to the City of Los Angeles in May 2001, stated that local
    governments have an affirmative duty under fair housing laws to provide reasonable
    accommodation and “It is becoming increasingly important that a process be made
    available for handling such requests that operates promptly and efficiently.” He advised
    jurisdictions not to use existing variance or conditional use permit processes because
    they do not provide the correct standard for making fair housing determinations and
    because the public process used in making entitlement determinations fosters
    opposition to much needed housing for individuals with disabilities.
    A fundamental characteristic of a fair housing reasonable accommodation procedure is
    the establishment of appropriate findings that reflect the intent and specific language of
    both the federal and state fair housing statutes. In this regard, it is somewhat different
    than traditional or typical zoning cases because here the focus of review is the need of
    the individual with disabilities to overcome barriers to housing, not on the topography of
    the site or the unique character of the lot. The focus here is solely on the special need
    of the individual to utilize his or her home or dwelling unit, which is directly related to the
    City of Menlo Park Housing Element — Adopted April 1, 2014                                     91

individual’s disability. It is this reasoning that underlies the Attorney General’s warning
not to utilize variance criteria for such determinations. The City has identified a program
(H3.C) to establish a reasonable accommodation procedure and the program is underway.
People with Developmental Disabilities
The Olmstead decision of the U.S. Supreme Court (1999) requires that meaningful
opportunities be created for individuals with developmental disabilities to reside, work
and receive support services in the most integrated settings. HUD has also issued
guidance (most recently in 2013) to encourage actions to achieve implementation of the
Olmstead decision. In 2010, SB 812 was signed into law requiring local housing
elements to include an analysis of the special housing needs of people with
developmental disabilities. Additionally, SB 812 requires that individuals with disabilities
receive public services in the least restrictive, most integrated setting appropriate to
their needs. The information below has been provided by the Golden Gate Regional
Center (GGRC), which covers the San Francisco Bay Area.
California defines developmentally disabled as a, “severe and chronic disability that is
attributable to a mental or physical impairment. The disability must begin before the
person’s 18th birthday, be expected to continue indefinitely, and present a substantial
disability.” Some development disabilities cause mental retardation and some do not.
Common developmental disabilities include Down’s Syndrome, autism, epilepsy and
cerebral palsy.
  Type of Developmental Disability in San Mateo County
                                                               San Mateo County
                                                       Distribution of People with
                                                      Developmental Disabilities
  Mild/Moderate Mental Retardation                                            50%
  Autism                                                                      18%
  Epilepsy                                                                    18%
  Cerebral Palsy                                                              17%
  Severe/Profound Mental Retardation                                          11%
  Source: Golden Gate Regional Center
People with developmental disabilities in San Mateo County have various diagnoses.
The common ones are summarized below. Because people can have multiple
diagnoses, the numbers total more than 100 percent.
People with developmental disabilities also tend to be younger than the general
population. There are several reasons for this. For some diagnoses there is a shorter
life expectancy. More importantly, starting in the 1990s there was an “autism wave” with
City of Menlo Park Housing Element — Adopted April 1, 2014                                  92

many more young people being diagnosed with the disorder, for reasons that are still
not well understood. The racial demographics of the developmentally disabled
population mirror that of the population of the Bay Area.
 Age of People with Development Disabilities in Menlo Park
 Age Range                           Number                                           Percent
 0-3                                         33                                           22%
 4-14                                        54                                           35%
 15-29                                       30                                           20%
 30-44                                       20                                           13%
 45-59                                       10                                            6%
 60-74                                        5                                            3%
 75-89                                        1                                            1%
 Total                                     153                                           100%
 Source: Golden Gate Regional Center, February 2014
Many people with developmental disabilities are unable to secure long-term
employment. This results in many people relying on Supplemental Security Income
(SSI) and many earn 10-20 percent of the Area Median Income (AMI).
People with developmental disabilities have various housing needs and housing
situations. Almost all (86 percent) of Menlo Park residents with developmental
disabilities live with a parent or legal guardian. The remaining Menlo Park residents with
developmental disabilities live independently or with some supportive services.
 Living Arrangements of People with Developmental Disabilities in Menlo Park
                                                     Number                               Percent
 Lives with                                       Menlo Park                         Menlo Park
 Parents/Legal Guardian                                    133                               86%
 Own Home                                                   17                               11%
 Licensed Group Homes                                         1                               1%
 Licensed Health Care Facility                                1                               1%
 Foster-Type Care                                             1                               1%
 Total:                                                    153                              100%
 Source: Golden Gate Regional Center, February 2014
 Note: Counts based on zip code and may include areas outside of jurisdictional borders.
City of Menlo Park Housing Element — Adopted April 1, 2014                                        93

Age and Living Arrangements of People with Developmental Disabilities in Menlo Park and San Mateo County
                                                           Licensed                            Subtotal
                   Home of                  Licensed          Health         Foster-                 of Total Number
                  Parent or       Own          Group            Care           Type             Autism          for All
                  Guardian       Home           Home         Facility          Care   Homeless    Only     Diagnoses
Menlo Park
0-3                        33          0             0                0             0        0       **             33
4-14                       54          0             0                0             0        0       18             54
15-29                      27          2             0                0             0        0        6             30
30-44                      12          8             0                0             0        0        1             20
45-59                       6          3             1                1             1        0        1             10
60-74                       1          3             0                0             0        0        0              5
75-89                       0          1             0                0             0        0        0              1
90-104                      0          0             0                0             0        0        0              0
Grand Total               133         17             1                1             1        0       26            153
San Mateo
County
0-3                       609          0             0                0           11         0       **            620
4-14                      930          0            11                0             1        1     329             943
15-29                     908         47           113               17           13         2     212           1,100
30-44                     294       103            135               35           12         0       34            579
45-59                     156       109            245               71           11         1       52            593
60-74                      35         53           122               91             6        0       10            307
75-89                       3          5            20               17             0        0        0             45
90-104                      0          0             4                1             0        0        0              5
Grand Total            2,935        317            650            232             54         4     637           4,192
**No diagnosis yet
Source: Golden Gate Regional Center, February 2014
Note: Counts based on zip code and may include areas outside of jurisdiction borders.
         According to the Golden Gate Regional Center, trends that are affecting people with
         developmental disabilities include California’s moves to reduce institutionalization,
         aging family caregivers not being able to continue providing in-house care and the
         growing wave of people with autism.
         a. Deinstitutionalization – In 1977, California passed the Lanterman
              Developmentally Disabled Services Act to minimize the institutionalization of
              developmentally disabled people, help them remain in their communities, and to
              allow them to live their lives as similar to non-disabled people as possible. To
              accomplish this end the state has been closing large institutional care facilities,
         City of Menlo Park Housing Element — Adopted April 1, 2014                                                94

     resulting in more people with disabilities being integrated into the community.
     However, this has increased the demand for community based independent living
     options to serve the needs of the developmentally disabled.
b. Aging Baby Boomers Unable to Care for Their Children with Developmental
     Disabilities – Almost three quarters of people with developmental disabilities live
     with a parent or caregiver, and many of these caregivers are baby boomers. As
     these caregivers age their ability to continue to care for their developmentally
     disabled children will decrease to the point where it is no longer possible. This trend
     is also going to be a factor in the increased need for community based independent
     living options for the developmentally disabled. Many service delivery systems and
     communities are not prepared to meet the increasing need.
c. Increasing Numbers of People with Autism - There is a large number of young
     adults with developmental disabilities that have autism. They have been brought up
     as independent members of the community and want to remain independent and
     involved in the community. There is a growing need to supply community based
     independent living options for these individuals.
People with developmental disabilities face many challenges when looking for housing:
a. Limited supply – There is a limited supply of disabled accessible, affordable
     housing generally, and the supply is especially tight near transit. Being near transit
     is important because many people with developmental disabilities cannot drive.
b. Lack of rental history – Because many people with developmental disabilities
     have lived with their parents they often do not have rental or credit history. This
     makes it harder for them to compete for the limited housing that is available.
c. Unable to afford high rents – Due to the challenge of securing long-term
     employment, people with developmental disabilities are often extremely low income
     and San Mateo County residents with developmental disabilities often cannot afford
     the rents in the communities where they grew up.
The three major needs for people with developmental disabilities are low cost
(subsidized) rents, disabled accessible homes, and buildings near public transportation.
These needs are very similar to the desires of other segments of the population.
Policies that promote affordable housing generally are also good for the
developmentally disabled community. The Menlo Park Housing Element contains
policies and programs supporting the specific recommendations from the Golden Gate
City of Menlo Park Housing Element — Adopted April 1, 2014                                  95

Regional Center. GGRC recommendations and related City programs, in parenthesis,
are listed below:
     •    Jurisdictions assisting with site identification for low income developments
          (higher density zoned sites and sites designated with the City’s Affordable
          Housing Overlay zoning; Program H3.D Encourage Rental Housing Assistance
          Programs)
     •    Policies to promote accessible homes (Program H3.B, Zone for Transitional and
          Supportive Housing; Program H3.C, Adopt Procedures for Reasonable
          Accommodation; Program H3.F, Assist in Providing Housing for Persons Living
          with Disabilities, Program H3.G Develop Incentives for Special Needs Housing)
     •    Inclusionary zoning (H4.B, Implement Inclusionary Housing Regulations)
     •    Second units (Program H4.E, Modify Second Dwelling Unit Development
          Standards and Permit Process; Program H4.F, Establish a Process and
          Standards to Allow the Conversion of Accessory Buildings and Structures to a
          Secondary Dwelling Unit)
     •    Mixed use zoning (implementation of the El Camino Real/Downtown Specific
          Plan; Program H4.N Create Opportunities for Mixed Use Development)
Additionally, some people with development disabilities need supportive housing that is
affordable and located near public transit. In supportive housing, additional services are
provided at the home.
Large Families and Female-Headed Households
In 2010, eleven percent of owners and seven percent of renters were large families.
Large families were significantly more likely to be poor than smaller families. Over 40
percent of large families had lower incomes in 2010. In 2010, there were a total of 1,039
households headed by a female head of household in Menlo Park. Of those, there were
545 owner households headed by women and 494 renter households headed by
women. Of the 545 owner households, 22 were ages 15-34, 334 were ages 35-64 and
189 with the householder over age 65. Of the 494 renter households, 115 were ages
15-34, 346 were ages 35-64 and 33 with the householder over age 65.
 Households of 5 or more by Tenure and Housing Problems
                                                      Menlo Park    County  State
                                                 Number Percent
 Owner-occupied        Housing Problems                455      67%   59%    61%
                       No Housing Problems             225      33%   41%    39%
 Renter-occupied       Housing Problems                240      76%   84%    81%
                       No Housing Problems               75     24%   16%    19%
 Source: 2006-2010 CHAS Data
City of Menlo Park Housing Element — Adopted April 1, 2014                                96

  Household Size, Income and Overcrowding in Menlo Park (2010)
  Overcrowding                                          1-4 persons               5+ Persons
  Not Overcrowded                                               89%                      11%
  Overcrowded                                                   92%                       7%
  Income Level
  Extremely Low Income                                           6%                     10%
  Very Low Income                                                3%                     15%
  Low Income                                                     9%                       7%
  Moderate Income or Above                                      82%                      59%
  Total Households                                             4,716                    1,030
  Source: 2006-1010 ACS, 2000 CHAS
  Housing Unit Sizes for Renter and Owner Units in Menlo Park (2010)
  Number of Bedrooms                              Renters           Owners  Total
  0 Bedrooms (studio)                                  <1%             2%     1%
  1 Bedroom                                           2.3%            35%    16%
  2 Bedrooms                                           20%            44%    30%
  3 Bedrooms                                           51%            14%    35%
  4 Bedrooms                                           21%             5%    14%
  5 + Bedrooms                                          7%             0%     4%
  Total Households                                    7,358          5,243 12,601
Source: 2010 ACS
Additional multi-family housing including child care facilities can allow single mothers to
secure gainful employment outside the home to address both the housing needs and
the supportive service needs of female-headed households. In addition, as identified
through workshops on the Menlo Park Housing Element, providing private or nearby
open space and recreation assists in the quality of life for families.
In addition, the creation of innovative housing for female heads of household could
include co-housing developments where childcare and meal preparation responsibilities
can be shared. The economies of scale available in this type of housing would be
advantageous to this special needs group as well as all other low-income households.
Limited equity cooperatives sponsored by non-profit housing developers are another
financing structure that could be considered for the benefit of all special needs groups.
City of Menlo Park Housing Element — Adopted April 1, 2014                                    97

 Female Headed Households
                                                            Menlo Park      County       State
                                                           Number   Percent
 Female living with own children, no husband                   418       3%      4%         7%
 Female living with other family members, no husband           464       4%      6%         6%
 Female living alone                                         2,304      18%    15%         13%
 Total Households                                           12,883     100% 256,305 12,433,049
 Female Households Below Poverty Level                         NA        5%      8%        17%
 Source: 2009-2011 American Community Survey
 C        Homeless Needs
In 2005-2006, a countywide group of diverse stakeholders undertook an intensive
community-based planning process to develop a plan to end homelessness in San
Mateo County. The end result – entitled “Housing Our People Effectively (HOPE):
Ending Homelessness in San Mateo County” (“the HOPE Plan”) – lays out concrete
strategies designed to end homelessness in our community within 10 years. The report
incorporates the experiences and expertise of over 200 stakeholders, including
members of the business, nonprofit and government sectors. These stakeholders met
in working groups over a period of 12 months to develop the recommendations in the
plan. Homeless and formerly homeless persons were represented in the working
groups, as well as in several focus groups conducted in emergency shelters and
transitional housing programs. The result of this year-long community planning process
was the finalized HOPE Plan, which was completed in March 2006.
One of the key strategies for ending homelessness laid out in the HOPE Plan is to
increase the supply of permanent affordable and supportive housing for people who are
homeless and develop strategies to help them to move into permanent housing as
rapidly as possible (a “housing first” or “rapid re-housing” approach). The HOPE Plan
intentionally made no recommendation to expand the supply of emergency or
transitional housing. Although the HOPE planners recognized that there is a lack of
needed resources throughout the housing continuum, including emergency and
transitional housing, the greatest need and the most effective use of new and/or
redirected resources is for creating and sustaining quality affordable housing and
supportive housing.
City of Menlo Park Housing Element — Adopted April 1, 2014                              98

Homeless Count and Demographics
Every other year, San Mateo County along with many other stakeholders, conducts a
homeless count. Conducted on January 24, 2013, they found 16 (unsheltered)
homeless people living in Menlo Park as well as 142 homeless residents in shelters,
institutions, motel voucher programs, etc.
 Homeless Count
                                         Menlo Park                           County
                             Unsheltered Sheltered                Unsheltered   Sheltered
 Year                          Homeless Homeless           Total    Homeless     Homeless   Total
 2007                                   52          177     229         1,094         970   2,064
 2009                                   25          208     233           803         993   1,796
 2011                                   72          168     240         1,162         987   2,149
 2013                                   16          142     158         1,299         982   2,281
 2007 - 2013 Change                    -36           -35     -71          205          12     217
 2007 - 2013 % Change                -69%          -20%    -31%         +19%          +1%   +11%
 Source: 2013 San Mateo County Homeless Census and Survey, 2011 San Mateo County Homeless Census
 and Survey, 2009 San Mateo County Homeless Census and Survey, prepared by the San Mateo Human
 Services Agency, Center on Homelessness
There is no data presently available documenting the increased level of demand for
shelter in San Mateo County during particular times of the year. Due to the relatively
mild climate, the only time of year when increased demand appears to be a factor is
during the winter months (December to February). During extremely cold periods,
some shelters set up additional cots to accommodate increased demand for shelter and
the County periodically opens special “warming shelters” during extended cold spells.
Anecdotal evidence suggests that this additional capacity is sufficient to meet the need
during these periods.
The biannual homeless count always takes place in the last week of January, which is a
period of time when demand for shelter typically is at its highest. The year-round need
described above is based on that biannual count. Below is the distribution of homeless
persons by need from the 2013 count.
 County Homeless Population Location 2007-2013
                                    2007       2013      Change
 On the Street                        29%       15%         -41%
 In Car, R.V., or Encampment          24%       41%          90%
 In Emergency Shelter                 14%       11%         -18%
 In Motel with Motel Voucher           5%         1%        -73%
 In Transitional Housing              15%       19%          41%
 In Institution                       13%       12%            7%
 Total:                             2,064      2,281          217
 Source: 2013 San Mateo County Homeless Census and Survey,
 2011 San Mateo County Homeless Census and Survey, 2009 San
 Mateo County Homeless Census and Survey, prepared by the San
 Mateo Human Services Agency, Center on Homelessness
City of Menlo Park Housing Element — Adopted April 1, 2014                                        99

 Demographics of Homeless Population
                                                         County
                                             Unsheltered        Sheltered
                                               Homeless         Homeless
 Single Adult or Living w/Another Adult                94%            79%
 Family                                                  6%           21%
 Male                                                  71%            60%
 Female                                                29%            40%
 White                                                 60%
 Latino                                                19%
 African American                                      13%
 Other Races                                           10%
 Non-Veteran                                           89%            76%
 Veteran                                               11%            24%
 Alcohol / Drug Problems                               72%             8%
 Physical Disability                                   52%
 Chronic Health Problem                                47%
 Mental Illness                                        37%            10%
 Source: 2013 San Mateo County Homeless Census and Survey, prepared
 by the San Mateo Human Services Agency, Center on Homelessness. May
 not total 100% due to rounding
 Location when Homelessness Occurred
                                                               County
 Living in San Mateo County when became homeless                  87%
 Hometown in San Mateo County                                     69%
 Source: 2013 San Mateo County Homeless Census and Survey,
 prepared by the San Mateo Human Services Agency, Center on
 Homelessness
As part of the planning process for the HOPE Plan, a working group was convened to
develop an estimate of the number of supportive housing units that would have to be
developed to meet the housing needs of all the homeless people in San Mateo County.
This working group drew from best practices in the field of supportive housing as well
as the expertise of local housing and shelter providers to develop their methodology.
The result was an estimate that San Mateo County needed to create 1,682 units of
supportive housing for homeless people during the 10-year period from 2006 to 2015.
In the two years since the plan was published, 34 supportive housing units for homeless
people have been created, leaving a balance of 1,648 units needed.
The estimates presented in the HOPE Plan do not provide a breakdown of unmet need
by jurisdiction. However, Menlo Park has estimated its share of the needed units based
on the percentage of the total number of unsheltered homeless people living in the
community.
City of Menlo Park Housing Element — Adopted April 1, 2014                             100

The Homeless Survey did not ask respondents to indicate whether they were runaway
youth, emancipated foster youth or “transitional age” youth (i.e. ages 18-25), so no data
is available on those subpopulations.
Based on information contained in the 2013 San Mateo County Homeless Census and
Survey, there are currently three facilities providing beds for 142 homeless people in
Menlo Park: (1) Veterans Affairs Domiciliary Program, with beds for 61 adults; (2)
Veterans Affairs Compensated Work Therapy Program, with beds for 10 adults; and, (3)
Haven Family House, which opened in June 2000 and is operated by Shelter Network
as shelter and transitional housing, with beds serving 28 adults, 3 youths and 40
children (71 total, with a capacity to serve 23 families at a time). In addition to the
sheltered count of 142 persons, there were 16 unsheltered people in Menlo Park in
January 2013 to the Homeless Census and Survey.
Support services are available at each of the three facilities located in Menlo Park.
Haven Family House provides case management, housing and job search assistance,
financial literacy and savings, children’s services, life skills education and services that
go “beyond the bed” to meet their clients’ unique needs and enable them to become
self-sufficient for the long term.
The VA facility is operated under the VA Palo Alto Health Care System, which consists
of three inpatient facilities located at Palo Alto, Menlo Park and Livermore, plus seven
outpatient clinics in San Jose, Fremont, Capitola, Monterey, Stockton, Modesto, and
Sonora. These facilities provide some of the world's finest medical care and cutting-
edge technology.
There are also other supportive housing programs available for the homeless in San
Mateo County. Two of the largest supportive housing programs in the county are the
San Mateo County Housing Authority’s Shelter Plus Care and Supportive Housing
programs. These are tenant-based voucher programs, in which participants receive a
rent subsidy to rent units in the private rental market and have a choice as to where
they will live. Tenants are therefore scattered throughout the County and the distribution
of units by jurisdiction fluctuates as participants enter and exit the program.
The table below shows programs providing support services for the homeless in San
Mateo County.
City of Menlo Park Housing Element — Adopted April 1, 2014                                 101

 Programs Providing Support Services for the Homeless in San Mateo County
Provider/Program                   Services Provided                               Service Area
Core Service Agencies
                                   Information and referral, emergency assistance,
Coastside Hope                                                                     Coastside
                                   rental and utility assistance
Daly City Community Services       Information and referral, emergency assistance,
                                                                                   North County
Center                             rental and utility assistance
North Peninsula Neighborhood       Information and referral, emergency assistance,
                                                                                   North County
Services Center                    rental and utility assistance
                                   Information and referral, emergency assistance,
Pacifica Resource Center                                                           North County
                                   rental and utility assistance
                                   Information and referral, emergency assistance,
Samaritan House                                                                    Central County
                                   rental and utility assistance
El Concilio Emergency Services     Information and referral, emergency assistance,
                                                                                   South County
Partnership                        rental and utility assistance
                                   Information and referral, emergency assistance,
Fair Oaks Community Center                                                         South County
                                   rental and utility assistance
Emergency Assistance
                                   Emergency food and clothing; information and    North, Central,
Salvation Army
                                   referrals                                       South County
                                   Emergency food and clothing; information and
St. Vincent DePaul Society                                                         All County
                                   referrals; homeless help desks
                                   Emergency food and clothing; information and
Puente Del Costa Sur                                                               Coastside
                                   referrals;
Homeless Outreach
Homeless Outreach Team (San
                                   Intensive street outreach with direct access to Downtown San
Mateo County Human Services
                                   housing.                                        Mateo
Agency/Shelter Network)
Mateo Lodge Mobile Support         Mobile mental health services for homeless
                                                                                   All County
Team                               people with mentally illness
Health Services
Mobile Health Clinic (San Mateo    Health screening, immunization, etc. for low
                                                                                   All County
County Health Dept.)               income and homeless people
Mental Health Services
Mental Health Association of       Mental health services for homeless people with
                                                                                   All County
San Mateo County                   mental illness
San Mateo County Behavioral
                                   Information, assessment, consultation and
Health and Recover Services,                                                       All County
                                   referral
Mental Health Access Team
City of Menlo Park Housing Element — Adopted April 1, 2014                                         102

Alcohol and Drug Services
Asian-American Recovery
                                   Outpatient services                              All County
Services
Free At Last                       Outpatient and residential treatment             All County
Women’s Recovery Association       Outpatient and residential treatment             All County
Palm Avenue Detoxification
                                   Drug and alcohol detox                           All County
Program
Latino Commission on Alcohol
                                   Residential treatment                            All County
and Drug Abuse Services
Project 90                         Residential treatment                            All County
Youth and Family Services
Youth and Family Enrichment
                                   Services for homeless youth                      All County
Services
Family Resource Centers (San
                                   Prevention and early intervention services at
Mateo County Human Services                                                         All County
                                   school sites throughout San Mateo County
Agency)
Domestic Violence Services
                                   Domestic Violence hotline, legal assistance,
CORA                                                                                All County
                                   counseling, prevention services
Employment and Training
                                   Employment and training services for people with
Department of Rehabilitation                                                        All County
                                   disabilities
Peninsula Works (San Mateo
County Human Services              One-stop careers centers                         All County
Agency)
Legal Services
Legal Aid Society of San Mateo     Free civil legal services for low income and
                                                                                    All County
County                             homeless people
Source: SB2 Policy and Technical Paper prepared for 21 Elements, Kate Bristol Consulting,
http://www.21elements.com/Emergency-Transitional-and-Supportive-Housing/View-category.html
Menlo Park is unique in having a facility operated by the U.S. Department of Veterans
Affairs that already provides for the needs of homeless veterans through the Veterans
Affairs Domiciliary Program and the Veterans Affairs Compensated Work Therapy
Program. In addition, the Clara-Mateo Alliance homeless shelter, operated by InnVision,
the largest non-profit provider of housing and services to homeless and at-risk families
and individuals in Silicon Valley, was located on the VA property from 2004 to 2011.
However, in 2011 the facility was forced to close due to earthquake safety and other
City of Menlo Park Housing Element — Adopted April 1, 2014                                     103

issues. The Clara-Mateo Alliance homeless shelter had 70 beds and about two-thirds of
the shelter’s residents were veterans.
Since there are homeless facility uses and services already located at the VA and
seven-day bus service is available along Willow Road, the City is considering the VA
campus and additional areas immediately adjacent for the new Homeless Facility
Overlay zone designation. The proposed zoning designation covers almost 100 acres of
land and is shown on the map below and provides the adequate capacity and
opportunity for a homeless facility to be developed to address the City’s unsheltered
homeless need for at least a 16 bed facility.
A homeless facility located in the overlay zone area, including the VA site, is intended to
serve both veterans and other homeless individuals. The Clara-Mateo Alliance
homeless shelter, previously located on the VA campus, served the general public. The
VA medical center property comprises 95 acres and is zoned PF, public facility, and the
remaining properties comprise 4.5 acres and are zoned R3, multiple family residential.
Within the 4.5-acre area there are a total of 25 parcels. One parcel is vacant (5,546
square feet in size), two parcels have 12 and 30 units each (19,045 and 44,665 square
feet in size), twelve parcels have from 2 to 4 units (parcels ranging from 4,992 to 8,018
square feet in size), four parcels have 1 unit (parcels 4,935 to 6,111 square feet in
size), five condominium parcels have 1 unit each and are too small for a homeless
facility (1,145 to 1,508 square feet in size) and two parcels that have other uses (a
church and a commercial use). For the purposes of the Housing Element, the
conclusions of this analysis are that 16 of the parcels within the 4.5 acres could be
redeveloped for a homeless facility. These parcels all contain four units or less, with
one parcel being vacant, are of adequate size and have redevelopment potential and
capacity for conversion to a homeless shelter for 16 beds. The smaller lot sizes also
make these parcels more financially feasible for a homeless facility.
City of Menlo Park Housing Element — Adopted April 1, 2014                               104

City of Menlo Park Housing Element — Adopted April 1, 2014 105
  D       Assisted Rental Housing “At Risk” of Conversion
                                         Government Code Section 65583 requires each city
                                         and county to conduct an analysis and identify
                                         programs for preserving assisted housing
                                         developments. The analysis is required to identify
                                         any low-income units that are at risk of losing
                                         subsidies over the next 10 years (2014-2024). The
                                         termination of Federal mortgage and or rent subsidies
                                         to housing developments built by the private sector is
a potential threat to affordable housing throughout the country. Communities with low-
income housing supported by federally subsidized housing are required to address the
needs of residents who may become displaced. Approximately 334 affordable rental
units that received subsidies have been developed in the City of Menlo Park.
The table below lists assisted affordable housing developments in Menlo Park. The
various service providers identified in the table all have the mission to provide affordable
housing for very low and lower income people. The waiting lists for these projects varies
from at least 1 year to several years, which illustrates the demand and need for
affordable units in Menlo Park. This is especially true since affordable units are rarely
vacated once a unit is occupied by a very low or low income person or family.
Financing of affordable housing often requires multiple funding sources that may have
varying requirements. The developments below have been financed through a variety of
sources, including Low Income Housing Tax Credits (LIHTC), Project Based Section 8
(HUD) and City loans. The expiration dates below are based on discussions with the
project sponsors and review of information maintained by the California Housing
Partnership Corporation. At this time, there are no units at-risk of conversion to market
rate prices over the next 15 years.
City of Menlo Park Housing Element — Adopted April 1, 2014                                   106

City of Menlo Park Housing Element — Adopted April 1, 2014 107
Section VII
Future Housing Needs and Opportunities
  A       Regional Housing Needs Allocation (RHNA)
                                            Within each Housing Element, the State mandates
                                            that local governments plan for their share of the
                                            region’s housing need for all income categories. In
                                            the case of the San Francisco Bay Area, the
                                            Association of Bay Area Governments (ABAG) and
                                            the State Housing and Community Development
                                            Department (HCD) determine the number of
                                            housing units that should be produced in the region.
                                            ABAG then allocates that need for each jurisdiction.
State law regarding Housing Elements was changed in 2004 to allow cities within a
county to join together to form a “sub-region,” which would administer the State
mandated RHNA process at the local level. This law allows the sub-region to receive
the sub-regional collective housing allocation from ABAG and then decide on and
implement its own methodology to apportion the allocation among the member cities and
county. In turn, the sub-regional RHNA process was used to establish the housing need
numbers for each jurisdiction’s Housing Element update for the 2007-2014 planning
period.
For the 2015-2023 Housing Element update, the County of San Mateo, in partnership
with all twenty cities in the County including Menlo Park, formed a sub-region
responsible for completing its own RHNA process for the 2015-2023 Housing Element
planning period. Based on the allocation methodology approved by the jurisdictions, the
San Mateo sub-region apportioned the County’s overall housing need to the individual
jurisdictions. The adopted sub-regional methodology, similar to ABAG’s methodology for
the current and previous RHNA processes, used weighted factors to develop
mathematical equations. The sub-regional allocations were then distributed using these
weighted factors for the individual cities. In addition to determining each jurisdiction’s
overall housing allocation of housing need, the units are also required to be distributed
based on income level need (for very low, low, moderate and above moderate income
households), as shown below for the 2015-2023 Housing Element planning period.
City of Menlo Park Housing Element — Adopted April 1, 2014                                     108

  Regional Housing Needs Allocation 2015 - 2023
                              Extremely     Very Low           Low  Moderate         Above
                            Low Income        Income       Income      Income     Moderate
                                   up to     $31,651 -    $52,751 -   $84,401 -     Income
                                 $31,650        52,750     $84,400    $123,600    $123,601+       Total
 Atherton                             17             18          26          29            3         93
 Belmont                              58             58          63          67          222        468
 Brisbane                             12             13          13          15           30         83
 Burlingame                          138            138         144         155          288        863
 Colma                                10             10           8           9           22         59
 Daly City                           200            200         188         221          541      1,350
 East Palo Alto                       32             32          54          83          266        467
 Foster City                          74             74          87          76          119        430
 Half Moon Bay                        26             26          31          36          121        240
 Hillsborough                         16             16          17          21           21         91
 Menlo Park                          116            117         129         143          150        655
 Millbrae                             96             97         101         112          257        663
 Pacifica                             60             61          68          70          154        413
 Portola Valley                       10             11          15          15           13         64
 Redwood City                        353            353         429         502        1,152      2,789
 San Bruno                           179            179         161         205          431      1,155
 San Carlos                           97             98         107         111          183        596
 San Mateo City                      429            430         469         530        1,242      3,100
 South San Francisco                 282            283         281         313          705      1,864
 Woodside                             11             12          13          15           11         62
 Unincorporated San
 Mateo County                         76             77         103         102          555        913
 Total                             2,292         2,303        2,507       2,830        6,486     16,418
 Source: Association of Bay Area Governments, Final 2014-2022 Regional Housing Need Allocation by
 County. Yearly Income is based on a family of four.
California income limits for the low, very low and moderate income categories are
derived from the income limits updated annually by the U.S. Department of Housing and
Urban Development (HUD) and the California Department of Housing and Community
Development (HCD). The income limits are based on the median income for San Mateo
County and are adjusted for household size. Very low income is defined as a household
earning less than 50% of the median income. Low income is defined as a household
earning 50-80% of the median income. Moderate income is a household earning 80-
120% of the median income. The “Median Income” schedule shown below is based on
the 2013 median family income of $103,000 for a four-person household, with
adjustments for smaller and larger household sizes. San Mateo County is considered a
high cost county, so HUD makes some adjustments when calculating the income limits,
which results in the very low income and low-income limits actually being higher than
50% and 80% of the median income, respectively.
City of Menlo Park Housing Element — Adopted April 1, 2014                                              109

The table below shows the City’s RHNA for 1999-2006, 2007-2014 and for the 2015-
2023 planning period.
The table below shows the City’s 2015-2023 RHNA that accounts for units that can be
credited to the City based on 2013 construction activity, current zoning and the
expectations from implementation of the programs contained in the 2015-2023 Housing
Element.
City of Menlo Park Housing Element — Adopted April 1, 2014                          110

The conclusions of the Housing Element are that there are sufficient sites and adequate
capacity for housing in Menlo Park to accommodate the City’s 2015-2023 RHNA at the
very low, low, moderate and above moderate-income affordability levels. Development
opportunities shown in the table set forth realistic expectations for the 2015-2023
Housing Element planning period as to site capacity based on current development
standards and other City regulations and requirements. The constraints analysis of the
City’s regulations and requirements provided in Section VII.C confirms this conclusion,
which is further supported by the number of project applications already reviewed (see
above) as well as a number of development applications anticipated to be reviewed over
the next 6 to 12 months for 500 El Camino Real (170 units) and 1300 El Camino
Real/Derry Lane (216 units) within the El Camino Real/Downtown Specific Plan area and
for 721-851 Hamilton Ave (195 units), 3645 Haven Avenue (146 units), and 1221-1275
Willow Road (90 units of which 42 would be net new).
Extremely Low Income (ELI) Household Need
It is estimated that 50% of the City’s Very Low Income housing need for the 2015-2023
planning period will be for households earning less than 30% of median income
(considered “Extremely Low Income” per the definitions). This translates into a need for
City of Menlo Park Housing Element — Adopted April 1, 2014                             111

about 116 units affordable to ELI households during the 2015-2023 planning period. The
2013 area median income for Menlo Park is $103,000. For ELI households, this results
in an income of $30,900 or less for a four-person household. ELI households have a
variety of housing needs. For example, most families and individuals receiving public
assistance, such as social security insurance (SSI) or disability insurance are considered
ELI households. The information below is from 2000 CHAS data for Menlo Park.
In 2000, approximately 1,129 ELI households resided in the City, representing
approximately 10 percent of the total households. Nearly two thirds of ELI households
are renters and most experience housing problems (defined as cost burden greater than
30 percent of income and/or overcrowding without complete kitchen or plumbing
facilities). For example, 83.3 percent of ELI renter households were in overpayment
situations. Even further, 61.9 percent of all ELI households paid more than 50 percent of
their income toward housing costs, compared to 10.9 percent for all households.
Many ELI households will be seeking rental housing and most likely facing overpayment,
overcrowding or substandard housing conditions. Some ELI households could include
persons with disabilities as well. Housing types available and suitable for ELI households
include affordable rentals, secondary dwelling units, emergency shelters, supportive
housing and transitional housing. Based on this range of need, the City will include ELI
households as it implements the affordable housing overlay zone and through
development of housing in housing opportunity areas.
  B       Summary of Available Land for Housing
The Housing Element recognizes there are limitations to the amount of available land
resources in Menlo Park and the intent of the Housing Element is to use remaining
available land resources as efficiently as possible in addressing local housing needs and
City of Menlo Park Housing Element — Adopted April 1, 2014                              112

the City’s share of regional housing needs. Further, City housing policies and programs
recognize that affordable and special needs housing (housing for seniors, affordable
workforce housing, housing for persons with disabilities, single person households,
shelter for the homeless and affordable family housing opportunities) are the greatest
housing needs in the community. The intent is to avoid the inefficient use of the
community’s fixed land resources on lower density, less affordable housing, other than
additional units already allowed under current zoning.
In addition, the focus of this Housing Element is to provide a multi-pronged City policy
and program approach to meeting a variety of housing needs in Menlo Park that: (1)
distributes affordable housing opportunities throughout the community; (2) locates new
housing near to transit and services when possible; (3) assures that new housing fits
with the desired design character of Menlo Park; and (4) supports the provision of high
quality services, well-planned infrastructure and the efficient use and protection of
environmental resources. The City’s multi-pronged approach to address housing needs
focuses on the following policies and programs:
     ! Create Opportunities for New Secondary Dwelling Units
     ! Provide Opportunities for a Mix of Housing and Commercial Uses to be
          Combined in Selected Locations
     ! Continue to Implement Existing Zoning for Market Rate Housing
     ! Implement the Recently Adopted El Camino Real/Downtown Specific Plan
     ! Provide Infill Housing Opportunities Around Downtown
     ! Provide new housing on higher density housing opportunity sites
     ! Create Incentives and Opportunities for Affordable Housing
Potential Environmental and Infrastructure Capacity Factors
The discussion that follows examines overall environmental factors examined in the
Environmental Assessment (EA) related to the feasibility of housing development during
the 2007-2014 planning period under the policies and programs contained in the City’s
2007-2014 Housing Element. In addition to development under the El Camino
Real/Downtown Specific Plan, the EA studied impacts of up to 900 new higher density
housing units (for sites being rezoned at that time), up to 118 infill dwelling units (for
sites surrounding the downtown), and up to 300 secondary dwelling units for a total of
1,318 units through the year 2035.
In general, development under the 2015-2023 Housing Element would not create any
unusual environmental impacts. Where potential environmental impacts may occur,
proposed General Plan policies would generally mitigate the impact(s) to a less than
significant level. Studies indicate there would be significant impacts related to Traffic and
City of Menlo Park Housing Element — Adopted April 1, 2014                                 113

Transportation, Air Quality and Greenhouse Gas Emissions, which are also topic areas
that were identified as significant, unavoidable impacts in the El Camino Real/Downtown
Specific Plan environmental impact report. For these three topic areas, the impacts are
citywide. Given the thresholds for these topics, a reduction in the number of dwelling
units to obtain a less than significant impact would likely result in a project that would not
meet the objective of achieving the City’s RHNA. These impacts do not pose a constraint
to the development projections under the Housing Element during the 2015-2023
planning period.
Development of the Veterans Affairs Clinic, MidPen’s two Gateway Apartments sites,
Hamilton Avenue and Haven Avenue sites, infill housing, second units and development
within the El Camino Real/Downtown Specific Plan area will allow future development in
locations that are either developed and/or underutilized, and/or in close proximity to
existing residential development and other services, where future development would
potentially have lesser impacts on natural resources.
Topics such as flooding, geologic and seismic safety, water quality and hydrology can be
addressed through the application of standard development regulations. The
Environmental Assessment prepared on the 2007-2014 Housing Element identified the
following topic areas that warrant additional review and/or mitigation. However, none of
the factors described below are expected to be a constraint to the development
projections under the Housing Element during the 2015-2023 planning period.
Biological Resources. Biological resources tend to be site-specific and the degree to
which significant vegetation and wildlife resources must be protected on a particular site.
This includes preservation of well-developed native vegetation (native grasslands, oak
woodlands, riparian woodland, etc.), populations of special-status plant or animal
species and wetland features (including freshwater seeps and tributary drainages). City
policies protect biological resources but not to the point where it will reduce the
development potential estimated in the Housing Element, including higher density sites
located within the El Camino Real/Downtown Specific Plan and surrounding infill areas,
and higher density sites rezoned concurrently as part of the Housing Element. The
Veterans Affairs Clinic is located in an area with a man-made, park-like setting with non-
native lawn and oak trees, while Hamilton Avenue East is a former industrial site with a
grassy vegetation covering, but no trees. On these sites, impacts would probably be
limited to trees (if removal is proposed).
Cultural Resources. For built environment historical resources, protections provided
under the City’s Zoning Ordinance are anticipated to mitigate or avoid most impacts to
such resources that would occur from development allowed under the City’s General
City of Menlo Park Housing Element — Adopted April 1, 2014                                  114

Plan and the Housing Element. Development also has the potential to adversely affect
archaeological resources, paleontological resources and human remains through their
destruction or disturbance. While the Veterans Affairs Clinic contains several historic
resources, the proposed area for housing development is not visually connected with
these historic sections. These are no other site-specific cultural issues that will constrain
the development anticipated under the Housing Element.
Hazardous Soils. The Hamilton Avenue East and Haven Avenue sites are former
industrial sites, which would require soils remediation prior to development for residential
uses. While soils management plans would be required, the property owners are aware
of this need and are working towards addressing this issue. Approval from the applicable
oversight agency would be required prior to any development. Existing structures on
these two sites will be evaluated for the presence of hazardous building materials prior
to their renovation or demolition. The removal of hazardous materials (if present) by
contractors licensed to remove and handle these materials in accordance with City
regulations and existing federal, State, and local regulations would insure that risks
associated with the transport, storage, use and disposal of such materials has no effect
on development assumptions contained in the Housing Element.
Noise. All of the sites would be exposed to local roadway noise. Midpen’s Gateway
Apartments sites and Haven Avenue would be exposed to traffic noise from Highway
101 and Bayfront Expressway. In addition, Midpen’s Gateway Apartments sites and
Hamilton Avenue East would be exposed to railway activity on the Dumbarton line. While
these noise sources exist, future development would be required to comply with
applicable exterior and interior noise standards, which could incorporate appropriate site
design techniques and/or the use of mechanical ventilation and rated windows to
effectively reduce noise levels.
Public Services. Potential impacts to school districts are addressed through the
payment of School Impact Fees and therefore, impacts are considered less than
significant. The Ravenswood School District and the Redwood City School District have
additional capacity at this time. The Veterans Affairs Clinic, Midpen’s Gateway
Apartments sites and Hamilton Avenue are located in the Ravenswood School District
while the Haven Avenue site is located in the Redwood City School District.
Water Supplies and Wastewater Infrastructure. The City’s water supply planning
efforts have developed adequate water supplies so that water supplies are not an
anticipated constraint to planned development. Because cumulative water demands
would not require an additional water supply, the construction or expansion of water
treatment facilities, over and above what is currently planned would be unnecessary.
City of Menlo Park Housing Element — Adopted April 1, 2014                                 115

Overall, when considered along with the future development under the Housing Element,
water demands would neither exceed planned levels of supply nor require building new
water treatment facilities or expanding existing facilities. Adequate wastewater treatment
capacity exists for the potential development under the Housing Element.
Composite of Housing Element Approach to Housing Sites
The sites analysis must cover potential zoning, environmental, infrastructure and other
potential development constraints to determine whether there are barriers to
development. The Housing Element must also establish a realistic development potential
under current zoning. Higher density sites covered under the El Camino Real/Downtown
Specific Plan have appropriate zoning, as do higher density sites located outside of the
downtown area that are now zoned R-4-S and R-4-S (AHO). Infill opportunities around
the Downtown also have zoning to enable development of higher density housing. The
El Camino Real/Downtown Specific Plan sites and sites located in the infill area around
the downtown are listed in Appendix A of the Housing Element. These areas provide the
opportunity for up to 750 units of higher density housing to be built. The Specific Plan
area is limited to a 680-unit cap on additional development, but bonuses would apply to
individual sites as they are proposed. However, the overall development potential of 680
additional housing units under the Specific Plan cannot be exceeded without additional
environmental review.
The minimum density in the R-4-S zone is 20 units/acre. The Haven Avenue sites,
Hamilton Avenue sites and the two MidPen Housing Gateway Apartments sites
comprise a total of 27.94 acres and would result in a minimum of 559 units. By including
the VA site (60 units), the minimum total number of units is 619 units, which still enables
the City to provide adequate sites for lower income housing consistent with the City’s
Regional Housing Needs Allocation.
The sites rezoned previously to R-4-S are all relatively flat and have minimal
development constraints. There has also been a significant degree of property owner
and developer interest in the development of multifamily housing on these sites. Overall
market trends, such as significant recent increases in rents and local job growth, have
created a high demand for housing on these sites. The Haven Avenue sites include
current uses such as outside storage, warehousing, mulching, etc. that would not
impede redevelopment of the site to residential use. There is an active development
proposal for development of approximately 10 acres of the Haven Avenue sites. The
Hamilton Avenue sites are in much the same condition, with sites either being vacant or
having light industrial uses. There is one parcel included with the Hamilton Avenue sites
that contains 8 residential units (Mt. Olive). Lot consolidation is preferred by the City to
City of Menlo Park Housing Element — Adopted April 1, 2014                                  116

achieve more coordinated site planning. The Hamilton Avenue sites are also located
near to the Facebook campus.
The MidPen and VA sites are different from Haven Avenue and Hamilton Avenue due to
ownership and site conditions. Even though the MidPen sites are developed with
multifamily residential uses, the owner (MidPen) is seeking funding to redevelop the site
at a higher density. All of the units proposed would be affordable to lower income
households. For the VA/Core site, the VA has selected Core Affordable Housing, which
is pursuing a development for very low income veterans.
The map in Appendix A shows a composite of the City’s approach to providing adequate
sites for a variety of housing types and needs. Specifically, these include sites rezoned
for higher density housing, lots around the downtown area that have additional
development potential, second units and the El Camino Real/Downtown Specific Plan
area. At least 50% of the City’s lower income need must be accommodated on sites
designated for residential use with only ancillary commercial or other uses to support the
development and reduce trips. Following the composite map are pages showing higher
density housing sites located outside of the El Camino Real/Downtown Specific Plan and
the surrounding infill areas.
Appendix A also lists all the separate properties for the VA site, MidPen sites, Haven
Avenue sites and Hamilton Avenue sites by Assessor’s Parcel Number (APN) and
provides information on current uses, zoning, development potential, etc. From a
planning standpoint, the base density shown in the table below should be considered the
realistic development potential for these sites. The table shows development under the
base zoning and development under State Density Bonus Law and, for the Haven
Avenue and MidPen sites, development under the Affordable Housing Overlay zone.
City of Menlo Park Housing Element — Adopted April 1, 2014                               117

Anton Menlo consists of 37 affordable housing units for lower income households. The
development would accommodate Facebook’s obligation to provide 15 affordable
housing units established as part of the City’s approval of the Facebook West Campus
project. The Facebook Below Market Rate Housing Agreement sets a 55-year
affordability term. Furthermore, Anton Menlo would provide an additional 22 affordable
units for very low-income households through State Density Bonus Law. These units
would be income-restricted for a period of 30 years as established in the Affordable
Housing Agreement.
The VA/CORE site contains 60 units, of which 59 would be made available to extremely
low- and very low-income households. Funding of the project is anticipated to be from a
combination of tax credits from the Tax Credit Allocation Committee, County HOME
funds and Affordable Housing Funds (which are comprised of one-time monies
City of Menlo Park Housing Element — Adopted April 1, 2014                            118

attributable to the dissolution of Redevelopment Agencies), and a loan from the City of
Menlo Park. The affordability restriction with the City is for a 55-year term.
In addition to the base density and realistic development potential established based on
30 units per acre, the City has established an Affordable Housing Overlay zone for some
of the higher density housing sites to provide incentives to achieve more affordable units
as part of new development. State Density Bonus Law could also apply to these sites.
The table above illustrates the base density under the R-4-S zoning (realistic
development potential), desired development potential under the Housing Element, and
potential density bonuses under State Density Bonus Law and the Affordable Housing
Overlay Zone.
  C       Potential Governmental Constraints to Housing
Conclusions of the Potential Governmental Constraints Analysis and
Summary of Recent Actions Taken By the City to Remove Potential
Governmental Constraints to Housing
As part of the Housing Element update, cities must look at potential governmental and
nongovernmental constraints to see how they impact the development or rehabilitation of
housing for all income levels. There is an important connection in the Housing Element
between the available land inventory and the analysis of potential governmental
constraints so the City can most effectively meet its housing goals. The connection
recognizes (a) there are limitations to the amount of available land resources in Menlo
Park and (b) the intent of the Housing Element is to use remaining available land
resources as efficiently as possible in addressing local housing needs and to meet the
City’s share of its Regional Housing Needs Allocation (RHNA).
In 2013, the City undertook a number of actions to remove potential governmental
constraints to housing. By linking the available land supply with environmental review
and the examination of City regulations and processes in a comprehensive manner, the
City was able to identify actions to facilitate the development of needed housing in a way
that effectively blends new housing into the Menlo Park community. By merging the
discussion of housing and land use, the City has also been able to provide a multi-
pronged approach to provide a variety of housing types, choices and affordability levels.
Specific strategies include: (a) second units; (b) infill housing around the downtown; (c)
implementation of the El Camino Real/Downtown Specific Plan; (d) inclusionary housing
requirements for market rate developments; (e) assistance and incentives for affordable
housing development; and (f) development of new housing at higher densities, with
City of Menlo Park Housing Element — Adopted April 1, 2014                               119

incentives provided through higher density and Affordable Housing Overlay zoning.
Programs to address development standards and processes for these strategies and to
remove any impediments to successful implementation were included in the 2007-2014
Housing Element.
In addition to modifications to development standards and processes, the City prepared
an Environmental Assessment (EA) to address the overall impacts of 2007-2014
Housing Element and to establish a Mitigation Monitoring and Reporting Program
(MMRP) for future development. Use of the EA has helped to streamline development
review. The discussion below describes in more detail the actions the City has
undertaken to remove potential governmental constraints within the context of its
comprehensive set of housing strategies.
Actions Taken By the City in the 2007-2014 Housing Element to Remove Potential
Governmental Constraints
(1)       R-4-S (High Density Residential, Special). The R-4-S zoning was adopted in
          June 2013 and is intended to encourage higher density housing at 30 units per
          acre in appropriate locations in the City. It also implements Housing Element
          programs H4.I and H4.O. The R-4-S zoning district has been applied to four
          housing opportunity sites in the City (also in June 2013). The R-4-S regulations
          establish parking based on bedroom count per unit rather than a standard two
          spaces per unit, which is the typical residential parking ratio in residential zoning
          districts outside of the Specific Plan area. The R-4-S zoning district is unique to
          other zoning districts in the City in that, in addition to development regulations
          and “by right” zoning for multiple family housing, the district contains helpful
          design standards and design guidelines covering:
          a.       Maximum Façade Height and Building Profile to provide variation and
                   articulation to buildings, and are applied when a property line is
                   contiguous to a public right-of-way or single-family zoned property.
          b.       Accessory Structures/Buildings to encourage accessory structures and
                   buildings to be located on the rear half of the lot since many of the R-4-
                   S parcels are deep.
          c.       Electric Vehicle Parking, with the parking counted towards the required
                   parking.
          d.       Process for Modifications to Regulations and Standards that would
                   allow modifications to the development regulations through approval of
                   a use permit and allow modifications to the design standards through
City of Menlo Park Housing Element — Adopted April 1, 2014                                    120

                   approval of architectural control, both of which are discretionary
                   processes.
          e.       Compliance Review Procedure so that if a development complies with
                   the defined development regulations and the design standards,
                   approval of the project is ministerial and discretionary review is not
                   required. Conforming projects are considered “by right” development.
                   To ensure conformance with the development regulations and design
                   standards, the draft ordinance includes a procedure for compliance
                   review. The process entails noticing of property owners and occupants
                   within a 300-foot radius of the project site and a study session before
                   the Planning Commission. The Commission’s review is limited to
                   review of the architectural design relative to the Design Standards and
                   Design Guidelines and is advisory only. The Community Development
                   Director makes the final determination of compliance.
          f.       Design Standards and Guidelines to provide quality living for the
                   project’s residents and to minimize impacts to adjacent uses with
                   application of the development regulations and design standards. All
                   development in this zoning district would need to meet both the
                   development regulations and the design standards. The design
                   guidelines serve to encourage good design, but are more qualitative in
                   nature and are not mandatory. Many of the design standards and
                   guidelines were borrowed from the Land Use and Building Character
                   chapter of the El Camino Real/Downtown Specific Plan. The intent is to
                   provide clarity and more exactness as to the City’s expectations for the
                   developer.
          g.       Mitigation Monitoring and Reporting Program compliance with the
                   Mitigation Monitoring and Reporting Program (MMRP) established
                   through the 2007-2014 Housing Element Environmental Assessment.
                   For example, all future development would need to comply with
                   measures identified by the Bay Area Air Quality Management District
                   (BAAQMD) for reducing construction emissions. Implementation of
                   measures to address potential environmental concerns would be
                   reviewed on a case-by case basis.
(2)       Rezoning of Housing Opportunity Sites. Five sites for higher density housing
          were selected as part of the 2007-2014 Housing Element process for rezoning.
          The sites were selected based on (a) community input, (b) strong property owner
          interest, (c) availability of the site within the City by the end of 2014 without need
          for annexation, (d) distribution of sites to balance the elementary school impacts
City of Menlo Park Housing Element — Adopted April 1, 2014                                     121

          of the potential new units through the El Camino Real Downtown Specific Plan
          and the units through infill around downtown, (e) proximity to projected job
          growth in Menlo Park (e.g., Facebook, Menlo Gateway, 151 Commonwealth,
          etc.) so that commute options through walking and bicycling would be possible,
          and (f) proximity to freeways (Highway 101) for easy access to regional
          transportation without impacting local streets.
          Four of the five sites were rezoned to the R-4-S district. They are located along
          the (1) 1200 and (2) 1300 blocks of Willow Road, (3) 600, 700 and 800 block of
          Hamilton Avenue and (4) the 3600 block of Haven Avenue. The Veterans Affairs
          campus was identified as the fifth site, but due to a Federal preemption of the
          City’s land use authority, the site did not need to be rezoned in order for the
          pending 60-unit affordable housing development to be built.
 (3)      Implementation of State Density Bonus Law. Government Code Section
          65915, the State Density Bonus law, requires local governments to provide
          density bonuses and other incentives to developers of senior housing as well as
          affordable housing who commit to providing a certain percentage of dwelling
          units to households whose incomes do not exceed specific thresholds. Under
          State law, a jurisdiction must provide a density bonus, and concessions and
          incentives based on certain criteria and must adopt an ordinance to implement
          the State law. The State Density Bonus law is used to supplement the City’s local
          Below Market Rate ordinance. Adoption of the zoning changes implemented
          Program H4.D of the 2007-2014 Housing Element, which is to amend the Zoning
          Ordinance to be consistent with State Density Bonus law requirements.
(4)       Creation of an Affordable Housing Overlay Zone. Consistent with program
          H.4.C of the 2007-2014 Housing Element, the City adopted an Affordable
          Housing Overlay (AHO) as part of the Zoning Ordinance. The AHO provides
          incentives above and beyond what is allowed under the State Density Bonus Law
          for providing low, very low and extremely low-income housing. One of the key
          incentives is the ability to increase the maximum density and floor area ratio
          (FAR) for a site. Unlike the City’s Below Market Rate Housing Program
          (inclusionary requirements), the AHO is not a provision for inclusionary zoning.
          Use of the AHO is voluntary, and can only be used where the AHO is zoned and
          when certain minimum standards have been met. The AHO has been applied to
          three select housing opportunity sites (the 1200 and 1300 blocks of Willow Road
          and the 3600 block of Haven Avenue) as well as throughout the El Camino
          Real/Downtown Specific Plan area boundary. Use of the AHO in the Specific
          Plan area is similar to receiving public benefit levels established in the plan. The
City of Menlo Park Housing Element — Adopted April 1, 2014                                   122

          Plan recognizes that affordable housing, particularly for lower affordability levels,
          in areas nearest to the station area/downtown and senior housing are elements
          where a public benefit bonus can be considered. Whereas the public benefit is
          determined through a structured negotiation process in the Specific Plan,
          application of the AHO is automatic if specific triggers are met.
(5)       Amendment to the R-3 (Apartment) District. Consistent with Housing Element
          Program H4.A, the City modified the R-3 (Apartment) zoning district to provide
          greater opportunities for infill housing in designated areas around the El Camino
          Real/Downtown Specific Plan area by increasing the maximum density to 30
          dwelling units per acre on lots 10,000 square feet or greater. To accommodate
          the increase in density on lots 10,000 square feet or greater, development
          regulations, such as floor area ratio, building coverage, height and parking were
          modified as well. The floor area ratio was increased on an even gradient from 35
          percent for a 13.1 du/ac project to 75 percent for a 30.0 du/ac project, and
          additional height will be permitted when a minimum of 20 du/ac is provided.
(6)       Secondary Dwelling Units. Consistent with Housing Element Program H4.E,
          the City modified the Secondary Dwelling Unit requirements pertaining to single-
          family residential lots 6,000 square feet or greater in size throughout the City.
          The intent of the ordinance change was to bring the ordinance into compliance
          with State law and to encourage the creation of more second units, which are
          ancillary to the main dwelling.
(7)       Implementation of Special Needs Housing Changes. The Housing Element
          contains programs to remove governmental constraints for special needs
          housing, including program H3.A Zone for Emergency Shelter for the Homeless,
          program H3.B Zone for Transitional and Supportive Housing and program H3.C
          Adopt Procedures for Reasonable Accommodation. Adoption of amendments to
          the Zoning Ordinance to implement these programs is anticipated to occur
          concurrently with adoption of the 2015-2023 Housing Element. The City is also
          working on program H1.L, which is to Adopt Priority Procedures for Providing
          Water and Sewer Service to Affordable Housing Developments. The intent is to
          adopt all of these changes early in 2014.
City of Menlo Park Housing Element — Adopted April 1, 2014                                   123

Summary of the Assessment of Potential Governmental Constraints and
Recommended Program Actions
The Housing Element provides an opportunity to comprehensively assess potential
governmental constraints to housing and to identify implementing programs to address
those constraints. Based on the assessment in the 2014-2002, the following programs
are included in the 2015-2023 Housing Element to address potential governmental
constraints (those programs noted with an asterisk — * — will also be reviewed as part
of the City’s comprehensive update of its General Plan):
H1.B      Review the Housing Element Annually
H1.I      Work with Non-Profits on Housing
H3.G      Develop Incentives for Special Needs Housing*
H4.A      Modify R-2 Zoning to Maximize Unit Potential*
H4.C      Modify BMR Guidelines
H4.E      Modify Secondary Dwelling Unit Development Standards and Permit Process
H4.F      Establish a Process and Standards to Allow the Conversion of Accessory
          Buildings and Structures to a Secondary Dwelling Unit
H4.H Work with Non-Profits and Property Owners on Housing Opportunity Sites
H4.I Create Multi-Family and Residential Mixed Use Design Guidelines*
H4.K Work with the Fire District
H4.L Coordinate with School Districts to Link Housing with School District Planning
          Activities*
H4.M Review the Subdivision Ordinance*
H4.N Create Opportunities for Mixed Use Development*
H4.O Review Transportation Impact Analysis Guidelines*
H4.P Update Parking Stall and Driveway Design Guidelines
H4.R Modify Overnight Parking Requirements to Include the R-4-S Zoning District
The conclusion of the potential governmental constraints analysis is that the City has
either already undertaken actions to remove constraints or it has identified program
actions as part of the Housing Element to remove constraints during the first half of the
2015-2023 Housing Element planning period.
Land Use Controls
Menlo Park uses development controls that are typical for other cities in the county and
the region. Zoning Ordinance changes are in process and will be adopted concurrently
with the updated Housing Element to implement Housing Element programs H3.A, which
is to establish an overlay zoning district and standards for emergency shelters for the
homeless, and H3.B, which is to establish allowances for transitional and supportive
housing consistent with State law. In addition, the definition of "dwelling" in the Zoning
City of Menlo Park Housing Element — Adopted April 1, 2014                                 124

Ordinance is being modified to include residential care facilities. The following table
summarizes what permits are needed for development.
The Land Use Control Table identifies a
Conditional Use Permit (CUP) requirement for
multi-family housing in the R-3 and R-4 zones,
however multi-family housing is now a permitted
use (a use allowed “by-right”) in the R-4-S zone.
Zoning controls for homeless shelters, transitional
and supportive housing to be consistent with
State law are currently being developed through
implementation of Housing Element programs
H3.A and H3.B. In addition, the City allows the
siting and processing of mobile
homes/manufactured homes in the same manner
as a conventional or stick-build dwelling. Zoning
standards, including building site requirements (lot area, coverage, FAR, landscaping,
etc.), setbacks and height limits under Menlo Park zoning are summarized on the next
page. The table includes recently adopted modifications covering the R-3 zone for
10,000 square feet lots or larger located near the SP-ECR/D (El Camino Real/Downtown
Specific Plan zoning) zone and standards applicable in the new R-4-S and R-4-S (AHO)
zones.
City of Menlo Park Housing Element — Adopted April 1, 2014                              125

City of Menlo Park Housing Element — Adopted April 1, 2014 126
During the 2007-2014 Housing Element update, Menlo Park’s basic multi-family zoning
standards contained in the R-3 and R-4 zoning districts were compared to the nearby
and neighboring cities of Palo Alto, Mountain View, Sunnyvale, and City of San Mateo.
Comparative standards for multi-family zoning allowing roughly 15-30 units per acre are
shown below.
As shown above, Menlo Park’s FAR for multi-family development is lower than
neighboring cities in the R-3 zone (which is more suitable for moderate income housing)
but comparable in the R-4 zone (which is suitable for lower income housing). However,
based on this comparison and other factors, the City adopted more flexible standards
that have been applied to lots of 10,000 square feet or great in the R-3 zone near the
SP-ECR/D zone and the standards in the new R-4-S and R-4-S (AHO) zones to
encourage greater opportunities for affordable housing. Additional standards that are
lower than comparable cities include the 30 percent lot coverage in the R-3 zone and a
maximum lot size in the R-4 zone of 1 acre in size. In addition, most comparable cities
do not require conditional use permits for multi-family housing in a multi-family zone.
Development has continued to occur in the City’s residential zones.
City of Menlo Park Housing Element — Adopted April 1, 2014                              127

Below are Menlo Park’s parking requirements compared to other cities located in San
Mateo County. As can be seen in the comparison, Menlo Park’s parking requirements
are comparable to other cities in the county. In addition, the R-4-S regulations establish
parking based on bedroom count per unit rather than a standard two spaces per unit,
which is the typical residential parking ratio in residential zoning districts outside of the
Specific Plan area. The Retirement Living Units (R-L-U) zone and programs to
encourage senior housing also provide incentives for reduced parking requirements.
City of Menlo Park Housing Element — Adopted April 1, 2014                                    128

As with other cities, Menlo Park’s development standards and requirements are intended
to protect the long-term health, safety and welfare of the community. The Housing
Element includes programs, as identified at the beginning of this section, to reevaluate
existing development standards to determine whether they should be revised so that
they provide less of a barrier to the provision of affordable housing but still protect the
long-term health, safety and welfare of the community.
Fees and Exactions
Processing fees are required for all property improvement and development
applications, pursuant to City Council policy to recover processing costs of development
review. Local fees add to the cost of development, however, all cities are concerned with
the need to recover processing costs. High planning and site development fees can
impact property owners’ ability to make improvements or repairs, especially for lower-
income households. However, line item fees related to processing, inspections and
installation services are limited by California law to the cost to the agencies of
performing these services. City zoning, through State Density Bonus Law and the
Affordable Housing Overlay zoning, provide various incentives for affordable housing as
a way to reduce project costs and address potential constraints that fees and exactions
may pose.
City of Menlo Park Housing Element — Adopted April 1, 2014                                  129

The fees for Menlo Park are summarized below for two developments: (1) a single-family
unit (3-bedrooms, 2,000 square feet on a 10,000 square foot lot at a density of 4 units
per acre and building permit value of $800,000); and, (2) a ten-unit condominium project
on 0.5 acres (each unit being 2-bedrooms and 1,200 square feet in size and a building
permit value of $500,000 for each unit). The fees below are shown for the entire 10-unit
condominium project, not on a per unit basis.
City of Menlo Park Housing Element — Adopted April 1, 2014                              130

The City’s Master Fee Schedule reflects fees charged by all City departments. It is
usually amended annually so that fees reflect current costs to provide services or, in
some cases, to add new fees for new City services and/or to eliminate fees for services
that are no longer offered.
Development Processing Time
The City recognizes that the time required to process a development proposal could be
a barrier to housing production if it is lengthy. The City has streamlined its development
review process over the years to make it more efficient, while still providing adequate
opportunity for public review and input. Typical procedures are summarized below.
City of Menlo Park Housing Element — Adopted April 1, 2014                               131

Steps in Application Review
Single Family (Ministerial Review)
1. Step One: Submittal of building permit application, architectural, structural, MEP, civil plans, structural
     calculations, Energy Code calculations and compliance forms, geotechnical investigation, and arborist
     report and FEMA elevation certification if required.
2. Step Two: Pay building plan review fees, geologist review fees, and improvement plan check fees
     (Engineering Division fee)
3. Step Three: Project is assigned to a City planner, Building Division plan checker (plan checker), and
     Engineering Division engineer for review and approval or comment. Note: The plan checker does not
     begin their review until the City planner has reviewed the project and has determined the project is in
     compliance with the City’s Zoning Ordinance or has very few comments that will then be included in the
     plan check letter issued by the plan checker.
4. Step Four: Plan check comments are sent within four (4) to six (6) weeks to the architect of record, Civil
     Engineer, and property owner after reviews are completed. Note: Engineering Division sends plan
     check comments directly to civil engineer of record who prepared plans independent of the Building and
     Planning Division’s comments.
5. Step Five: Upon re-submittal of revised plans and supporting calculations based on plan check
     comments, plans and calculations are routed to planner, plan checker, and Engineering Division
     engineer for review and approval or comment.
6. Step Six: After plan approval but prior to issuance of permit, the applicant is notified of remaining
     outstanding City fees associated with the issuance of the Building permit and activities to be completed
     prior to issuance such as, Fire District approval, documentation of payment of school fees, contractor
     information and current City Business License or completion of Owner Builder forms as mandated by
     the state.
7. Issuance of permit after verification of completion of step 6.
Single Family Requiring Use Permit Review by Planning Commission
1. Step One: Meeting with Planner to review preliminary design concepts; planner coordination with
     Building, Engineering, Transportation and/or other internal and external divisions and agencies as may
     be necessary, potentially through Development Review Team (DRT) meetings; applicants provided with
     applicable written handouts, application forms and application submittal guidelines (also available on
     City website).
2. Step Two: Submittal of a formal application and fees at a scheduled appointment with a planner;
     preliminary review of submittal conducted with applicant to determine if submittal is complete and
     whether there are any immediately observable issues that will need to be addressed.
3. Step Three: Plans are reviewed by staff planners to identify any key issues and assigned to a project
     planner within seven (7) days of submittal.
4. Step Four: Within seven (7) days of application submittal, a notice of application including the name of
     the applicant, address and brief description of the project, copies of the site plan and elevations, and
     contact information for the project planner are posted on the City’s website. A notice is mailed to all
     occupants and property owners within 300 feet of the project site advising them of the new application
     and the information available on the web.
5. Step Five: Within 30 days of application submittal, project planner completes review and sends notice of
     whether application is complete or incomplete. If incomplete, needed information is identified. Once
     submittal is determined complete, project is scheduled for Planning Commission at next available
     meeting, typically within 30 days.
City of Menlo Park Housing Element — Adopted April 1, 2014                                                    132

6.   Step Six: At least 18 days prior to the Planning Commission meeting, a public hearing notice is placed
     with a local newspaper for publishing at least 12 days before the hearing, posted on the City’s website,
     and mailed to all residents and property owners within 300 feet of the project site.
7. Step Seven: Project planner coordinates with other internal and external divisions and agencies to
     prepare staff report; staff report is mailed to Planning Commissioners and project sponsors and placed
     on the City’s website a minimum of four (4) days prior to the hearing date.
8. Step Eight: Public hearing is held and decision rendered.
9. Step Nine: Letter of action is prepared and sent to applicant within 5 (five) days.
10. Step Ten: Appeal period runs for 15 days after which the Commission action becomes final. If appealed
     to the City Council, Steps Six through Ten are repeated with regards to noticing, report preparation and
     distribution. The Zoning Ordinance states that appeals shall be scheduled insofar as practicable within
     45 days of receipt of the appeal, but if not acted upon within 75 days, the Commission’s action is
     deemed affirmed.
El Camino Real/Downtown Specific Plan Residential Development
1. Step One: Meeting(s) with Planner to review preliminary project concept and applicability of the Specific
     Plan; applicants provided with applicable written handouts and guidelines (also available on City
     website). Optional meeting with Development Review Team (DRT) for interdepartmental
     review/feedback.
2. Step Two: Submittal of a formal application and fees at a scheduled appointment with a planner;
     preliminary review of submittal conducted with applicant to determine if submittal is complete and
     whether there are any immediately observable issues that will need to be addressed.
3. Step Three: Preliminary review conducted to determine project consistency with Specific Plan.
4. Step Four: Preliminary environmental review conducted to determine if the project is consistent with the
     Specific Plan EIR or whether additional environmental review would be required. If additional review is
     required, determine and implement the appropriate type of review.
5. Step Five: When project is designated complete, send public meeting/hearing notice for Planning
     Commission (typically 3 weeks in advance) for architectural and site plan approval.
6. Step Six: Planning Commission action, subject to appeal to the City Council.
The processing times identified above for the El Camino Real/Downtown Specific Plan
are the same as for other multi-family developments. The typical multi-family process
includes meetings with staff, submittal, preliminary review, preliminary environmental
review under CEQA, project completeness and then action before the Planning
Commission. Processing times are summarized below for various types of approvals. All
timeframes assume a Negative Declaration under CEQA. As shown on the next page, if
an EIR is required it would add between 9 months to 1 year to the approval process.
City of Menlo Park Housing Element — Adopted April 1, 2014                                                 133

Typical Processing Times
                                                                       Countywide
                             Menlo Park                                Average for       Countywide
                                 Typical                               Straight-         Average for
                             Processing                                Forward           Complicated
Permit/Procedure         Time in Weeks    Comments                     Application       Applications
Ministerial Review               8 weeks  Building permit internal     2 weeks           5 weeks
                                          review; does not include
                                          time spent by project
                                          applicant to respond to
                                          comments
Conditional Use            8 to 20 weeks  Timeframe dependent on       8 weeks           20 weeks
Permit                                    accuracy/completeness of
                                          initial submittal and
                                          applicant responsiveness
Rezone                    16 to 24 weeks                               17 weeks          36 weeks
General                   20 to 32 weeks                               17 weeks          43 weeks
Plan/Zoning
Ordinance
Amendment
Architectural              8 to 20 weeks                               6 weeks           12 weeks
Control review and
El Camino
Real/Downtown
Specific Plan
Tract maps                      10 weeks  Includes time to take maps   16 weeks          30 weeks
                                          to Council (4 weeks)
Parcel maps                      6 weeks                               NA                NA
Initial Study              4 to 12 weeks                               12 weeks          27 weeks
EIRs                      36 to 52 weeks                               34 weeks          58 weeks
Source: City of Menlo Park (2013) and 21 Elements research conducted for the 2007-2014 Planning Period
Generally, as shown below, processing time in Menlo Park is similar to other cities, but
there are a few categories where the process is slower — design review and the time
needed to process an Environmental Impact Report as part of project review.
Establishing conditions for site development of higher density housing sites, establishing
multi-family as a permitted use in the new R-4-S zoning and using the materials
prepared for the Environmental Assessment of the 2007-2014 Housing Element will
reduce the time required for future development.
Except for the El Camino Real/Downtown Specific Plan and the design standards and
guidelines contained in the R-4-S zoning district, the City has no formal design
guidelines to assist in project review, although findings related to project compatibility
City of Menlo Park Housing Element — Adopted April 1, 2014                                          134

are required for project approval under Section 16.68.020 (Architectural control) in the
Zoning Ordinance. Architectural Control review by the Planning Commission is generally
required for any exterior modifications to an existing building or for new construction,
except for single-family, duplex and accessory buildings. In the M-2 zoning district, the
Community Development Director can approve modifications to the buildings that do not
increase gross floor area. The Planning Commission or Community Development
Director (depending on the permit) must make the following findings: (1) that the general
appearance of the structures is in keeping with character of the neighborhood; (2) that
the development will not be detrimental to the harmonious and orderly growth of the city;
(3) that the development will not impair the desirability of investment or occupation in the
neighborhood; (4) that the development provides adequate parking as required in all
applicable city ordinances and has made adequate provisions for access to such
parking; and, (5) that the development is consistent with any applicable specific plan.
Program H4.I (Create Multi-Family and Residential Mixed Use Design Guidelines) is
included in the Housing Element to provide more specific direction and guidance in the
design of multi-family and mixed-use housing development. The intent is to provide more
clarity as to City standards related to compatibility with the setting and adjacent uses and
clarity as to City expectations.
While added design criteria and scrutiny may require slightly more processing time and
impose some additional requirements, it is not considered a constraint because it is
important that new projects blend with the community, becoming a natural and integral
part of the existing neighborhood fabric, both visually and structurally. Design review
requirements generally provide an opportunity for design issues to be raised early in the
review process, thus helping to assure community acceptance of a project proposal,
which can reduce delay due to project appeals and other forms of community objections.
Codes and Enforcement, On/off Site Improvement Standards
While building codes are important to protect health and safety, they may also constitute
a constraint to new developments. In particular, local amendments to the California
Building Standards Code should be carefully analyzed. The Council adopted the 2013
California Building Standards Code in 2013 with an effective date of January 1, 2014.
Associated with this action, the Council adopted local amendments to the Code as
recommended by staff covering eight (8) types of work exempt from building permits to
be consistent with previously adopted local amendments. Associated with this action, the
Council adopted local amendments to the Code establishing the following: (1) local
administrative authority applicable to all structures, not just one- and two-family
residences and townhomes; (2) standards for grading and excavation applicable to all
structures, not just one-and two-family residences and townhomes; and (3) modifications
City of Menlo Park Housing Element — Adopted April 1, 2014                                135

to the types of work exempt from building permits related to accessory structures,
fences, retaining walls, water tanks, exterior flat work, interior finish work, playground
equipment and awnings. None of these amendments pose a constraint to the
development of housing.
As part of any development project, the City will evaluate and determine the appropriate
on and off-site improvements. The type and extent of the improvements often relate to
the type, size, complexity and location of the project. Although each project is reviewed
on a case-by-case basis, the City has procedures for determining when frontage
improvements are required and established Parking and Parking and Driveway Design
Guidelines, which can help make the process more predictable. Whenever a
discretionary approval is required for a project, the City can require frontage
improvements where none already exist. For new residential projects, if no frontage
improvements exist, then new frontage improvements are required and they must meet
City Standard Details. The frontage improvements should generally match those of
adjoining or nearby properties for aesthetic consistency and ease of use. A typical
vertical curb, gutter and sidewalk would consist of an 18-inch gutter, six inch curb and a
minimum five foot sidewalk. In some instances, a planter strip or wider sidewalk may be
required, depending on the location. In cases where there are already existing frontage
improvements, then the owner is typically responsible to remove and replace damaged
frontage improvements. Generally the off-site improvements occur within existing right-
of-way and no additional land dedication or public easements are needed. Therefore,
there should be no impacts to development setbacks, density or floor area ratio, which
are important factors for making a development work.
On-site improvements consist of internal circulation and landscaping. The City’s Parking
and Driveway Design Guidelines provide direction on street width and parking
dimensions, yet the City’s Transportation Manager has the authority to modify the
requirements. The City believes there are opportunities to revisiting and updating the
Guidelines pertaining to multi-family residential development (Program H4.P) to account
for the changing trends in development and more efficient use of the site while still
achieving health and safety for the site and surrounding area.
New residential developments must also comply with the City’s Water Efficient
Landscape Ordinance. The ordinance applies to all new and rehabilitated landscaping
exceeding 2,500 square feet associated with projects requiring 1) subdivision
improvements, 2) grading and drainage improvements, 3) new construction, 4) additions
or modifications that require grading and drainage plan approval or 5) new water service.
While additional steps may be required to show compliance, the end product is intended
to result in less water usage and hopefully greater sustainability.
City of Menlo Park Housing Element — Adopted April 1, 2014                                 136

                                       Constraints for People with Disabilities
                                       Family
                                       Menlo Park uses the following definition of family, which
                                       is consistent with state law, “A group of individuals living
                                       together in a dwelling unit as a single housekeeping unit
                                       under a common housekeeping management plan
                                       based on an internally structured relationship providing
                                       organization and stability.”
Reasonable Accommodation Procedures
Menlo Park’s zoning code does not currently have a reasonable accommodation
procedure, however, it is the city’s policy to defer to state and federal law when the
zoning code is out of compliance. Housing Element program H3.C, which is currently
being implemented, will include reasonable accommodation procedures for persons with
disabilities.
Group Homes
Menlo Park’s zoning code does not address group homes, and the closest category is
foster homes. Housing Element programs H3.A and H3.B, covering zoning for homeless
shelters, transitional and supportive housing, are currently being implemented to be
consistent with State law. The City will also amend the zoning code to allow homeless
shelters, transitional and supportive housing in appropriate zoning districts.
Parking
The zoning code does not have separate parking standards for people with disabilities. A
person living with a disability would be able to apply for an exception to these standards
under the new reasonable accommodation procedures.
Emergency Shelters, Transitional Housing and Supportive Housing
Menlo Park’s Zoning Ordinance does not currently address these types of housing.
Housing Element policies and implementing programs will address these constraints.
Inclusionary Zoning as a Potential Constraint to Housing
Seven cities in the county have an inclusionary requirement of 15 percent, while in
unincorporated areas of San Mateo County and five other San Mateo County cities the
requirement is 20 percent. A number of cities in San Mateo County collect fees for small
projects under the threshold to provide affordable units onsite. Most impose the fee on
projects that consist of four or more units, although San Carlos collects the fee on 2 or
more units. A comparison of Menlo Park’s inclusionary requirements with those of other
City of Menlo Park Housing Element — Adopted April 1, 2014                                       137

jurisdictions in San Mateo County shows the City’s requirements fall in the middle. This
is shown in the table below.
The City’s BMR Guidelines apply to both residential for-sale projects and to commercial
projects in the form of an in-lieu or impact fee. All residential for-sale projects of 5 or
more units are subject to the City’s inclusionary requirements. The City’s BMR
Guidelines require the BMR units to be for moderate-income first time homebuyers at
110% of median income. For projects of 5-9 units the requirement is generally 1 unit; for
projects of 10-19 units there is a 10% requirement; and for projects of 20 or more units
the requirement is 15% of the units being BMR units. An in-lieu fee is required for
fractional units.
The City offers one bonus unit for each BMR unit up to a maximum of a 15% bonus
above the allowable density. The City also offers increased FAR. In addition, there are
requirements that the BMR units be comparable to the market rate units in a
development, but they need not be of luxury quality and can contain standard, but not
luxury, appliances. If lower income units are proposed, they may be a smaller size, duet-
style and/or attached but with architecturally consistent exterior. The City requires
construction of the units on-site, although construction of units off-site or payment of in-
lieu fee is allowed, but at the City's discretion.
City of Menlo Park Housing Element — Adopted April 1, 2014                                  138

The City’s BMR requirements have not been a constraint to housing development as
projects have been proposed and built under these requirements. However, BMR
Guidelines are targeted to a distinct affordability level and housing tenure (moderate
income for-sale housing) and other development incentives and density bonus
allowances are proposed under programs contained in the Housing Element (State
Density Bonus law and Affordable Housing Overlay zoning). The El Camino
Real/Downtown Specific Plan also contains density bonus provisions for projects
providing a “public benefit.” The Housing Element contains program language to define
the “public benefit” as it would relate to projects with affordable housing units.
In 1994, the California Coalition for Rural Housing (CCRH) conducted the first statewide
survey on inclusionary housing and found that 12% of statewide jurisdictions had an
inclusionary program. In 2003, CCRH and Non-Profit Housing Association of Northern
California (NPH) collaboratively conducted a follow-up survey, which revealed that the
number of jurisdictions with inclusionary housing had jumped to 20%. The 2003 survey
generated interest in obtaining more precise production data on the types of housing
built and the income levels served. In 2006, a new study was launched to determine the
growth in inclusionary programs statewide, and provide a detailed snapshot of the
housing that is being produced by these programs. Affordable Housing by Choice —
Trends in California Inclusionary Programs (NPH, 2007) looked at housing produced
through inclusionary programs from January 1999 through June 2006 and found that:
(1)       Nearly one-third of California jurisdictions now have Inclusionary Programs.
(2)       More than 80,000 Californians have housing through Inclusionary Programs.
(3)       Most Inclusionary housing is integrated within market-rate developments.
(4)       Inclusionary housing provides shelter for those most in need — nearly three-
          quarters of the housing produced through Inclusionary Programs is affordable to
          people with some of the lowest incomes. These findings shed new light on the
          popular perception that inclusionary policies create ownership units mostly for
          moderate-income families.
(5)       Lower-Income Households are best served through partnerships — When
          market-rate developers work with affordable housing developers to meet their
          inclusionary requirement, the units are more likely to serve lower-income
          households. Joint ventures play a particularly important role in developing units
          for households most in need. One-third of all the housing built through
          Inclusionary Programs resulted from such partnerships.
City of Menlo Park Housing Element — Adopted April 1, 2014                                 139

  D       Potential Non-Governmental Constraints to Housing
                                                           State law requires that the Housing
                                                           Element include a discussion of the
                                                           factors that present barriers to the
                                                           production of housing, including
                                                           government actions and market forces
                                                           (non-governmental constraints).
                                                           Identification of these constraints helps
                                                           the City to implement measures that
                                                           address these concerns and reduce
                                                           their impacts on the production of
                                                           housing.
Availability and Cost of Financing
Until mid 2008, home mortgage financing was readily available at attractive rates
throughout San Mateo County and California. Rates vary, but ranged around 6.25
percent to seven percent from 2006-2008 for a 30 year fixed rate loan (HSH Associates
Financial Publishers). However, rates have been as high as ten or 12 percent in the last
decade.
Starting in late 2008, it became harder to get a home purchase loan, but the average
interest rate has fallen to around five percent. In particular, people with short credit
history, lower incomes or self-employment incomes, or those with other unusual
circumstances, have had trouble qualifying for a loan or were charged higher rates.
Small changes in the interest rate for home purchases dramatically affect affordability. A
30-year home loan for $400,000 at five percent interest has monthly payments of
roughly $2,150. A similar home loan at seven percent interest has payments of roughly
20 percent more, or $2,660.
Construction loans for new housing are difficult to secure in the current market. In past
years, lenders would provide up to 80 percent of the cost of new construction (loan to
value ratio). In recent years, due to market conditions and government regulations,
banks require larger investments by the builder.
Affordable housing developments face additional constraints in financing. Though public
funding is available, it is allocated on a highly competitive basis and developments must
meet multiple qualifying criteria, often including the requirement to pay prevailing wages.
Smaller developments with higher per unit costs are among the hardest to make
financially feasible. This is because the higher costs result in a sale price that is above
City of Menlo Park Housing Element — Adopted April 1, 2014                                         140

the affordability levels set for many programs. Additionally, smaller projects often require
significant time by developers, but because the overall budget is smaller and fees are
based on a percentage of total costs, the projects are sometimes not feasible.
                                                                 Land and Construction
                                                                 Costs
                                                                 San Mateo County is a desirable
                                                                 place for housing and available
                                                                 land is in short supply, which
                                                                 contribute to high land costs.
                                                                 These costs vary both between
                                                                 and within jurisdictions based on
                                                                 factors like the desirability of the
                                                                 location and the permitted
                                                                 density.
Generally, multi-family and mixed-use land costs more. Based on a typical multi-family
construction in San Mateo County, land costs add $40,000-$60,000 per unit, but can run
upwards of $75,000 per unit in some locations. In Menlo Park, land costs range from
roughly $2 million to $5 million an acre, with the permitted density driving much of the
difference.
For San Mateo County, land costs average around 20-25 percent of construction costs
for multi-family and 40 percent of construction costs for single family.
Construction costs include both hard costs, such as labor and materials, and soft costs,
such as architectural and engineering services, development fees and insurance. For
multi-family homes in San Mateo County, hard costs account of 60-65 percent of the
building cost and soft costs average around 15-20 percent (the remaining 15-20 percent
is land costs). For single family homes, hard costs often are roughly 40 percent of the
total cost, soft costs are 20 percent and land is the remainder.
                                            Working with Non-Profit Housing
                                            Developers
                                            The key to the success of non-profit developers lies
                                            in three areas: (1) their ability to draw upon a
                                            diversity of funding sources and mechanisms to
                                            make their developments work financially; (2) their
                                            commitment to working cooperatively and
                                            constructively with the local community; and, (3)
City of Menlo Park Housing Element — Adopted April 1, 2014                                         141

their long-term commitment to ensuring excellence in design, construction and
management of their developments, creating assets that are valued by the people who
live in the developments as well as their neighbors and others. The City can work with
non-profit developers where there are opportunities, either through public ownership of
property or key larger sites (over 1 acre in size) where special opportunities exist with
minimal constraints, carrying costs, or costs of processing or construction. Since multiple
funding sources are usually used on an affordable project, there are additional burdens
placed on non-profit developers to track the information required and report on a timely
basis.
                                           In 2013, the City issued a Notice of Funding
                                           Availability (NOFA) for availability for approximately
                                           $3.2 million in Below Market Rate housing funds to
                                           support the acquisition, rehabilitation or new
                                           construction of housing that will provide long-term
                                           affordability. The funding is intended to fill the
                                           financing gap between the projected total
                                           development costs and other available funding
                                           sources.
                                           There are a wide variety of resources provided
                                           through federal, state and local programs to support
affordable housing development and related programs and services. Specific programs
and sources of funding are summarized earlier in the Housing Element. Local
government resources, which have historically played a less important role in supporting
housing development, now play a fairly significant role by making local developments
more competitive for federal and state financing. There is considerable competition for
the program funds that are available, and any one development will need to draw upon
multiple resources to be financially feasible. When developments are able to
demonstrate a financial commitment and contribution from local sources — especially if
coupled with regulatory support through policies such as fast-track processing, fee
waivers, and/or density bonuses — they are better able to leverage funding from other
‘outside’ sources.
City of Menlo Park Housing Element — Adopted April 1, 2014                                      142

  E       Energy
                                                           Housing Elements are required to
                                                           identify opportunities for energy
                                                           conservation. Energy costs have
                                                           increased significantly over the past
                                                           several decades, and climate change
                                                           concerns have increased the need and
                                                           desire for further energy conservation
                                                           and related “green building” programs.
                                                           Buildings use significant energy in their
                                                           design, construction and operation.
                                                           The use of “green building” techniques
                                                           and materials can reduce the resources
that go into new construction and can make buildings operate much more efficiently.
One common definition of “green building” is “design and construction practices that
significantly reduce or eliminate the negative impacts of buildings on the environment
through energy efficiency and renewable energy, conservation of materials and
resources, water efficiency, site planning and indoor environmental quality.”
Part 6 of Title 24 of the California Code of Regulations sets forth mandatory energy
standards for new development, and requires adoption of an “energy budget.” In turn,
the home building industry must comply with these standards while localities are
responsible for enforcing the energy conservation regulations.
Pacific Gas & Electric (PG&E) provides a variety of energy conservation services for
residents and PG&E also participates in several other energy assistance programs for
lower income households, which help qualified homeowners and renters, conserve
energy and control electricity costs. These include the California Alternate Rates for
Energy (CARE) Program and the Relief for Energy Assistance through Community Help
(REACH) Program. The CARE provides a 15 percent monthly discount on gas and
electric rates to income qualified households, certain non-profits, facilities housing
agricultural employees, homeless shelters, hospices and other qualified non-profit group
living facilities.
The REACH Program provides one-time energy assistance to customers who have no
other way to pay their energy bill. The intent of REACH is to assist low-income
customers, particularly the elderly, disabled, sick, working poor, and the unemployed,
who experience severe hardships and are unable to pay for their necessary energy
needs.
City of Menlo Park Housing Element — Adopted April 1, 2014                                        143

                               Menlo Park has been very successful in implementing Energy
                               Upgrade California, which provides rebates and incentives for
                               improvements to items such as insulation, air ducts, windows,
                               furnace and air-conditioning. The City has an excellent
                               outreach and marketing approach for the program. San Mateo
                               County is also implementing an outreach campaign.
City of Menlo Park Housing Element — Adopted April 1, 2014                                144

City of Menlo Park Housing Element
Appendix A
Available Land Inventory

Appendix A includes a map and six tables, all of which relate to the City of Menlo Park’s Ability
to Address its Regional Housing Needs Allocation (RHNA) for the 2015-2023 Planning Period
table on page 111. The new unit potential identified in Tables 1, 2, 3 and 4 is based on the
realistic development potential of these sites considering current site conditions, existing uses
and development potential under existing zoning and development standards. The map shows
a composite of the City’s approach to providing adequate sites for a variety of housing types
and needs. Specifically, these include sites zoned for higher density housing, lots around the
downtown area that have additional development potential, second units and the El Camino
Real/Downtown Specific Plan area.
         Table 1: High Density Housing Opportunity Sites – This table relates to the “High
         Density Opportunity Sites” row of the table on page 111. The 433 units in Table 1 reflect
         the potential net new units factoring in density bonuses available through the Affordable
         Housing Overlay.
         Table 2: Potential Housing Sites within ECR/D Specific Plan – This table
         demonstrates that there are opportunity sites with base zoning of 30 dwelling units per
         acre to substantiate the development potential for 680 units listed in the “El Camino
         Real/Downtown Specific Plan” row of the table on page 111.
         Table 3: Infill Around Downtown– This table demonstrates that there are opportunity
         sites in the areas adjacent to the boundary of the Specific Plan with base zoning of 30
         dwelling units per acre to substantiate the development potential for 70 units listed in the
         “New Housing on Infill Sites Around Downtown” row of the table on page 111. In
         addition, Table 3 shows the existing development potential under existing zoning for
         smaller lots in this geographic area of 71 units, which relates to the “Scattered Site Units
         Under Pre-2012 Zoning” row of the table on page 111.
         Table 4: Scattered Sites – This table covers properties that are not reflected in Tables
         1, 2 or 3 and relates to the “Scattered Site Units Under Pre-2012 Zoning” row of the
         table on page 111. One-hundred eighteen units are available in 2013.
         Table 5: Built and Approved Units – This table relates to the “Scattered Site Units
         Under Pre-2012 Zoning” row of the table on page 111. Two-hundred two units were built
         or approved between 2007 and June 2013 and eleven units were built or approved
         between July 2013 and December 2013.
         Table 6: Built and Pending Second Units – This table relates to the “New Second
         Units” row of the table on page111. Six second units were built or approved between
         2007 and 2012 and seven units have been approved or are pending in 2013.

                                                                                                                                           City of Menlo Park                                                       MIDDLEFIE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              LD
±                                                                                                                             Potential Development Consolidated Summary
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Haven
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Avenue
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   HAV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    EN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          MAR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     MARSH                    SH   RD
                                                                                     ALAMEDA DE LAS PULGAS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   O
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             BO                 SC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                H   AN              TT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       N   ON
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    SLER
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         CHRY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           IO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     TITUT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 CONS
  SA
       ND
                                                                                                                                                                                                           ENCINAL
            HI
               LL                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        N
                    R                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           CO
                        D                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          CHIL
                                                                                                                    VALPARAISO AVE                                                       GLENWOOD
                                                                                                                                                         UNIVERSITY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    BAY
                                                                                                                                                                                                   OAK GROVE
                                                                             AVY
                                                                                                                                                                      CRANE
                                                                                                             SANTA CRUZ AVE                                                                                                                                                                                     Hamilton
                                                                                                                                                                              MENLO                   RAVENSWOOD AVE                                                                                            Avenue
                                                                                                                                                  UNIVERSITY
                                                                    N
                                                                                                                                                                                                          LAUR EL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          D
                                                               SH                                                                                                                                                                             WOO
                                                                  AR                                                                                                                                                               RING
                                                                                                                                                                                 EL CAMINO REA L
                                                                                                                                                                                                   ALMA
                                                                     O
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         NEWB
                                             SA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         MIDDLEFIELD RD
                                                  ND                                                                                     MIDDLE                                                                                                                                                                                                    LOW
                                                       HI               ON                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      WIL D
                                                                     AR K
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          RIDG
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   R
                                                         LL
                                                              RD   SH PAR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Veterans Affairs                              E         / 13 00 ay
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               1200
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Clinic                                        e n 's Gatew
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    WI                                                             W       RD               MidP
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      LL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        OW                                                   WILLO                                                   O'B
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        RI E
                                                                                                                          SAND                                                                                                                                                                                                              N                                        E
                                                                                                                               HILL                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                AV
                                                                                                                                    RD                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        TY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            SI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ER
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     IV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 N
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             U
                                         D
                                    ER
                              PIN
                            AL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        UNIVERSITY AV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     E
                                                                                   SERRA BL
                                                                                           VD
                                                                                                                                                                                ALMA ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Dwelling Unit
                                                                               JUNIPE RO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Development Potential
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         El Camino Real/Downtown Specific Plan
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Downtown Infill Area
                                                                                                                                                                                           EM
                                                                                                                                                                                              BA                                                                                                                         Other Sites Zoned for Housing at 30+ units/acre
                                                                                                                                                                                                RC
                                                                                                                                                                              CHURCHILL AV         AD
                                                                                                                                                                                          E           ER                                                                                                                 No Change Except Second Units
                                                                                                                                                                                                         O
This map was developed for general planning usage.                                                                                                                                                                                 RD                                                                                    City Limits
The City of Menlo Park is not responsible nor liable for
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Sphere Of Influence
use of this map beyond its intended purpose.
Prepared November 20, 2013                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           0           1,000      2,000    3,000       4,000             5,000
City of Menlo Park Planning Division, GIS Services                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Feet

Veterans Affairs Clinic
City of Menlo Park Housing Element
City of Menlo Park Housing Elemen
City of Menlo Park Housing Elemen
MidPen’s Gateway Apartments (1200 Block of Willow Road)
City of Menlo Park Housing Element

City of Menlo Park Housing Elemen
City of Menlo Park Housing Elemen
MidPen’s Gateway Apartments (1300 Block of Willow Road)
City of Menlo Park Housing Element

City of Menlo Park Housing Elemen
City of Menlo Park Housing Elemen
Hamilton Avenue
City of Menlo Park Housing Element
City of Menlo Park Housing Elemen
City of Menlo Park Housing Elemen
Haven Avenue
City of Menlo Park Housing Element
City of Menlo Park Housing Elemen
City of Menlo Park Housing Elemen
                                                                                                            Table 1: High Density Housing Opportunity Sites
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Total
                                                                                                                                                                                                       Dwelling
                                                                                                            Existing       Existing General Plan                                   Lot Area  Lot Area            Allowable
         Site Name         APN                   Address                     Property Owner (Developer)                                                       Existing Use                             Units per               Status
                                                                                                            Zoning              Designation                                        (Sq. Ft.)  (Acres)            Dwelling
                                                                                                                                                                                                         Acre
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Units
Veterans Affairs Clinic 062470050 605 Willow Road                   United States of America (Core)            PF              Public Facility       Vacant portion of VA Campus      87,599      2.01    30              60 Pipeline
MidPen's Gateway Apts   062103610 1221-1275 Willow Road             Menlo Gateway Inc. (MidPen)           R-4-S (AHO)     High Density Residential    Multifamily Residential (48)    98,686      2.27    30              68
MidPen's Gateway Apts   055383560 1317-1385 Willow Road             Menlo Gateway Inc. (MidPen)           R-4-S (AHO)     High Density Residential    Multifamily Residential (82)   129,427      2.97    30              89
Hamilton Avenue         055374120 631 Hamilton Avenue               Mt. Olive Apostolic Original             R-4-S        High Density Residential     Multifamily Residential (8)    29,164      0.67    30              20
Hamilton Avenue         055396070 721 Hamilton Avenue               Bayfront Investments LLC (Greenheart)    R-4-S        High Density Residential        Light Manufacturing         39,803      0.91    30              27
Hamilton Avenue         055396030 700 block Hamilton Avenue         Bayfront Investments LLC (Greenheart)    R-4-S        High Density Residential               Vacant               11,232      0.26    30               8
Hamilton Avenue         055396060 700 block Hamilton Avenue         Bayfront Investments LLC (Greenheart)    R-4-S        High Density Residential               Vacant               17,335      0.40    30              12
Hamilton Avenue         055397010 755 Hamilton Avenue               Bayfront Investments LLC (Greenheart)    R-4-S        High Density Residential        Light Manufacturing         28,562      0.66    30              20
Hamilton Avenue         055397020 759 Hamilton Avenue               Bayfront Investments LLC (Greenheart)    R-4-S        High Density Residential            Warehouse               11,229      0.26    30               8
Hamilton Avenue         055397030 763 Hamilton Avenue               Bayfront Investments LLC (Greenheart)    R-4-S        High Density Residential            Warehouse               11,228      0.26    30               8
Hamilton Avenue         055397040 767 Hamilton Avenue               Bayfront Investments LLC (Greenheart)    R-4-S        High Density Residential               Office               11,227      0.26    30               8
Hamilton Avenue         055397050 700 block Hamilton Avenue         Bayfront Investments LLC (Greenheart)    R-4-S        High Density Residential               Vacant                6,103      0.14    30               4
Hamilton Avenue         055398240 700 block Hamilton Avenue         Bayfront Investments LLC (Greenheart)    R-4-S        High Density Residential               Vacant                7,757      0.18    30               5
Hamilton Avenue         055398010 771 Hamilton Avenue               Bayfront Investments LLC (Greenheart)    R-4-S        High Density Residential        Light Manufacturing          9,159      0.21    30               6
Hamilton Avenue         055398026 777 Hamilton Avenue               Bayfront Investments LLC (Greenheart)    R-4-S        High Density Residential               Vacant               22,450      0.52    30              15
Hamilton Avenue         055398030 735 Hamilton Avenue               Bayfront Investments LLC (Greenheart)    R-4-S        High Density Residential               Vacant               11,225      0.26    30               8
Hamilton Avenue         055398040 787 Hamilton Avenue               Bayfront Investments LLC (Greenheart)    R-4-S        High Density Residential               Vacant               11,225      0.26    30               8
Hamilton Avenue         055398050 791 Hamilton Avenue               Bayfront Investments LLC (Greenheart)    R-4-S        High Density Residential               Vacant               12,200      0.28    30               8
Hamilton Avenue         055398060 801 Hamilton Avenue               Bayfront Investments LLC (Greenheart)    R-4-S        High Density Residential               Vacant               12,201      0.28    30               8
Hamilton Avenue         055398070 811 Hamilton Avenue               Bayfront Investments LLC (Greenheart)    R-4-S        High Density Residential               Vacant               12,199      0.28    30               8
Hamilton Avenue         055398080 821 Hamilton Avenue               Bayfront Investments LLC (Greenheart)    R-4-S        High Density Residential               Vacant               12,200      0.28    30               8
Hamilton Avenue         055398090 831 Hamilton Avenue               Angelo Paul TR (Greenheart)              R-4-S        High Density Residential        Light Manufacturing         12,201      0.28    30               8
Hamilton Avenue         055398100 841 Hamilton Avenue               Angelo Paul TR (Greenheart)              R-4-S        High Density Residential            Warehouse               12,200      0.28    30               8
Hamilton Avenue         055398110 851 Hamilton Avenue               Angelo Paul TR (Greenheart)              R-4-S        High Density Residential        Light Manufacturing         12,200      0.28    30               8
Haven Avenue            055170190 3605, 3607, 3609 & 3611 Haven Ave Anton Menlo LLC (St. Anton)           R-4-S (AHO)     High Density Residential        Light Manufacturing         77,528      1.78    30              53 Pipeline
Haven Avenue            055170200 3615 Haven Avenue                 Anton Menlo LLC (St. Anton)           R-4-S (AHO)     High Density Residential               Office               50,690      1.16    30              35 Pipeline
Haven Avenue            055170260 3600 block Haven Avenue           Anton Menlo LLC (St. Anton)           R-4-S (AHO)     High Density Residential               Vacant               14,455      0.33    30              10 Pipeline
Haven Avenue            055170270 3600 block Haven Avenue           Anton Menlo LLC (St. Anton)           R-4-S (AHO)     High Density Residential               Vacant                5,478      0.13    30               4 Pipeline
Haven Avenue            055170180 3633, 3635, 3637 & 3655 Haven Ave Anton Menlo LLC (St. Anton)           R-4-S (AHO)     High Density Residential               Vacant              208,870      4.80    30            144 Pipeline
Haven Avenue            055170320 3639 Haven Avenue                 Anton Menlo LLC (St. Anton)           R-4-S (AHO)     High Density Residential        Light Manufacturing         65,296      1.50    30              45 Pipeline
Haven Avenue            055170330 3641 Haven Avenue                 Scarlett Henry A & P M TRS            R-4-S (AHO)     High Density Residential        Light Manufacturing         39,914      0.92    30              27
Haven Avenue            055170060 3645 & 3651 Haven Avenue          Butler Realty LLC (Greystar)          R-4-S (AHO)     High Density Residential           Outside Storage          16,510      0.38    30              11
Haven Avenue            055170070 3665 Haven Avenue                 Butler Realty LLC (Greystar)          R-4-S (AHO)     High Density Residential            Warehouse               51,208      1.18    30              35
Haven Avenue            055170080 3645 Haven Avenue                 Butler Realty LLC (Greystar)          R-4-S (AHO)     High Density Residential          Outside Storage           39,285      0.90    30              27
Haven Avenue            055170210 3645 Haven Avenue                 Butler Realty LLC (Greystar)          R-4-S (AHO)     High Density Residential            Warehouse               76,675      1.76    30              53
Haven Avenue            055170220 3645 Haven Avenue                 Butler Realty LLC (Greystar)          R-4-S (AHO)     High Density Residential               Vacant               29,284      0.67    30              20
TOTAL                                                                                                                                                                                            29.94                    898
Pipeline                                                                                                                                                                                                                465
Remainder                                                                                                                                                                                                               433
                                                                                                                                 12.31.13
                                                              Table 2: Potential Housing Sites within ECR/D Specific Plan
                                                                                                                                                            Total    Density
                                                                                                                                               Dwelling                            Density
                                   Existing                                                                               Lot Area   Lot Area            Allowable Qualifies for
    APN              Address                 Existing General Plan Designation                    Existing Use                                 Units per                         Qualifies for
                                    Zoning                                                                                (Sq. Ft.)   (Acres)            Dwelling Very Low or
                                                                                                                                                 Acre                             Moderate
                                                                                                                                                            Units     Low
061430450      1300 El Camino Real ECR NE-R El Camino Real Downtown Specific Plan Vacant (Former Auto Sales)                146,728       3.37    32            107         107
061430200            Derry Lane    ECR NE-R El Camino Real Downtown Specific Plan Commercial and Vacant                     150,339       3.45    32            110         110
060341140      1850 El Camino Real ECR NE-L El Camino Real Downtown Specific Plan Restaurant                                   9,743      0.22    20               4                         4
060341130      1850 El Camino Real ECR NE-L El Camino Real Downtown Specific Plan Restaurant                                  13,253      0.30    20               6                         6
060341280      1850 El Camino Real ECR NE-L El Camino Real Downtown Specific Plan Restaurant                                   6,249      0.14    20               2                         2
060344240 1610-1620 El Camino Real ECR NE-L El Camino Real Downtown Specific Plan 1-story commercial                           7,977      0.18    20               3                         3
060344250 1610-1620 El Camino Real ECR NE-L El Camino Real Downtown Specific Plan 1-story commercial                           9,203      0.21    20               4                         4
061422100      1451 San Antonio St  ECR NE  El Camino Real Downtown Specific Plan Single-Family Residential                    7,489      0.17    25               4                         4
061422240      1450 El Camino Real  ECR NE  El Camino Real Downtown Specific Plan 1-story office                               7,500      0.17    25               4                         4
061422230      1438 El Camino Real  ECR NE  El Camino Real Downtown Specific Plan Restaurant                                   7,501      0.17    25               4                         4
061422350      1436 El Camino Real  ECR NE  El Camino Real Downtown Specific Plan Carwash                                     29,975      0.69    25              17                       17
071103030      1295 El Camino Real ECR NW   El Camino Real Downtown Specific Plan 1-story commercial                          18,245      0.42    25              10                       10
071103040 1283-1285 El Camino Real ECR NW   El Camino Real Downtown Specific Plan 1-story commercial                           9,132      0.21    25               5                         5
071103050      1281 El Camino Real ECR NW   El Camino Real Downtown Specific Plan Auto repair                                  9,132      0.21    25               5                         5
071103060      1279 El Camino Real ECR NW   El Camino Real Downtown Specific Plan Auto repair                                  9,130      0.21    25               5                         5
071103080 1265-1267 El Camino Real ECR NW   El Camino Real Downtown Specific Plan 2-story commercial                           8,828      0.20    25               5                         5
071103090 1259-1263 El Camino Real ECR NW   El Camino Real Downtown Specific Plan 2-story commercial                           8,828      0.20    25               5                         5
071103100 1251-1257 El Camino Real ECR NW   El Camino Real Downtown Specific Plan 1-story commercial                          11,464      0.26    25               6                         6
061441140      1100 El Camino Real   SA E   El Camino Real Downtown Specific Plan Restaurant                                  16,309      0.37    50              18         18
061441050   556-558 Santa Cruz Ave   SA E   El Camino Real Downtown Specific Plan 2-story mixed use                           10,349      0.24    50              11         11
061441040   506-540 Santa Cruz Ave   SA E   El Camino Real Downtown Specific Plan 1-story commercial                          13,632      0.31    50              15         15
061441030      1125 Merrill St       SA E   El Camino Real Downtown Specific Plan Veterinary hospital                          6,166      0.14    50               7           7
061412430 1100 block Alma St         SA E   El Camino Real Downtown Specific Plan Parking lot                                 13,498      0.31    50              15         15
061412440      1100 Alma St          SA E   El Camino Real Downtown Specific Plan 2-story office                              32,467      0.75    50              37         37
061412450 1010-1026 Alma St          SA E   El Camino Real Downtown Specific Plan 1-story commercial                          28,752      0.66    50              33         33
061412160       550 Ravenswood Ave   SA E   El Camino Real Downtown Specific Plan 1-story commercial                          18,340      0.42    50              21         21
071333200       700 El Camino Real  ECR SE  El Camino Real Downtown Specific Plan 1-story retail                            128,643       2.95    40            118         118
071440040       550 El Camino Real  ECR SE  El Camino Real Downtown Specific Plan Unoccupied (Former Auto Sales)              71,054      1.63    40              65         65
071413200   201-211 El Camino Real  ECR SW  El Camino Real Downtown Specific Plan 1-story commercial                           7,345      0.17    25               4                         4
                                                                                        12.31.13
                                                              Table 2: Potential Housing Sites within ECR/D Specific Plan
                                                                                                                                                            Total    Density
                                                                                                                                               Dwelling                            Density
                                   Existing                                                                               Lot Area   Lot Area            Allowable Qualifies for
    APN               Address                Existing General Plan Designation                    Existing Use                                 Units per                         Qualifies for
                                   Zoning                                                                                 (Sq. Ft.)   (Acres)            Dwelling Very Low or
                                                                                                                                                 Acre                             Moderate
                                                                                                                                                            Units     Low
071413370  600 block Cambridge Ave ECR SW   El Camino Real Downtown Specific Plan Parking lot                                  7,823      0.18    25               4                         4
071411460   405-409 El Camino Real ECR SW   El Camino Real Downtown Specific Plan 1-story commercial                           7,895      0.18    25               4                         4
071411210       417 El Camino Real ECR SW   El Camino Real Downtown Specific Plan 1-story commercial                           2,755      0.06    25               1                         1
071411200       425 El Camino Real ECR SW   El Camino Real Downtown Specific Plan 1-story commercial                           2,817      0.06    25               1                         1
071411190   433-441 El Camino Real ECR SW   El Camino Real Downtown Specific Plan 1-story commercial                           5,819      0.13    25               3                         3
071411180       495 El Camino Real ECR SW   El Camino Real Downtown Specific Plan Gas station                                  6,065      0.14    25               3                         3
071411170       495 El Camino Real ECR SW   El Camino Real Downtown Specific Plan Gas station                                  3,126      0.07    25               1                         1
071411450       495 El Camino Real ECR SW   El Camino Real Downtown Specific Plan Gas station                                  7,965      0.18    25               4                         4
071288550        650 Live Oak Ave  ECR SW   El Camino Real Downtown Specific Plan 1-story commercial                          22,426      0.51    25              12                       12
071288580   905-925 El Camino Real ECR SW   El Camino Real Downtown Specific Plan 1-story commercial                          14,396      0.33    25               8                         8
071288230       935 El Camino Real ECR SW   El Camino Real Downtown Specific Plan 1-story commercial                           3,796      0.09    25               2                         2
071288590   989-999 El Camino Real ECR SW   El Camino Real Downtown Specific Plan 1-story commercial                          15,653      0.36    25               8                         8
071288190   607-611 Menlo Ave      ECR SW   El Camino Real Downtown Specific Plan commercial                                   9,484      0.22    25               5                         5
071288180   615-617 Menlo Ave      ECR SW   El Camino Real Downtown Specific Plan commercial                                   6,983      0.16    25               4                         4
071287080 1001-1005 El Camino Real  SA W    El Camino Real Downtown Specific Plan 2-story mixed use                            2,884      0.07    50               3           3
071287070 1011-1031 El Camino Real  SA W    El Camino Real Downtown Specific Plan 1-story commercial                           8,344      0.19    50               9           9
071287060 1035-1039 El Camino Real  SA W    El Camino Real Downtown Specific Plan Restaurant                                   4,605      0.11    50               5           5
071287090      1047 El Camino Real  SA W    El Camino Real Downtown Specific Plan 2-story mixed use                            6,293      0.14    50               7           7
071287030 1075-1079 El Camino Real  SA W    El Camino Real Downtown Specific Plan Restaurant                                   2,682      0.06    50               3           3
071287020 1081-1083 El Camino Real  SA W    El Camino Real Downtown Specific Plan Restaurant                                   2,194      0.05    50               2           2
071287010   603-609 Santa Cruz Ave  SA W    El Camino Real Downtown Specific Plan 1-story commercial                           3,901      0.09    50               4           4
071286080   611-633 Santa Cruz Ave  SA W    El Camino Real Downtown Specific Plan 2-story commercial                          19,549      0.45    50              22         22
071286040 1000 block Doyle St       SA W    El Camino Real Downtown Specific Plan Parking lot                                  5,749      0.13    50               6           6
071286060      1010 Doyle St        SA W    El Camino Real Downtown Specific Plan 2-story commercial                           6,912      0.16    50               7           7
071286050  600 block Menlo Ave      SA W    El Camino Real Downtown Specific Plan Parking lot                                  6,682      0.15    50               7           7
071102140   600-618 Santa Cruz Ave  SA W    El Camino Real Downtown Specific Plan 1-story commercial                          14,117      0.32    50              16         16
071102130 1133-1159 El Camino Real  SA W    El Camino Real Downtown Specific Plan 1-story commercial                          23,685      0.54    50              27         27
071102390 1161-1169 El Camino Real  SA W    El Camino Real Downtown Specific Plan 1-story commercial                           5,756      0.13    50               6           6
071102370 1177-1185 El Camino Real  SA W    El Camino Real Downtown Specific Plan 1-story commercial                           7,513      0.17    50               8           8
                                                                                        12.31.13
                                                                                                      Table 2: Potential Housing Sites within ECR/D Specific Plan
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Total     Density
                                                                                                                                                                                                               Dwelling                            Density
                                                                Existing                                                                                                              Lot Area       Lot Area            Allowable Qualifies for
      APN                            Address                                     Existing General Plan Designation                              Existing Use                                                   Units per                         Qualifies for
                                                                 Zoning                                                                                                               (Sq. Ft.)       (Acres)            Dwelling Very Low or
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Acre                             Moderate
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Units      Low
071102350                     1189 El Camino Real                 SA W          El Camino Real Downtown Specific Plan           1-story commercial                                         5,345          0.12    50               6           6
071102100                      625 Oak Grove Ave                  SA W          El Camino Real Downtown Specific Plan           1-story commercial                                         3,891          0.09    50               4           4
TOTAL                                                                                                                                                                                                                           852         699           153
Percentage of Total Allowable Dwelling Units at Density that Qualifies for Particular Income Category                                                                                                                          100%         82%           18%
Distribution of 680-Unit Cap by Percentage Above                                                                                                                                                                                  680        558           122
Note: Any proposal for development of residential units in excess of the 680 units allowed under the Specific Plan would require an amendment to the Specific Plan and concurrent environmental review.
                                                                                                                                      12.31.13
                                                                    Table 3: Infill Around Downtown
                                                                                                                                       Total              Net     Dwelling
                                                                                                                                              Existing
                              Existing   Existing General Plan                                                   Lot Area  Lot Area Allowable          Potential  Units per
   APN         Address                                                                Existing Use                                            Dwelling
                              Zoning          Designation                                                        (Sq. Ft.)  (Acres) Dwelling           Dwelling      Acre
                                                                                                                                               Units
                                                                                                                                       Units             Units   (Allowable)
071288560  934 CRANE ST          R3    Medium Density Residential Residential: Five or More Units                 27,511      0.63      18       9         9         28.5
071292070 1003 ROBLE AVE         R3    Medium Density Residential Residential: Five or More Units                 22,122      0.51      15       7         8         29.5
071091060  823 VALPARAISO AVE    R3    Medium Density Residential Residential: Single-Family                      17,772      0.41      12       1        11         29.4
071312030  887 ROBLE AVE         R3    Medium Density Residential Residential: Fourplex                           15,799      0.36      10       4         6         27.6
061401010  417 GLENWOOD AVE      R3    Medium Density Residential Residential: More Than 1 Detached Living Units  15,588      0.36      10       3         7         27.9
071302120  934 ALICE LN          R3    Medium Density Residential Residential: Combination of Unit Types          15,302      0.35      10       4         6         28.5
071292010  971 OAK LN            R3    Medium Density Residential Residential: Two Duplexes                       15,066      0.35      10       4         6         28.9
071101160 1249 HOOVER ST         R3    Medium Density Residential Residential: Fourplex                           13,686      0.31       9       4         5         28.6
061401100 1257 LAUREL ST         R3    Medium Density Residential Residential: Single-Family                      13,388      0.31       9       1         8         29.3
061401270 1300 MILLS ST          R3    Medium Density Residential Residential: Combination of Unit Types          12,665      0.29       8       4         4         27.5
071302110  904 ALICE LN          R3    Medium Density Residential Residential: Two Duplexes                       12,403      0.28       8       4         4         28.1
071291240  800 ARBOR RD          R3    Medium Density Residential Residential: Five or More Units                 12,284      0.28       8       8         0         28.4
071293150 1025 MALLET CT         R3    Medium Density Residential Residential: Fourplex                           12,260      0.28       8       4         4         28.4
071292190  810 FREMONT ST        R3    Medium Density Residential Residential: Fourplex                           11,740      0.27       8       4         4         29.7
071302230  587 ALICE LN          R3    Medium Density Residential Residential: Combination of Unit Types          11,226      0.26       7       2         5         27.2
071103420 1220 HOOVER ST         R3    Medium Density Residential Residential: More Than 1 Detached Living Units  10,893      0.25       7       2         5         28.0
071292170  750 FREMONT ST        R3    Medium Density Residential Residential: SFR & Duplex or Triplex            10,785      0.25       7       3         4         28.3
071272080  985 SANTA CRUZ AVE    R3    Medium Density Residential Residential: Combination of Unit Types          10,623      0.24       7       4         3         28.7
071301280  765 UNIVERSITY DR     R3    Medium Density Residential Residential: Single-Family                      10,362      0.24       7       1         6         29.4
071103320 1340 HOOVER ST         R3    Medium Density Residential Residential: Single-Family                      9,035       0.21       2       1         1          9.6
071093070 1340 CRANE ST          R3    Medium Density Residential Residential: Single-Family                      9,027       0.21       2       1         1          9.7
071272420  969 UNIVERSITY DR     R3    Medium Density Residential Residential: Single-Family                       8,918      0.20       2       1         1          9.8
061401090 1261 LAUREL ST         R3    Medium Density Residential Residential: Single-Family                       8,805      0.20       2       1         1          9.9
071093180 1230 CRANE ST          R3    Medium Density Residential Residential: Single-Family                       8,450      0.19       2       1         1         10.3
071291160  649 FREMONT ST        R3    Medium Density Residential Residential: Single-Family                       8,447      0.19       2       1         1         10.3
                                                                                    12.31.13
                                                                    Table 3: Infill Around Downtown
                                                                                                                          Total              Net     Dwelling
                                                                                                                                 Existing
                              Existing   Existing General Plan                                      Lot Area  Lot Area Allowable          Potential  Units per
   APN         Address                                                                Existing Use                               Dwelling
                              Zoning          Designation                                           (Sq. Ft.)  (Acres) Dwelling           Dwelling      Acre
                                                                                                                                  Units
                                                                                                                          Units             Units   (Allowable)
061401280 1320 MILLS ST          R3    Medium Density Residential Residential: Single-Family         8,323       0.19       2       1         1         10.5
061401150  424 OAK GROVE AVE     R3    Medium Density Residential Residential: Single-Family         8,249       0.19       2       1         1         10.6
071093170 1232 CRANE ST          R3    Medium Density Residential Residential: Single-Family         8,170       0.19       2       1         1         10.7
061401030 1333 LAUREL ST         R3    Medium Density Residential Residential: Single-Family         8,130       0.19       2       1         1         10.7
071301310  916 FLORENCE LN       R3    Medium Density Residential Residential: Single-Family         8,046       0.18       2       1         1         10.8
071093040  735 VALPARAISO AVE    R3    Medium Density Residential Residential: Single-Family         8,023       0.18       2       1         1         10.9
071091400 1308 UNIVERSITY DR     R3    Medium Density Residential Residential: Single-Family         7,860       0.18       2       1         1         11.1
071091410 1310 UNIVERSITY DR     R3    Medium Density Residential Residential: Single-Family         7,852       0.18       2       1         1         11.1
061382260 1066 PINE ST           R3    Medium Density Residential Residential: Single-Family         7,760       0.18       2       1         1         11.2
071272190  966 MENLO AVE         R3    Medium Density Residential Residential: Single-Family         7,626       0.18       2       1         1         11.4
071311200  820 UNIVERSITY DR     R3    Medium Density Residential Residential: Single-Family         7,562       0.17       2       1         1         11.5
061401350  425 GLENWOOD AVE      R3    Medium Density Residential Residential: Single-Family         7,501       0.17       2       1         1         11.6
071301140  936 ROBLE AVE         R3    Medium Density Residential Residential: Single-Family         7,500       0.17       2       1         1         11.6
071301270  775 UNIVERSITY DR     R3    Medium Density Residential Residential: Single-Family         7,500       0.17       2       1         1         11.6
071311060  801 LIVE OAK AVE      R3    Medium Density Residential Residential: Single-Family         7,422       0.17       2       1         1         11.7
071311070  797 LIVE OAK AVE      R3    Medium Density Residential Residential: Single-Family         7,415       0.17       2       1         1         11.7
071301130  922 ROBLE AVE         R3    Medium Density Residential Residential: Single-Family         7,358       0.17       2       1         1         11.8
071301210  973 ROBLE AVE         R3    Medium Density Residential Residential: Single-Family         7,332       0.17       2       1         1         11.9
071301030  957 OAK LN            R3    Medium Density Residential Residential: Single-Family         7,331       0.17       2       1         1         11.9
071093290 1360 CRANE ST          R3    Medium Density Residential Residential: Single-Family         7,273       0.17       2       1         1         12.0
071293080 1010 MALLET CT         R3    Medium Density Residential Residential: Single-Family         7,242       0.17       2       1         1         12.0
071293100 1030 MALLET CT         R3    Medium Density Residential Residential: Single-Family         7,186       0.16       2       1         1         12.1
071301300  721 UNIVERSITY DR     R3    Medium Density Residential Residential: Single-Family         7,078       0.16       2       1         1         12.3
061401240 1264 MILLS ST          R3    Medium Density Residential Residential: Single-Family         7,052       0.16       2       1         1         12.4
071101110 1305 HOOVER ST         R3    Medium Density Residential Residential: Single-Family         7,000       0.16       2       1         1         12.4
                                                                                    12.31.13
                                                                    Table 3: Infill Around Downtown
                                                                                                                          Total              Net     Dwelling
                                                                                                                                 Existing
                              Existing   Existing General Plan                                      Lot Area  Lot Area Allowable          Potential  Units per
   APN         Address                                                                Existing Use                               Dwelling
                              Zoning          Designation                                           (Sq. Ft.)  (Acres) Dwelling           Dwelling      Acre
                                                                                                                                  Units
                                                                                                                          Units             Units   (Allowable)
071101210 1243 HOOVER ST         R3    Medium Density Residential Residential: Single-Family         7,000       0.16       2       1         1         12.4
071293250  620 FREMONT ST        R3    Medium Density Residential Residential: Single-Family         6,720       0.15       2       1         1         13.0
071274080  836 LIVE OAK AVE      R3    Medium Density Residential Residential: Single-Family         6,552       0.15       2       1         1         13.3
071293060  640 FREMONT ST        R3    Medium Density Residential Residential: Single-Family         6,551       0.15       2       1         1         13.3
071093160 1234 CRANE ST          R3    Medium Density Residential Residential: Single-Family         6,456       0.15       2       1         1         13.5
071271080  949 FREMONT ST        R3    Medium Density Residential Residential: Single-Family         6,449       0.15       2       1         1         13.5
071288410  764 LIVE OAK AVE      R3    Medium Density Residential Residential: Single-Family         6,397       0.15       2       1         1         13.6
071093140 1238 CRANE ST          R3    Medium Density Residential Residential: Single-Family         6,393       0.15       2       1         1         13.6
071093150 1236 CRANE ST          R3    Medium Density Residential Residential: Single-Family         6,392       0.15       2       1         1         13.6
061402140 1225 MILLS ST          R3    Medium Density Residential Residential: Single-Family         6,215       0.14       2       1         1         14.0
071271110  909 FREMONT ST        R3    Medium Density Residential Residential: Single-Family         6,193       0.14       2       1         1         14.1
071302260  519 UNIVERSITY DR     R3    Medium Density Residential Residential: Single-Family         6,156       0.14       2       1         1         14.2
071103330 1346 HOOVER ST         R3    Medium Density Residential Residential: Single-Family         5,952       0.14       2       1         1         14.6
071321030  737 LIVE OAK AVE      R3    Medium Density Residential Residential: Single-Family         5,913       0.14       2       1         1         14.7
071321020  751 LIVE OAK AVE      R3    Medium Density Residential Residential: Single-Family         5,851       0.13       2       1         1         14.9
071288310  676 LIVE OAK AVE      R3    Medium Density Residential Residential: Single-Family         5,751       0.13       2       1         1         15.1
071272070  993 SANTA CRUZ AVE    R3    Medium Density Residential Residential: Single-Family         5,691       0.13       2       1         1         15.3
071331140  688 ROBLE AVE         R3    Medium Density Residential Residential: Single-Family         5,640       0.13       2       1         1         15.4
071321070  705 LIVE OAK AVE      R3    Medium Density Residential Residential: Single-Family         5,632       0.13       2       1         1         15.5
071331030  671 LIVE OAK AVE      R3    Medium Density Residential Residential: Single-Family         5,632       0.13       2       1         1         15.5
071271070  955 FREMONT ST        R3    Medium Density Residential Residential: Single-Family         5,626       0.13       2       1         1         15.5
071271060 1003 FREMONT ST        R3    Medium Density Residential Residential: Single-Family         5,626       0.13       2       1         1         15.5
071291070  816 ARBOR RD          R3    Medium Density Residential Residential: Single-Family         5,625       0.13       2       1         1         15.5
071271140  928 ARBOR RD          R3    Medium Density Residential Residential: Single-Family         5,625       0.13       2       1         1         15.5
071312020  893 ROBLE AVE         R3    Medium Density Residential Residential: Single-Family         5,494       0.13       2       1         1         15.9
                                                                                    12.31.13
                                                                                 Table 3: Infill Around Downtown
                                                                                                                                       Total              Net     Dwelling
                                                                                                                                              Existing
                                         Existing     Existing General Plan                                      Lot Area  Lot Area Allowable          Potential  Units per
   APN         Address                                                                             Existing Use                               Dwelling
                                         Zoning            Designation                                           (Sq. Ft.)  (Acres) Dwelling           Dwelling      Acre
                                                                                                                                               Units
                                                                                                                                       Units             Units   (Allowable)
071321130  752 ROBLE AVE                    R3      Medium Density Residential Residential: Single-Family         5,440       0.12       2       1          1        16.0
071282140  932 EVELYN ST                    R3      Medium Density Residential Residential: Single-Family         5,399       0.12       2       1          1        16.1
071311170  890 ROBLE AVE                    R3      Medium Density Residential Residential: Single-Family         5,331       0.12       2       1          1        16.3
071272140 1001 UNIVERSITY DR                R3      Medium Density Residential Residential: Single-Family         5,297       0.12       2       1          1        16.4
071293180  570 FREMONT ST                   R3      Medium Density Residential Residential: Single-Family         5,280       0.12       2       1         1         16.5
071293190  564 FREMONT ST                   R3      Medium Density Residential Residential: Single-Family         5,280       0.12       2       1         1         16.5
071293200  542 FREMONT ST                   R3      Medium Density Residential Residential: Single-Family         5,278       0.12       2       1         1         16.5
071293210  520 FREMONT ST                   R3      Medium Density Residential Residential: Single-Family         5,276       0.12       2       1         1         16.5
071272120 1047 UNIVERSITY DR                R3      Medium Density Residential Residential: Single-Family         5,243       0.12       2       1         1         16.6
071272130 1039 UNIVERSITY DR                R3      Medium Density Residential Residential: Single-Family         5,243       0.12       2       1         1         16.6
071302070  689 UNIVERSITY DR                R3      Medium Density Residential Residential: Single-Family         5,107       0.12       2       1         1         17.1
071093020 1354 CRANE ST                     R3      Medium Density Residential Residential: Single-Family         5,072       0.12       2       1          1        17.2
071311190  810 UNIVERSITY DR                R3      Medium Density Residential Residential: Single-Family         5,060       0.12       2       1          1        17.2
071293240  624 FREMONT ST                   R3      Medium Density Residential Residential: Single-Family         5,040       0.12       2       1          1        17.3
071282160  946 EVELYN ST                    R3      Medium Density Residential Residential: Single-Family         5,000       0.11       2       1         1         17.4
Subtotal       Lots 10,000 sf or greater (30 du/ac)                                                                                                       105
Subtotal       Lots less than 10,000 sf (12-29 du/ac)                                                                                                      46
Subtotal       Lots less than 10,000 sf (<12 du/ac)                                                                                                        25
TOTAL                                                                                                                                                     176
                                                                                                 12.31.13
                                                                        Table 4: Scattered Sites
                                                                                                                                     Total             Net      Dwelling
                                                                                                                                            Existing
                                   Existing                                                                    Lot Area  Lot Area Allowable          Potential Units per
APN                  Address                  Existing General Plan Designation            Existing Use                                     Dwelling
                                   Zoning                                                                      (Sq. Ft.)  (Acres) Dwelling           Dwelling      Acre
                                                                                                                                             Units
                                                                                                                                     Units            Units    (Allowable)
062074330        741 PIERCE RD        R3    Medium Density Residential                        Vacant               2,648   0.06        1       0         1         16.5
062074340  700 block PIERCE RD        R3    Medium Density Residential                        Vacant               2,677   0.06        1       0         1         16.3
062074350        731 PIERCE RD        R3    Medium Density Residential                        Vacant               5,376   0.12        2       0         2         16.2
062021040        130 NEWBRIDGE ST     R3    Medium Density Residential              Single-Family Residential      5,433   0.12        2       1         1         16.0
071412300        658 PARTRIDGE AVE    R3    Medium Density Residential              Single-Family Residential      5,692   0.13        2       1         1         15.3
062216060        324 HAIGHT ST       R1U    Low Density Residential                           Vacant               3,028   0.07        1       0         1         14.4
063142120 2100 block MENALTO AVE     R1U    Low Density Residential                           Vacant               3,483   0.08        1       0         1         12.5
062021060      1121 MENLO OAKS DR     R3    Medium Density Residential              Single-Family Residential      6,979   0.16        2       1         1         12.5
071433260        760 HARVARD AVE      R2    Medium Density Residential              Single-Family Residential      7,007   0.16        2       1         1         12.4
062013230  300 block PIERCE RD        R3    Medium Density Residential                        Vacant             10,510    0.24        3       0         3         12.4
071433250        752 HARVARD AVE      R2    Medium Density Residential              Single-Family Residential      7,012   0.16        2       1         1         12.4
061382170        215 OAK GROVE AVE    R2    Medium Density Residential                   Vacant (portion)        67,082    1.54       19       0        19         12.3
071424020        875 CAMBRIDGE AVE    R2    Medium Density Residential               Single-Family Residential     7,090   0.16        2       1         1         12.3
071434090        649 HARVARD AVE      R2    Medium Density Residential               Single-Family Residential   10,774    0.25        3       1         2         12.1
071413240        636 CAMBRIDGE AVE    R2    Medium Density Residential               Single-Family Residential     7,268   0.17        2       1         1         12.0
071413280        724 CAMBRIDGE AVE    R2    Medium Density Residential               Single-Family Residential     7,325   0.17        2       1         1         11.9
071413300        750 CAMBRIDGE AVE    R2    Medium Density Residential               Single-Family Residential     7,354   0.17        2       1         1         11.8
071413310        760 CAMBRIDGE AVE    R2    Medium Density Residential               Single-Family Residential     7,369   0.17        2       1         1         11.8
071434100  600 block HARVARD AVE      R2    Medium Density Residential                        Vacant             11,054    0.25        3       0         3         11.8
071405130        824 CAMBRIDGE AVE    R2    Medium Density Residential              Single-Family Residential      7,440   0.17        2       1         1         11.7
071405140        830 CAMBRIDGE AVE    R2    Medium Density Residential              Single-Family Residential      7,456   0.17        2       1         1         11.7
071405150        848 CAMBRIDGE AVE    R2    Medium Density Residential              Single-Family Residential      7,471   0.17        2       1         1         11.7
071434300        730 CREEK DR         R2    Medium Density Residential               Single-Family Residential   11,222    0.26        3        1        2         11.6
071405170        854 CAMBRIDGE AVE    R2    Medium Density Residential               Single-Family Residential     7,499   0.17        2        1        1         11.6
071412290        646 PARTRIDGE AVE    R3    Medium Density Residential               Single-Family Residential     7,500   0.17        2        1        1         11.6
                                                                                12.31.13
                                                                       Table 4: Scattered Sites
                                                                                                                                    Total             Net      Dwelling
                                                                                                                                           Existing
                                  Existing                                                                    Lot Area  Lot Area Allowable          Potential Units per
APN                 Address                  Existing General Plan Designation            Existing Use                                     Dwelling
                                  Zoning                                                                      (Sq. Ft.)  (Acres) Dwelling           Dwelling      Acre
                                                                                                                                            Units
                                                                                                                                    Units            Units    (Allowable)
071433220       712 HARVARD AVE      R2    Medium Density Residential               Single-Family Residential     7,731   0.18        2       1         1         11.3
071433040       739 CAMBRIDGE AVE    R2    Medium Density Residential               Single-Family Residential     7,787   0.18        2       1         1         11.2
071413010       785 PARTRIDGE AVE    R2    Medium Density Residential               Single-Family Residential     8,041   0.18        2       1         1         10.8
071433110       627 CAMBRIDGE AVE    R2    Medium Density Residential               Single-Family Residential     8,064   0.19        2       1         1         10.8
071433090       649 CAMBRIDGE AVE    R2    Medium Density Residential               Single-Family Residential     8,071   0.19        2       1         1         10.8
071433080       665 CAMBRIDGE AVE    R2    Medium Density Residential               Single-Family Residential     8,075   0.19        2       1         1         10.8
071433070       705 CAMBRIDGE AVE    R2    Medium Density Residential               Single-Family Residential     8,078   0.19        2       1         1         10.8
071433050       725 CAMBRIDGE AVE    R2    Medium Density Residential               Single-Family Residential     8,084   0.19        2       1         1         10.8
071431060       145 CORNELL RD       R2    Medium Density Residential               Single-Family Residential     8,086   0.19        2       1         1         10.8
071431050       815 CAMBRIDGE AVE    R2    Medium Density Residential               Single-Family Residential     8,107   0.19        2       1         1         10.7
071431040       825 CAMBRIDGE AVE    R2    Medium Density Residential               Single-Family Residential     8,111   0.19        2       1         1         10.7
062073300     1105 HOLLYBURNE AVE   R1U    Low Density Residential                           Vacant               4,106   0.09        1       0         1         10.6
062021050     1131 MENLO OAKS DR     R3    Medium Density Residential               Single-Family Residential     8,415   0.19        2       1         1         10.4
071404220       860 PARTRIDGE AVE    R2    Medium Density Residential               Single-Family Residential     9,268   0.21        2       1         1          9.4
071404210       856 PARTRIDGE AVE    R2    Medium Density Residential               Single-Family Residential     9,276   0.21        2       1         1          9.4
071404200       850 PARTRIDGE AVE    R2    Medium Density Residential               Single-Family Residential     9,283   0.21        2       1         1          9.4
071434110       629 HARVARD AVE      R2    Medium Density Residential               Single-Family Residential     9,425   0.22        2       1         1          9.2
071413320       776 CAMBRIDGE AVE    R2    Medium Density Residential               Single-Family Residential     9,529   0.22        2       1         1          9.1
071413150       617 PARTRIDGE AVE    R3    Medium Density Residential               Single-Family Residential     9,592   0.22        2       1         1          9.1
071434060       709 HARVARD AVE      R2    Medium Density Residential               Single-Family Residential   10,035    0.23        2       1         1          8.7
063472030     1925 EUCLID AVE        R3    Medium Density Residential               Single-Family Residential     5,730   0.13        2       1         1          7.6
063472050     1947 EUCLID AVE        R3    Medium Density Residential                        Vacant               6,000   0.14        2       0         2          7.3
062064110     1005 MADERA AVE        R3    Medium Density Residential               Single-Family Residential     6,111   0.14        2        1        1          7.1
063453080 400 block FRENCH CT       R1U    Low Density Residential                           Vacant               6,310   0.14        1       0         1          6.9
062303160 600 block WOODLAND AVE    R1U    Low Density Residential                           Vacant               6,529   0.15        1       0         1          6.7
                                                                               12.31.13
                                                                              Table 4: Scattered Sites
                                                                                                                                           Total             Net      Dwelling
                                                                                                                                                  Existing
                                         Existing                                                                    Lot Area  Lot Area Allowable          Potential Units per
APN                  Address                        Existing General Plan Designation            Existing Use                                     Dwelling
                                         Zoning                                                                      (Sq. Ft.)  (Acres) Dwelling           Dwelling      Acre
                                                                                                                                                   Units
                                                                                                                                           Units            Units    (Allowable)
063472020      1917 EUCLID AVE              R3    Medium Density Residential               Single-Family Residential     6,959   0.16        2       1         1          6.3
062383130      1975 MENALTO AVE             R2    Medium Density Residential               Single-Family Residential     7,269   0.17        2       1         1          6.0
062383140      1971 MENALTO AVE             R2    Medium Density Residential               Single-Family Residential     7,283   0.17        2       1         1          6.0
061321110  400 block FELTON DR           R1S (FG) Low Density Residential                           Vacant               7,522   0.17        1       0         1          5.8
062272760  200 block WILLOW RD             R1U    Low Density Residential                           Vacant               7,665   0.18        1       0         1          5.7
063452390 1300 block WOODLAND AVE          R1U    Low Density Residential                           Vacant               9,295   0.21        1       0         1          4.7
071022220 1300 block N LEMON ST            R1S    Low Density Residential                           Vacant               9,931   0.23        1       0         1          4.4
063425070      1916 MENALTO AVE             R2    Medium Density Residential              Single-Family Residential    10,044    0.23        2       1         1          4.3
074311600            RURAL LN              R1S    Low Density Residential                           Vacant             40,343    0.93        4       0         4          4.3
062460060        320 MIDDLEFIELD RD        R1S    Low Density Residential                      Vacant (portion)       217,800    5.00       21       0        21          4.2
071022240 1300 block N LEMON ST            R1S    Low Density Residential                           Vacant             22,985    0.53        2       0         2          3.8
062074020 1100 block HOLLYBURNE AVE        R1U    Low Density Residential                           Vacant             11,612    0.27        1       0         1          3.8
071072270 1300 block ARBOR RD               RE    Very Low Density Residential                      Vacant             12,162    0.28        1       0         1          3.6
063472010      1495 WOODLAND AVE            R3    Medium Density Residential              Single-Family Residential    12,358    0.28        3       1         2          3.6
071192280      1652 BAY LAUREL DR          R1S    Low Density Residential                           Vacant             14,017    0.32        1       0         1          3.1
071192070      1691 BAY LAUREL DR          R1S    Low Density Residential                           Vacant             17,847    0.41        1       0         1          2.4
071350030  100 block SAN MATEO DR          R1S    Low Density Residential                           Vacant             17,941    0.41        1       0         1          2.4
Subtotal             12 du/ac or greater                                                                                                                      37
Subtotal             Less than 12 du/ac                                                                                                                       81
TOTAL                                                                                                                                                        118
                                                                                      12.31.13
                            Table 5: Built and Approved Units
                                                                                      Deed
                                             Date     Approval                                Market
                                                                          Net New  Restricted
                                           Building    Date (if Structure                      Rate
APN         Address                                                       Dwelling Affordable
                                            Permit   permit not   Type                        Dwelling
                                                                            Unit    Dwelling
                                            Issued     issued)                                 Unit
                                                                                      Unit
055341240 1423 ROSEMARY ST                 01/19/07                 SF       1                  1
055480010 1413 ROSEMARY ST                 01/19/07                 SF       1          1       0
055480020 1415 ROSEMARY ST                 01/19/07                 SF       1                  1
055480030 1417 ROSEMARY ST                 01/19/07                 SF       1          1       0
055480040 1419 ROSEMARY ST                 01/19/07                 SF       1                  1
055480050 1421 ROSEMARY ST                 01/19/07                 SF       1                  1
055480070 1425 ROSEMARY ST                 01/19/07                 SF       1          1       0
055480080 1490 ROSEMARY ST                 01/19/07                 SF       1          1       0
055480090 1470 ROSEMARY ST                 01/19/07                 SF       1                  1
055480100 1450 ROSEMARY ST                 01/19/07                 SF       1                  1
055480110 1430 ROSEMARY ST                 01/19/07                 SF       1                  1
055480120 1410 ROSEMARY ST                 01/19/07                 SF       1          1       0
055480130 1400 ROSEMARY ST                 01/19/07                 SF       1                  1
055480210 537 SANDLEWOOD ST                01/19/07                 SF       1          1       0
071162240 1618 STANFORD AVE                03/09/07                 SF       1                  1
062421060 152 LINFIELD DR                  04/12/07                 SF       1                  1
062421060 154 LINFIELD DR                  04/12/07                 SF       1                  1
062421060 156 LINFIELD DR                  04/12/07                 SF       1                  1
071404150 812 PARTRIDGE AVE                04/17/07                 SF       1                  1
071412420 800 PARTRIDGE AVE                04/23/07                 SF       1                  1
055480140 1401 SAGE ST                     06/12/07                 SF       1                  1
055480150 1403 SAGE ST                     06/12/07                 SF       1          1       0
055480160 1405 SAGE ST                     06/12/07                 SF       1                  1
055480200 539 SANDLEWOOD ST                06/12/07                 SF       1                  1
055480420 520 SANDLEWOOD ST                06/12/07                 SF       1          1       0
055480460 559 HAMILTON AVE                 06/12/07                 SF       1          1       0
055480470 1401 GINGER ST                   06/12/07                 SF       1          1       0
055480170 1407 SAGE ST                     06/13/07                 SF       1          1       0
055480180 1409 SAGE ST                     06/13/07                 SF       1                  1
055480190 1411 SAGE ST                     06/13/07                 SF       1                  1
055480410 510 SANDLEWOOD ST                06/26/07                 SF       1                  1
062550010 1 HERITAGE PL                    06/29/07                 SF       1          1       0
062550020 2 HERITAGE PL                    06/29/07                 SF       1                  1
062550030 3 HERITAGE PL                    06/29/07                 SF       1                  1
062550050 5 HERITAGE PL                    07/02/07                 SF       1                  1
062550080 8 HERITAGE PL                    07/02/07                 SF       1                  1
062550090 9 HERITAGE PL                    07/02/07                 SF       1                  1
062550040 4 HERITAGE PL                    07/05/07                 SF       1                  1
062550060 6 HERITAGE PL                    07/05/07                 SF       1                  1
062550110 11 HERITAGE PL                   07/05/07                 SF       1                  1
062550120 12 HERITAGE PL                   07/05/07                 SF       1                  1
055480400 1405 GINGER ST                   07/10/07                 SF       1                  1
055480450 555 HAMILTON AVE                 07/10/07                 SF       1          1       0
062422110 157 LINFIELD DR                  07/10/07                 SF       1          1       0
062422110 159 LINFIELD DR                  07/10/07                 SF       1                  1
062422110 161 LINFIELD DR                  07/10/07                 SF       1                  1
062422110 163 LINFIELD DR                  07/10/07                 SF       1                  1
062422110 165 LINFIELD DR                  07/10/07                 SF       1                  1
062422110 167 LINFIELD DR                  07/10/07                 SF       1                  1
062422110 169 LINFIELD DR                  07/10/07                 SF       1          1       0
062422110 171 LINFIELD DR                  07/10/07                 SF       1                  1
062422110 218 MORGAN LANE                  07/31/07                 SF       1                  1
062422110 214 MORGAN LANE                  07/31/07                 SF       1                  1
062422110 210 MORGAN LANE                  07/31/07                 SF       1                  1
062422110 208 MORGAN LANE                  07/31/07                 SF       1                  1
062422110 216 MORGAN LANE                  08/16/07                 SF       1                  1
062422110 212 MORGAN LANE                  08/16/07                 SF       1                  1
                                         12.31.13
                               Table 5: Built and Approved Units
                                                                                         Deed
                                                Date     Approval                                Market
                                                                             Net New  Restricted
                                              Building    Date (if Structure                      Rate
APN         Address                                                          Dwelling Affordable
                                               Permit   permit not   Type                        Dwelling
                                                                               Unit    Dwelling
                                               Issued     issued)                                 Unit
                                                                                         Unit
062422110 202 MORGAN LANE                     08/22/07                 SF       1          1       0
062422110 204 MORGAN LANE                     08/22/07                 SF       1                  1
062422110 203 BALLARD LANE                    08/22/07                 SF       1                  1
062422110 201 BALLARD LANE                    08/22/07                 SF       1                  1
062422110 201 PEARL LANE                      08/22/07                 SF       1                  1
062422110 203 PEARL LANE                      08/22/07                 SF       1                  1
062422110 205 PEARL LANE                      08/22/07                 SF       1                  1
062422110 207 PEARL LANE                      08/22/07                 SF       1                  1
062550070 7 HERITAGE PL                       08/29/07                 SF       1                  1
062422110 230 MORGAN LANE                     09/25/07                 SF       1                  1
062422110 228 MORGAN LANE                     09/25/07                 SF       1          1       0
062422110 226 MORGAN LANE                     09/25/07                 SF       1                  1
062422110 224 MORGAN LANE                     09/25/07                 SF       1                  1
062422110 222 MORGAN LANE                     09/25/07                 SF       1                  1
062422110 209 PEARL LANE                      09/25/07                 SF       1                  1
062422110 211 PEARL LANE                      09/25/07                 SF       1                  1
062422130 807 PAULSON CIRCLE                  10/03/07                 SF       1                  1
062422130 805 PAULSON CIRCLE                  10/03/07                 SF       1                  1
071272060 1001 SANTA CRUZ AVE                 10/09/07              SF, 2-4      2                 2
071302280 928 MIDDLE AVE FRONT                10/19/07                 SF        1                 1
062422130 841 PAULSON CIRCLE                  11/02/07                 SF        1                 1
062422110 202 BALLARD LANE                    11/08/07                 SF        1         1       0
062422110 204 BALLARD LANE                    11/08/07                 SF        1                 1
062422110 236 MORGAN LANE                     11/08/07                 SF       1                  1
062422110 234 MORGAN LANE                     11/08/07                 SF       1                  1
062422110 232 MORGAN LANE                     11/08/07                 SF       1                  1
062214100 10 HERITAGE PL                      11/15/07                 SF       1          1       0
062422130 839 PAULSON CIRCLE                  12/28/07                 SF       1                  1
062422130 843 PAULSON CIRCLE                  12/28/07                 SF       1                  1
062422130 835 PAULSON CIRCLE                  03/05/08                 SF       1                  1
062422130 833 PAULSON CIRCLE                  03/05/08                 SF       1          1       0
062422130 837 PAULSON CIRCLE                  03/05/08                 SF       1                  1
062422130 831 PAULSON CIRCLE                  03/05/08                 SF       1                  1
074162180 1080 LASSEN DR                      03/05/08                 SF       1                  1
074120360 130 ROYAL OAK CT                    06/18/08                 SF       1                  1
074120360 135 ROYAL OAK CT                    06/18/08                 SF       1                  1
074120360 110 ROYAL OAK CT                    06/18/08                 SF       1                  1
074120360 125 ROYAL OAK CT                    06/18/08                 SF       1                  1
074120360 120 ROYAL OAK CT                    06/18/08                 SF       1                  1
074120360 150 ROYAL OAK CT                    06/19/08                 SF       1                  1
062422130 834 PAULSON CIRCLE                  06/23/08                 SF       1                  1
062422130 836 PAULSON CIRCLE                  06/23/08                 SF        1                 1
062422130 822 PAULSON CIRCLE                  06/23/08                 SF        1                 1
062422130 832 PAULSON CIRCLE                  06/23/08                 SF        1                 1
062421060 156 MORANDI LN                      07/16/08                 SF        1                 1
062421060 154 MORANDI LN                      07/16/08                 SF       1                  1
062421060 152 MORANDI LN                      07/16/08                 SF       1                  1
062421060 151 MORANDI LN                      07/16/08                 SF       1          1       0
062421060 153 MORANDI LN                      07/16/08                 SF       1                  1
062421060 155 MORANDI LN                      07/16/08                 SF       1                  1
062422130 827 PAULSON CIRCLE                  07/29/08                 SF       1                  1
062422130 829 PAULSON CIRCLE                  07/29/08                 SF       1                  1
062422130 825 PAULSON CIRCLE                  07/29/08                 SF       1                  1
062422130 823 PAULSON CIRCLE                  07/31/08                 SF       1                  1
062422130 821 PAULSON CIRCLE                  07/31/08                 SF       1                  1
062422130 819 PAULSON CIRCLE                  07/31/08                 SF       1                  1
062422130 817 PAULSON CIRCLE                  09/11/08                 SF       1                  1
                                            12.31.13
                                             Table 5: Built and Approved Units
                                                                                                       Deed
                                                               Date    Approval                                Market
                                                                                           Net New  Restricted
                                                            Building    Date (if Structure                      Rate
APN         Address                                                                        Dwelling Affordable
                                                             Permit   permit not   Type                        Dwelling
                                                                                             Unit    Dwelling
                                                              Issued    issued)                                 Unit
                                                                                                       Unit
062580250 804 PAULSON CIR                                   09/23/08                 SF       1                  1
062580300 818 PAULSON CIR                                   09/23/08                 SF       1                  1
062580310 816 PAULSON CIR                                   09/23/08                 SF       1                  1
062580040 813 PAULSON CIR                                   09/25/08                 SF       1          1       0
062580050 815 PAULSON CIR                                   09/25/08                 SF       1                  1
062580210 801 PAULSON CIR                                   09/25/08                 SF       1                  1
062580030 811 PAULSON CIR                                   10/06/08                 SF       1                  1
062580240 812 PAULSON CIR                                   10/14/08                 SF       1                  1
062580320 814 PAULSON CIR                                   10/14/08                 SF       1                  1
062580020 809 PAULSON CIR                                   12/01/08                 SF        1                  1
071433180 644 HARVARD                                       01/16/09                 SF        1                  1
062580200 845 PAULSON CIR                                   04/23/09                 SF        1                  1
062580220 803 PAULSON CIR                                   04/23/09                 SF        1                  1
071271030 1081 SANTA CRUZ AVE                               02/10/10                2-4        3                  3
062383120 1981 MENALTO AVE                                  04/15/10                 SF        1                  1
071301100 849 UNIVERSITY DR                                 06/09/10                 SF        1                  1
071301100 865 UNIVERSITY DR                                 06/09/10                 SF        1                  1
071291230 737 FREMONT ST                                    10/06/10                 SF        2                  2
062570080 153 BURNELL LN                                    10/20/10                 SF        1                  1
071282090 802 LIVE OAK AVE                                  11/02/10                 SF        1                  1
071282090 905 CRANE ST                                      11/02/10                 SF        1                  1
062570070 151 BURNELL LN                                    11/03/10                 SF        1                  1
062570160 313 HOMEWOOD PL                                   11/16/10                 SF        1                  1
062570220 301 HOMEWOOD PL                                   11/17/10                 SF       1                  1
062570180 309 HOMEWOOD PL                                   11/18/10                 SF       1                  1
062570190 307 HOMEWOOD PL                                   11/18/10                 SF       1          1       0
062570200 305 HOMEWOOD PL                                   11/18/10                 SF       1                  1
062570210 303 HOMEWOOD PL                                   11/18/10                 SF       1                  1
062570170 311 HOMEWOOD PL                                   11/29/10                 SF       1                  1
062570090 155 BURNELL LN                                    12/09/10                 SF       1                  1
071022110 1206 N LEMON AVE                                  12/21/10                 SF       1                  1
062570020 160 LINFIELD DR                                   01/03/11                 SF        1                  1
062570030 158 LINFIELD DR                                   01/03/11                 SF        1         1        0
062570010 162 LINFIELD DR                                   01/10/11                 SF        1                  1
071302290 960 MIDDLE AVE                                    03/08/11                 SF        1                  1
061382210 1030 PINE ST                                      02/17/12                 SF        1                  1
074112640 2199 CLAYTON DR                                   03/22/12                 SF        1                  1
063430090 1956 MENALTO AVE A                                04/17/12                 SF        1                  1
074112100 2199 CLAYTON DR                                   04/24/12                 SF        1                  1
074120430 140 ROYAL OAK CT                                  05/08/12                 SF        1                  1
061421330 1444 SAN ANTONIO ST                               07/24/12                 SF        1                  1
071301120 821 UNIVERSITY AVE (900 ROBLE AVE)                10/08/12                2-4        1                  1
071288390 742 LIVE OAK AVE                                  11/19/12                 SF        1                  1
061422390 1460 EL CAMINO REAL                               04/26/13              2-4, 5+     16         1       15
062370180 531 POPE ST                                       04/08/13                 SF        1                  1
071412430 389 EL CAMINO REAL                                05/13/13              SF, 2-4     22         3       19
071103310 1330 HOOVER ST                                    05/21/13                 SF       1                  1
062272420 163 WILLOW RD                                     06/25/13                 SF       1                  1
062012050 15 IRIS LN                                        07/08/13                 SF       1                  1
063430060 1968 MENALTO AVE                                  07/16/13                 SF       1                  1
062064140 731 BAY ROAD                                      08/01/13                 SF       1                  1
062064130 735 BAY ROAD                                      08/01/13                 SF       1                  1
063452380 1357 WOODLAND AVE                                  pending   07/22/13      SF       1                  1
061401080 1273 LAUREL ST                                     pending   05/07/13      SF        2                  2
061401070 1281 LAUREL ST                                     pending   05/07/13      SF        2                  2
063463680 433 O'CONNOR ST                                    pending   08/05/13      SF        1                  1
074270200 777 SHARON PARK DR                                    na      pending      SF        1                  1
                                                          12.31.13
                                    Table 5: Built and Approved Units
                                                                                              Deed
                                                     Date     Approval                                Market
                                                                                  Net New  Restricted
                                                   Building    Date (if Structure                      Rate
APN         Address                                                               Dwelling Affordable
                                                    Permit   permit not   Type                        Dwelling
                                                                                    Unit    Dwelling
                                                    Issued     issued)                                 Unit
                                                                                              Unit
                                                                                                         0
Subtotal January 2007 to June 2013                                                  202        28       174
Subtotal July 2013 to December 2013                                                  11         0        11
TOTAL                                                                               213        28       185
                                                                                                         0
Subtotal 2007                                                                        87        19        68
Subtotal 2008                                                                        38         3        35
Subtotal 2009                                                                        3          0        3
Subtotal 2010                                                                        21         1        20
Subtotal 2011                                                                        4          1        3
Subtotal 2012                                                                        8          0        8
Subtotal 2013                                                                        45         4        41
Subtotal Pending                                                                     7          0        7
Total                                                                               213        28       185
                                                 12.31.13
                             Table 6: Built and Pending Second Units
                                                          Attached or
                                      Date Building
APN        Address                                         Detached    Units
                                      Permit Issued
                                                       Secondary Unit?
062432130 425 Claremont Way                   08/02/07   Detached Unit  1
063430760 344 O'Connor St                     10/04/07   Attached Unit  1
071081140 1177 Johnson St                     12/10/07   Detached Unit  1
055331190 351 Terminal Ave                    10/29/08   Detached Unit  1
063430730 332 O'Connor St                     06/14/10   Detached Unit  1
062384070 622 Laurel Ave                      03/28/12   Detached Unit  1
062454080 60 Willow Rd                        02/19/13   Attached Unit  1
062412220 308 Sherwood Wy                     04/12/13   Detached Unit  1
062061260 1040 Henderson Ave                  10/02/13   Attached Unit  1
063430790 127 Elliott Dr                      10/23/13   Detached Unit  1
063430520 374 O'Connor St                     12/11/13   Attached Unit  1
062271230 288 San Luis Dr                     12/19/13   Attached Unit  1
071341060 1159 Bay Laurel Dr                   pending   Attached Unit  1
Subtotal  2007 to 2012                                                  6
Subtotal  2013                                                          7
Total                                                                   13
Subtotal  2007                                                          3
Subtotal  2008                                                          1
Subtotal  2009                                                          0
Subtotal  2010                                                          1
Subtotal  2011                                                          0
Subtotal  2012                                                          1
Subtotal  2013                                                          6
Subtotal  Pending                                                       1
Total                                                                   13
                                              12.31.13

City of Menlo Park Housing Element
Appendix B
Review of the 2007-2014
Housing Element

                                                                        Review	  of	  2007-­‐2014	  Housing	  Element	  Implementing	  Programs
                                                                                                                                                                                Implementation Status and Recommendation
   2007-2014 Housing Element Program Name/Number              Program Description and Objective                                       Timeframe and Progress
                                                                                                                                                                                for the 2015-2023 Housing Element
Goal 1 Implementation Responsibilities
H1.A    Establish City Staff Work Priorities for Implementing Establish priorities for implementing Housing Element Programs          Annually                                  Continue program — Make this an annual update as
        Housing Element Programs                                                                                                                                                part of the annual Housing Element review (see
                                                                                                                                                                                Program H1.B)
H1.B    Review the Housing Element Annually                   Review and monitoring of Housing Element implementation; submit         Annually                                  Continue program — update and undertake by April
                                                              Annual Report to HCD                                                                                              of each year using forms provided by HCD
H1.C    Publicize Fair Housing Laws and Respond to            Obtain and distribute materials (see Program 1H.D)                      Ongoing                                   Continue program — Obtain and distribute
        Discrimination Complaints                                                                                                                                               information (check annually)
H1.D    Provide Information on Housing Programs               Obtain and distribute materials at public locations                     Annual                                    Continue program — Obtain and distribute
                                                                                                                                                                                information (check annually)
H1.E    Undertake Community Outreach When Implementing Conduct public outreach and distribute materials (see Programs H1.C            Consistent with program timelines         Continue program and monitor as part of the Annual
        Housing Element Programs                              and H1.D)                                                                                                         Housing Element review (Program H1.B)
H1.F    Work with the San Mateo County Department of          Coordinate with County efforts to maintain and support affordable       Ongoing                                   Continue program and monitor as part of the Annual
        Housing                                               housing                                                                                                           Housing Element review (Program H1.B)
H1.G    Adopt an Anti-Discrimination Ordinance                Undertake Municipal Code amendment                                      2014 — undertake during the 2015-2023     Continue program.
                                                                                                                                      planning period
H1.H    Utilize the City’s Below Market Rate (BMR) Housing Accumulate and distribute funds for affordable housing                     Ongoing                                   Continue program and monitor as part of the Annual
        Fund                                                                                                                                                                    Housing Element review (Program H1.B)
H1.I.   Work with Non-Profits on Housing                      Maintain a working relationship with non-profit housing sponsors        Ongoing                                   Focus on Mid-Pen's Gateway Apartments and other
                                                                                                                                                                                possible developments as they arise. Continue to
                                                                                                                                                                                undertake outreach to non-profits
H1.J    Update the Housing Element                            Maintain consistency with Housing Element law                           In progress for the 2015-2023 planning    Update for the 2015-2023 planning period and
                                                                                                                                      period. Anticipated to be completed by    assess as part of the annual Housing Element
                                                                                                                                      Spring/Summer 2014.                       review (see Program H1.B)
H1.K    Address Rent Conflicts                                Resolve rent conflicts as they arise                                    Ongoing                                   Continue program and monitor as part of the Annual
                                                                                                                                                                                Housing Element review (Program H1.B)
H1.L    Adopt Priority Procedures for Water and Sewer         Comply with Government Code Section 65589.7                             In progress; targeting completion in 2013 Program completed (delete)
        Service to Affordable Housing Developments
H1.M    Lobby for Changes to State Housing Element            Work with other San Mateo County jurisdictions and lobby for changes to Ongoing                                   Continue program, expand to identify and monitor
        Requirements                                          State Housing Element law (coordinate with Program H1.B)                                                          as part of the Annual Housing Element review
                                                                                                                                                                                (Program H1.B)
Goal 2 Existing Housing and Neighborhoods
H2.A    Adopt Ordinance for “At Risk” Units                   Protect existing subsidized rental housing (coordinate with Program     2016 — undertake during the 2015-2023     Continue program and monitor as part of the Annual
                                                              H1.G)                                                                   planning period                           Housing Element review (Program H1.B)
H2.B    Implement Energy Loan Programs and                    Provide loans for 25 homes from 2007-2014                               Ongoing — undertake during the 2015-      Continue program and monitor as part of the Annual
        Improvements                                                                                                                  2023 planning period (25 homes)           Housing Element review (Program H1.B)
 Appendix B

                                                                      Review	  of	  2007-­‐2014	  Housing	  Element	  Implementing	  Programs
                                                                                                                                                                                  Implementation Status and Recommendation
   2007-2014 Housing Element Program Name/Number            Program Description and Objective                                         Timeframe and Progress
                                                                                                                                                                                  for the 2015-2023 Housing Element
H2.C    Amend the Zoning Ordinance to Protect Existing      Protect existing rental housing                                           Consider as part of the City's General Plan Continue program
        Housing                                                                                                                       Update (2015-2013)
H2.D    Assist in Implementing Housing Rehabilitation       Provide loans to rehabilitate very low and low income housing (20 loans   Ongoing — undertake during the 2015-        Continue program and monitor as part of the Annual
        Programs                                            from 2007-2014)                                                           2023 planning period (10 homes)             Housing Element review (Program H1.B).
                                                                                                                                                                                  Investigate use of rehabilitation loans for secondary
                                                                                                                                                                                  dwelling units
Goal 3 Specialized Housing Needs
H3.A    Zone for Emergency Shelter for the Homeless         Amend the Zoning Ordinance                                                In progress; anticipated to be competed in Delete program if ordinance is adopted. Add new
                                                                                                                                      Spring/Summer 2014                          program to work with the Veteran's Administration on
                                                                                                                                                                                  homeless veterans' needs.
H3.B    Zone for Transitional and Supportive Housing        Amend the Zoning Ordinance                                                In progress; anticipated to be competed in Delete program if ordinance is adopted. Address
                                                                                                                                      Spring/Summer 2014                          small residential care facilities.
H3.C    Adopt Procedures for Reasonable Accommodation       Amend the Zoning Ordinance and/or modify administrative procedures;       In progress; anticipated to be competed in Delete program if ordinance is adopted.
                                                            create handout                                                            Spring/Summer 2014
H3.D    Encourage Rental Housing Assistance Programs        Provide rental assistance to 235 extremely low and very low income        Ongoing assistance to 235 extremely low Continue program and monitor as part of the Annual
                                                            Menlo Park residents annually                                             and very low income households per year Housing Element review (Program H1.B)
H3.E    Investigate Possible Multi-Jurisdictional Emergency Construction of homeless facility (if feasible)                           Longer term program as the opportunity      Keep program, although program may not be
        Shelter                                                                                                                       arises                                      needed if emergency shelter ordinance is adopted.
H3.F    Assist in Providing Housing for Persons Living with Provision of housing and services for disabled persons                    Ongoing                                     Continue program and monitor as part of the Annual
        Disabilities                                                                                                                                                              Housing Element review (Program H1.B)
H3.G    Develop Incentives for Special Needs Housing        Amend the Zoning Ordinance to provide opportunities for housing and       2014                                        Continue the program — Review special needs
                                                            adequate support services for seniors and people living with disabilities                                             housing incentives, update program and monitor as
                                                                                                                                                                                  part of the Annual Housing Element review (Program
                                                                                                                                                                                  H1.B)
H3.H    Continue Support for Countywide Homeless            Support housing and services for the homeless and at-risk persons and     Ongoing                                     Continue program and monitor as part of the Annual
        Programs                                            families                                                                                                              Housing Element review (Program H1.B)
Goal 4 New Housing
H4.A    Modify Development Standards to Encourage Infill    Amend the Zoning Ordinance to encourage                                   Completed June, 2013                        Delete.
        Housing                                             smaller units and infill housing.
H4.B    Modify R-2 Zoning to Maximize Unit Potential        Amend the Zoning Ordinance to maximize                                    Consider as part of General Plan Update     Continue program. Review issues and strategies as
                                                            dwelling unit potential in R-2 zones                                                                                  part of the General Plan Update.
H4.C    Adopt Standards for an “Affordable Housing Overlay Amend the Zoning Ordinance to provide flexibility and incentives for       Completed June, 2013                        Delete.
        Zone”                                               affordable housing
 Appendix B

                                                                         Review	  of	  2007-­‐2014	  Housing	  Element	  Implementing	  Programs
                                                                                                                                                                                 Implementation Status and Recommendation
   2007-2014 Housing Element Program Name/Number              Program Description and Objective                                       Timeframe and Progress
                                                                                                                                                                                 for the 2015-2023 Housing Element
H4.D    Implement Inclusionary Housing Regulations and        Amend the Zoning Ordinance to require affordable housing in market rate State Density Bonus Law completed June, Delete adoption of State Density Bonus Law
        Adopt Standards to Implement State Density Bonus developments and to implement State Density Bonus law incentives             2013; Review of inclusionary zoning        program. Continue to implement the City's
        Law                                                                                                                           regulations in progress                    inclusionary requirements. Include separate
                                                                                                                                                                                 programs to (1) evaluate the City's Below Market
                                                                                                                                                                                 Rate program guidelines and (2) update the BMR
                                                                                                                                                                                 nexus study.
H4.E    Modify Second Dwelling Unit Development               Amend ther Zoning Ordinance to create great incentives for second units Completed June, 2013                       Continue program and consider reducing minimum
        Standards and Permit Process                          (10 new second untis — 3 very low, 4 low and 3 moderate income units)                                              lot size, clarifications of the exisiting ordinance such
                                                                                                                                                                                 as application of height and setbacks along an alley,
                                                                                                                                                                                 and development of other secondary dwelling unit
                                                                                                                                                                                 incentives as part of the next Housing Element cycle
                                                                                                                                                                                 (2015-2023).
H4.F    Undertake a Second Unit Amnesty Program               Adopt procedures and implement a second unit amnesty program (10        In progress; anticipated to be competed in Consider the effectiveness of the program as part of
                                                              very low, 15 low and 10 moderate income units)                          Spring/Summer 2014                         the Housing Element update and modify accordingly.
H4.G    Implement First-Time Homebuyer Program                Provide loans for 40 units assisted                                     BMR funds are no longer available for this Delete. The City is referring first time homebuyers to
                                                                                                                                      program.                                   HEART and Union Bank for down payment
                                                                                                                                                                                 assistance. Include as part of Programs H1.C and
                                                                                                                                                                                 H1.D to obtain and distribute information (check
                                                                                                                                                                                 annually on the status of the program).
H4.H    Work with Non-Profits and Property Owners on High Develop incentives and procedures to encourage affordable housing           Ongoing                                    Continue program.
        Potential Housing Opportunity Sites
H4.I    Create Multi-Family and Residential Mixed Use         Establish design guidelines for multi-family and mixed use housing      Consider as part of General Plan Update    Continue program and consider as part of General
        Design Guidelines                                     developments                                                                                                       Plan Update.
H4.J    Consider Surplus City Land for Housing                Identify opportunities for housing as they arise                        Consider as part of General Plan Update    Continue program and consider as part of General
                                                                                                                                                                                 Plan Update.
H4.K    Work with the Fire District                           Undertake local amendments to the State Fire Code                       In progress; anticipated to be competed in Delete program if ordinance is adopted.
                                                                                                                                      early 2014
H4.L    Coordinate with School Districts to Link Housing with Coordinate and consider school districts long-range planning, resources Ongoing                                    Continue program. Consider as part of and then
        School District Planning Activities                   and capacity in planning for housing                                                                               implementation following the General Plan Update.
H4.M    Review the Subdivision Ordinance                      Modify the Subdivision Ordinance as needed                              Consider as part of General Plan Update    Continue program. Review of directions for
                                                                                                                                                                                 Municipal Code Ttitle 15 as part of the General Plan
                                                                                                                                                                                 Update. Modify the Subivision Ordinance following
                                                                                                                                                                                 adoption of the updated General Plan.
H4.N    Create Opportunities for Mixed Use Development        Conduct study to determine appropriate locations for housing in         Consider as part of General Plan Update    Examine current commercial districts that do not
                                                              commercial zones                                                                                                   currently allow residential uses and review
                                                                                                                                                                                 opportunities for mixed use housing as part of the
                                                                                                                                                                                 General Plan Update.
H4.O    Implement Actions in Support of High Potential        Undertake Zoning Zoning Ordinance amendments to enable the              Completed June, 2013                       Delete.
        Housing Opportunity Sites                             construction of affordable housing to achieve the City's RHNA
H4.P    Review Transportation Impact Analysis Guidelines      Modify Transportation Impact Analysis (TIA) guidelines                  Consider as part the General Plan Update. Continue program.
 Appendix B

                                                                       Review	  of	  2007-­‐2014	  Housing	  Element	  Implementing	  Programs
                                                                                                                                                                            Implementation Status and Recommendation
   2007-2014 Housing Element Program Name/Number             Program Description and Objective                                   Timeframe and Progress
                                                                                                                                                                            for the 2015-2023 Housing Element
H4.Q    Update Parking Stall and Driveway Design             Modify Parking Stall and Driveway Design Guidelines                 In progress; anticipated to be competed in Delete program if program has been completed.
        Guidelines                                                                                                               early 2014
H4.R    Achieve Long-Term Viability of Affordable Housing    Coordination with project sponsors in tenant selection, project     Ongoing as projects are proposed           Continue program.
                                                             maintenance and management, and neighborhood outreach
H4.S    Review Overnight Parking Requirements for the     R- Review and modify night parking prohibitions in the R-4-S zone.     In progress; anticipated to be competed in Delete program if program has been completed.
        4-S Zoning District                                                                                                      early 2014
H4.T    Explore Creation of a Transportation Management      Focus on the Haven Avenue/Bayfront Expressway area to coordinate    Consider as part the General Plan Update. Continue program.
        Association                                          grants, shuttles and other transportation.
H4.U    Explore Pedestrian and Bicycle Improvements          Coordinate with Redwood City and explore improvements over Highway Consider as part the General Plan Update. Continue program.
                                                             101 between Marsh Road and 5th Avenue.
 Appendix B

City of Menlo Park Housing Element
Appendix C
Fact Sheet on Housing
Element Requirements for
Addressing Homelessness

                                                  Fact Sheet
                                                  Please Tell Me More . . . about
                                                  Housing Element Requirements for
                                                  Addressing Homelessness. . .
              What does State law require the City of Menlo Park
              to do to address homelessness?
Effective January 1, 2008, SB2 (Chapter 633, Statutes of 2007) requires every California city and
county to engage in a detailed analysis of emergency shelters and transitional and supportive housing
in their Housing Element revision and to regulate zoning for these facilities. In addition, the law
broadened the scope of the Housing Accountability Act to include emergency shelters as well as
supportive and transitional housing. The City of Menlo Park’s Housing Element must: (a) Identify
and estimate the housing and service needs of homeless persons and families and assess the unmet
need for emergency shelter, and transitional and supportive housing; (b) designate in the City’s
Zoning Ordinance where emergency shelters must be allowed without a conditional use permit or
other discretionary action (such as a variance, minor use permit, special use permit or any other
discretionary process) —although non-discretionary design review standards may be applied; and (c)
develop a program to reduce constraints on the development of transitional and supportive housing.
              Government Code Section 65583(a)(4) requires the identification of a zone or zones
              where emergency shelters are allowed as a permitted use without a conditional use
              or other discretionary permit. The identified zone or zones shall include sufficient
              capacity to accommodate the need for emergency shelters identified in paragraph (7) of
              Government Code Section 65583(a), except that each local government shall identify
              a zone or zones that can accommodate at least one year-round emergency shelter.
              Government Code Section 65583(c)(1) requires “As part of the analysis of available sites,
              a jurisdiction must include an analysis of zoning that encourages and facilitates a variety
              of housing types…including emergency shelters and transitional housing.”
              What are the definitions used to define the various
              types of homeless facilities?
SB 2 requires jurisdictions to explicitly recognize emergency, transitional and supportive housing in
their zoning code. Below are sample definitions taken from State law.
      Emergency Shelters (Health and Safety Code Section 50801(e). “Emergency shelter” means
housing with minimal supportive services for homeless persons that is limited to occupancy of six
months or less by a homeless person. No individual or household may be denied emergency shelter
because of an inability to pay.
      Transitional Housing (Health and Safety Code Section 50675.2)(h). “Transitional Housing” and
“transitional housing development” means buildings configured as rental housing developments, but
Fact Sheet on Homelessness — Prepared July 2013	                                                          Page 1

operated under program requirements that call for the termination of assistance and recirculation of
the assisted units to another eligible program recipient at some predetermined future point in time,
which shall be no less than six months.
      Supportive Housing (Health and Safety Code 50675.14(b). Housing with no limit on length of
stay, that is occupied by the target population as defined in subdivision (d) of Section 53260, and
that is linked to on- or off-site services that assist the supportive housing residents in retaining the
housing, improving his or her health status, and maximizing his or her ability to live and, when
possible, work in the community.
      Target Population Definition per HSC 53260(d). (d) “Target population” means adults with
low-income having one or more disabilities, including mental illness, HIV or AIDS, substance
abuse, or other chronic health conditions, or individuals eligible for services provided under the
Lanterman Developmental Disabilities Services Act (Division 4.5 (commencing with Section 4500)
of the Welfare and Institutions Code) and may, among other populations, include families with
children, elderly persons, young adults aging out of the foster care system, individuals exiting from
institutional settings, veterans, or homeless people.
              What must Menlo Park do to comply with State law to
              address homelessness?
The City of Menlo Park is required to identify a zone or zones where a year-round emergency shelter
would be allowed as a permitted use without a conditional use or other discretionary permit. Under
the City’s existing Zoning Ordinance, permanent homeless shelters are not allowed. Zoning for a
shelter could be done through the following means:
      OPTION #1 — Use of Existing Zoning Designations. The City can identify a zoning designation
where emergency shelters would be allowed as a permitted use. The City can also establish other
standards within that zone as to the location or appropriate sites where a facility might be located,
such as minimum parcel size, proximity to services or within an appropriate walking distance
to transit. Cities in San Mateo County have identified a variety of zones in compliance with SB2
requirements. For example, Atherton has designated a specific site owned by the Town near the
railroad station, El Camino Real and bus transportation. Others, such as San Bruno, San Mateo, and
San Carlos, have designated commercial and transit oriented locations.
      OPTION #2 — Use of an Overlay Zone. Overlay zoning can be applied over one or more
Zoning districts and creates a second, mapped zone that is superimposed over the conventional,
underlying zoning district. Overlay zones typically provide for a higher level of regulation or specific
requirements to address unique issues or circumstances. They also allow more specificity as to where
particular uses or requirements must be applied and located. The Cities of Belmont and Burlingame
have used the overlay zone approach to comply with SB2 requirements.
Because of SB 2, the areas that jurisdictions can regulate are limited and, according to State
Department of Housing and Community Development (HCD), the regulations must be “predictable
and objective” and “encourage and facilitate” the development of shelters. The subjects that are
permitted to be regulated include: (a) development standards common to the zoning district; (b)
Fact Sheet on Homelessness — Prepared July 2013	                                                        Page 2

maximum number of beds; (c) off-street parking; (d) size and location of exterior and interior on-site
waiting and client intake areas; (e) the provision of on-site management; (f) the proximity to other
emergency shelters; (g) the length of stay; (h) lighting; (i) security during hours that the emergency
shelter is in operation; (j) non-discretionary design standards; and, (k) voluntary or incentive based
standards.
In addition, SB 2 provides that transitional and supportive housing must constitute a residential
use, and it requires zoning to treat transitional and supportive housing to be subject only to those
restrictions that apply to other residential uses of the same type in the same zone. For example, if the
transitional housing is a multifamily use proposed in a multifamily zone, then zoning should treat the
transitional housing the same as other multifamily uses proposed in the zone.
              What are homeless shelters in San Mateo County like in
              terms of their size and parking requirements?
State law specifically allows jurisdictions to regulate the number of beds in an emergency shelter. At
the same time, it says limits on the numbers of beds must “facilitate,” “promote,” and “encourage” new
emergency housing. Shelters in San Mateo county range from six beds to 87 beds, with the median
number being 22. In addition, the standards may not require more parking for emergency shelters
than for other residential or commercial uses within the same zone. Parking is needed for employees,
volunteers/visitors and residents. Most homeless families will have a car while most homeless
individuals will not. The rule of thumb that Shelter Network uses is one car per family or .35 cars per
individual bed, plus one parking spot per staff member on duty when residents are there (but less if
on major a transit route). This standard was confirmed with several other organizations and agencies.
But this varies significantly between jurisdictions and client populations. Homeless shelters that serve
the chronically homeless or the mentally ill will have lower parking needs. As a comparison, available
parking spaces for various emergency shelters are summarized below:
      Crossroads (Oakland), 0.55 acres, 125 residents, 47 employees, 17 parking spaces
      Family Emergency Center, (San Rafael), 0.25 acres, 52 beds, 16 spaces
      Mill Street Shelter (San Rafael) 0.33 acres, 40 beds, 10 spaces
      Safe Harbor (S. San Francisco), 86 beds, 24 spaces (parking lot is full at night)
Fact Sheet on Homelessness — Prepared July 2013	                                                      Page 3

              What is the Countywide approach to providing facilities
              and services for the homeless?
In 2005-2006, a countywide group of diverse stakeholders undertook an intensive community-
based planning process to develop a plan to end homelessness in San Mateo County. The end result
— entitled “Housing Our People Effectively (HOPE): Ending Homelessness in San Mateo County”
(“the HOPE Plan”) — lays out concrete strategies designed to end homelessness in the county within
10 years. The report incorporates the experiences and expertise of over 200 stakeholders, including
members of the business, nonprofit and government sectors. These stakeholders met in working
groups over a period of 12 months to develop the recommendations in the plan. Homeless and
formerly homeless persons were represented in the working groups, as well as in several focus groups
conducted in emergency shelters and transitional housing programs. The result of this year-long
community planning process was the finalized HOPE Plan, which was completed in 2006. The plan
has been formally adopted by the San Mateo County Board of Supervisors.
One of the key strategies for ending homelessness laid out in the HOPE Plan is to increase the supply
of permanent affordable and supportive housing for people who are homeless and develop strategies
to help them to move into permanent housing as rapidly as possible (a “housing first” or “rapid re-
housing” approach). The HOPE Plan intentionally made no recommendation to expand the supply
of emergency or transitional housing. Although the HOPE planners recognized that there is a lack of
needed resources throughout the housing continuum, including emergency and transitional housing,
the greatest need and the most effective use of new and/or redirected resources is for creating and
sustaining quality affordable housing and supportive housing.
              What does “Housing First” and “Rapid Re-Housing” mean
              as an approach to addressing homelessness?
“Housing First” is an approach that centers on providing homeless people with housing quickly
and then providing services as needed. What differentiates a “Housing First” approach from other
strategies is that there is an immediate and primary focus on helping individuals and families quickly
access and sustain permanent housing. This approach has the benefit of being consistent with what
most people experiencing homelessness want and seek help to achieve.
A “Housing First” approach rests on the belief that helping people access and sustain permanent,
affordable housing should be the central goal of our work with people experiencing homelessness.
By providing housing assistance, case management and supportive services responsive to individual
or family needs (time-limited or long-term) after an individual or family is housed, communities
can significantly reduce the time people experience homelessness and prevent further episodes of
homelessness. A central tenet of the “Housing First” approach is that social services to enhance
individual and family well-being can be more effective when people are in their own home.
Importantly, the “Housing First” model offers an alternative to emergency shelter or transitional
housing for homeless individuals. National studies show that as permanent supportive housing is
made available to chronically homeless individuals, the need for emergency shelter beds decreases. In
addition, health improvements have been documented along with a significant decrease in tenants’
emergency room visits and hospital inpatient days. “Housing First” moves individuals directly from
the streets or shelters into their own homes. Individuals are offered extensive follow-up through case
Fact Sheet on Homelessness — Prepared July 2013	                                                    Page 4

management services. The model is premised on research that proves that permanent supportive
housing is the most effective and cost efficient service model for chronically homeless individuals.
Without a stable place to live and a support system to help them address underlying problems, most
homeless people shift from one emergency system to the next – from the streets to shelters, to public
hospitals, to psychiatric institutions and detox centers, and ultimately, back to the streets – in an
endless cycle. The services offered may include housing search assistance, case management, support
for finding and keeping a job, transportation assistance, mental health services, and substance abuse
treatment.
              How many homeless people and facilities are located in the
              City of Menlo Park?
Every other year San Mateo County and many other stakeholders conduct a homeless count. The
most recent count was conducted on January 24, 2013 and found 16 (unsheltered) homeless people
living in Menlo Park, as well as 142 homeless residents in shelters, institutions, motel voucher
programs and other facilities. For perspective, populations who are at elevated risk for homelessness
include lower income households paying more than 50 percent of their income for housing (there
are slightly over 1,500 households in this category in Menlo Park), youth aging out of the foster care
system, children with special needs in unsupportive households, people fleeing domestic violence,
people with untreated mental illness or substance abuse and veterans.
The tables on the next page provide data on the characteristics of San Mateo County’s homeless
population and an inventory of emergency shelter beds, transitional housing beds and supportive
housing units for homeless people in Menlo Park. The data source is the San Mateo County Center on
Homelessness, which updates this inventory on an annual basis.
Two of the largest supportive housing programs in the county are the San Mateo County Housing
Authority’s Shelter Plus Care and Supportive Housing programs. These are tenant-based voucher
programs in which participants receive a rent subsidy to rent units in the private rental market and
have a choice as to where they will live. Tenants are therefore scattered throughout the county and the
distribution of units by jurisdiction fluctuates as participants enter and exit the program.
InnVision Shelter Network’s service methodology, “Beyond the Bed” provides a comprehensive
network of housing and services to enable homeless families and individuals to return to permanent
housing and self-sufficiency. InnVision provides services to homeless and low-income individuals
and families with several programs including a 15-bed rotating-church shelter for singles, a
church-rotating hot meal service, a 40-unit transitional supportive housing program and a 20-unit
permanent supportive housing program. Through these services InnVision Peninsula Programs
provide food, showers, clothing, emergency assistance, medical care, and counseling to those in need
in our communities in Northern Santa Clara County and Southern San Mateo County.
There are no data presently available on the increased level of demand during particular times of
the year. Due to the relatively mild climate, the only time of year when increased demand appears
to be a factor is during the winter months (December to February). During extremely cold periods,
some shelters set up additional cots to accommodate increased demand for shelter and the County
periodically opens special “warming shelters” during extended cold spells. Anecdotal evidence
suggests that this additional capacity is sufficient to meet the need during these periods.
Fact Sheet on Homelessness — Prepared July 2013	                                                      Page 5

                                                 http://www.menlopark.org/athome
Fact Sheet on Homelessness — Prepared July 2013	                                Page 6

GENERAL
          PLAN
  City of Menlo Park
ADOPTED NOVEMBER 29, 2016

       ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
                                 CITY COUNCIL
                                 Richard Cline, Mayor
                        Kirsten Keith, Mayor Pro Tem
                                    Catherine Carlton
                                           Ray Mueller
                                        Peter I. Ohtaki
                  PLANNING COMMISSION
                               Katherine Strehl, Chair
                            Drew Combs, Vice Chair*
                                       Andrew Barnes
                                     Susan Goodhue*
                                            Larry Kahle
                                          John Onken*
                                           Henry Riggs
  FORMER PLANNING COMMISSION MEMBERS
                                      Vincent Bressler
                          John Kadvany, Katie Ferrick
                                              Ben Eiref
GENERAL PLAN ADVISORY COMMITTEE (GPAC)
                                            Harry Bims
                                    David Bohannon II
                                        James Cebrian
                                       Kristin Duriseti
                                            Adina Levin
                                           Roger Royse
                                          Michele Tate
                                   Matthew Zumstein
                                             Heidi Butz
                                         Cindy Welton
                                           Ray Mueller
                                        Peter I. Ohtaki
                                      Katherine Strehl
                                      Vincent Bressler
                        CITY COMMISSIONS
                                  Bicycle Commission
                  Environmental Quality Commission
                                Housing Commission
                                  Library Commission
                   Parks and Recreation Commission
                         Transportation Commission
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS                                       (Continued)
                                                  KEY CITY STAFF
                                     Alex D. McIntyre, City Manager
                                Chip Taylor, Assistant City Manager
                                            Bill McClure, City Attorney
                            Leigh F. Prince, Assistant City Attorney
             Arlinda Heineck, Community Development Director
    Ron J. LaFrance, Assistant Community Development Director
                              Justin Murphy, Public Works Director
                                    Deanna Chow, Principal Planner
                           Nikki Nagaya, Transportation Manager
      Jim Cogan, Housing and Economic Development Manager
                         Heather Abrams, Sustainability Manager
                                 Azalea Mitch, Senior Civil Engineer
                                         Ori Paz, Planning Technician
                Vanh Malathong, Technical Services Coordinator
                                          CONSULTANT TEAM
                                                               PlaceWorks
                                                   BAE Economics, Inc.
                           Nelson\Nygaard Consulting Associates
                                  TJKM Transportation Consultants
                     Peninsula Resolution Conflict Center (PCRC)
                                                       Alejandro Vilchez
                    * Recused from voting on approval due to conflict of interest.
INTRODUCTION
    ADOPTED NOVEMBER 29, 2016

GENERAL PLAN
INTRODUCTION
WHAT IS A GENERAL PLAN?
A general plan is a road map for the city’s future. It embodies a
community’s proud heritage as well as its aspirations for the future. It
recognizes change over time and the opportunities and challenges that
can come with change. It includes specific and actionable programs to
make the most of those opportunities and address challenges.
Preparation of a general plan is an inclusive activity, based on extensive
public participation that highlights community hopes and concerns, but     “I wish Menlo Park had a 21st-
also provides a framework for coalescing often-competing objectives        Century vision for its industrial
into a common vision for the future. By focusing attention on both near-   employment center.”
and longer-term solutions, the general plan helps people see the
community as a complex system that continually changes in response to      Community Workshop
opportunities and challenges, and therefore it helps forge agreement on    Participant,
a course for action.                                                       September 2014
At its core, a General Plan embraces and carry’s out through its goals,
policies and programs, the community’s vision for the future physical
development of the city.
WHAT THE STATE REQUIRES
Sometimes described as a city’s “Constitution,” general plans are
required by California law to guide land use and development over an
extended period of time. Each general plan in California is required to
address specific provisions for seven mandated “elements” listed in
Government Code Section 65302 — land use, circulation, housing,
conservation, open space, noise, and safety.
                                                                                                             I-1

C I T Y  O F  M E N L O P A R K G E N E R A L P L A N
I N T R O D U C T I O N
                                                   Each element must include goals, policies, and programs that explain
                                                   how the City will address local issues relating to preservation, growth,
                                                   change, and environmental quality. A goal expresses a desired outcome
                                                   or end-state; a policy sets a direction for the City to follow in order to
                                                   meet one or more goals; and a program is an action carried out pursuant
                                                   to a policy to achieve a specific goal.
                                                   Beyond the goals, policies and programs, each element embraces a
                                                   specific function. At its core, the Land Use Element outlines land uses
                                                   and standards for physical development through “land use designations”
                                                   applied throughout the city. The Circulation Element establishes a
                                                   complete street classification system including a full range of different
                                                   travel modes. The Housing Element includes quantified housing
                                                   production objectives and explanations of how those may be achieved,
                                                   and the Open Space/Conservation, Noise, and Safety Elements contain
                                                   programs to ensure the protection of persons and property from a
                                                   variety of environmental risks.
                                                   WHY HAVE A GENERAL PLAN?
                                                   In addition to being required by state law, the central purpose of the
  “Enabling the M-2 Area to                        Menlo Park General Plan is to maintain the community's special
  flourish into a more diverse area                character that includes a range of residential, business, and employment
  would make it a better place to                  opportunities, and to accommodate change that will help maintain a vital
  live and one that’s more self-                   community. All of the General Plan elements in combination seek to
  sustaining.”                                     create a vibrant city, with neighborhoods, shopping, entertainment, and
                                                   employment destinations that together comprise a sustainable, healthy
  Land Use Survey Response,                        environment for all community members both now and in the future.
  January 2015
                                                   Many issues addressed in the Menlo Park General Plan center on the
                                                   connection between land use and transportation, as exemplified by the
                                                   impacts of regional commuting, which at peak-travel times can account
                                                   for most traffic in the city. Issues related to the potential effects of
                                                   climate change also influence planning in Menlo Park, especially along its
                                                   border with San Francisco Bay, where expected sea level rise and coastal
                                                   flooding require innovative means to protect property and occupants.
                                                   In addition, the General Plan reflects ever-increasing awareness of the
                                                   importance of energy and water conservation, as well as the need to
                                                   reduce greenhouse gas emissions to meet City and statewide goals.
I-2

                                                                        C I T Y O F  M E N L O P A R K  G E N E R A L  P L A N
                                                                                                       I N T R O D U C T I O N
Efforts to increase community resiliency and to adapt sustainably to
environmental change touch all General Plan elements.
The General Plan is used by the City Council and Planning Commission to
evaluate land use changes and to make funding and budget decisions. It
is used by City staff to regulate building and development and to make
recommendations on projects. It is used by the community to
understand the City’s long-range plans and proposals for different
geographic areas. The Plan provides the basis for the City’s development
regulations and the foundation for its Capital Improvement Programs.
HOW MENLO PARK CAME TO BE
                                                                                  “I love Menlo Park’s community
It is important to think about the history of Menlo Park as we plan for its       – I see people I know around
future. The city developed over time due to a number of critical factors.         town – and convenience: I can
These factors have shaped the city into what it is today and influence the        live and work here.”
vision for its future.
                                                                                  Community Workshop
The arrival of the railroad in 1863 and its connection to San Jose in 1864        Participant,
dramatically cut the time it took to travel the Peninsula and cemented            September 2014
Menlo Park’s role as an easily accessible rural getaway from San
Francisco. Ten years later, Menlo Park incorporated in 1874. The opening
of Stanford University in 1891 changed the course of history for Menlo
Park and the San Francisco Peninsula. The growth of the University itself
and the research and business it generated would become integral to the
economy and character of Menlo Park. Perhaps just as transformative
was the opening of Camp Fremont, a training ground for US Soldiers to
be sent off to World War I, which temporarily increased Menlo Park’s
population, previously less than 2,000 people, by as much as 40,000
according to some estimates. After the end of World War I, Camp
Fremont closed and later became the Veterans Medical Center. The
closure of the camp returned the town to more incremental growth, but
left behind a number of new businesses and city improvements.
The modern era brought considerable change and growth to Menlo Park,
taking it from a small town to a major player in an increasingly urbanized
region. Menlo Park’s population marched steadily upward, increasing
from 2,414 in 1930 to 26,826 in 1970. In 1923, the citizens of Atherton
voted to effectively secede from Menlo Park, formally incorporating as
Atherton. Efforts to bring Atherton into a broader reincorporation of
                                                                                                                            I-3

C I T Y  O F  M E N L O   P A R K G E N E R A L P L A N
I N T R O D U C T I O N
                                                     Menlo Park were unsuccessful, and in 1927, Menlo Park voted to
                                                     incorporate as a municipality independent of Atherton. 1,2
                                                     THE MODERN ERA
                                                     The 1920s and 1930s saw the expansion of both Menlo Park’s
                                                     transportation infrastructure and its residential neighborhoods. In 1927,
                                                     the same year as Menlo Park’s official incorporation, the original
                                                     Dumbarton Bridge opened, creating a new link between the East Bay and
                                                     the Peninsula. Between 1929 and 1931, the Bayshore Highway (now US
                                                     101) was constructed and expanded to Menlo Park. Even then, the new
                                                     bridges and freeways were subject to traffic and agitated drivers,
                                                     especially when roads leading to the bridge proved inadequate and
                                                     football games brought traffic to a standstill. Other roadways underwent
                                                     similar expansions. In the late 1930s, El Camino Real was paved and
                                                     widened from two lanes to four. This change meant the closure,
                                                     demolition, or relocation of many Menlo Park businesses and structures.
El Camino Real in the late 1960s
                                                     This time period also saw the beginnings of the Belle Haven
                                                     neighborhood, with two-bedroom homes in the new development
                                                     selling for as low as $2,950 ($50,000 in 2014 dollars). 3 Belle Haven was
                                                     the only major housing development undertaken locally during the worst
                                                     of the Great Depression, and it was not fully built out until the 1950s. 4
                                                     The mid-twentieth century witnessed Menlo Park becoming a major
                                                     regional and global leader in technology and the broader economy. In
                                                     1946, the Stanford Research Institute was established, making Menlo
                                                     Park a center of research and innovation. Although the Stanford
                                                     Research Institute separated from Stanford University and changed its
                                                     name to SRI International in 1970, this institution is still headquartered in
                                                     Menlo Park and has contributed innovations ranging from the computer
Menlo Park in the 1960s
                                                            1  Svanevik, Michael and Shirley Burgett, 2000. Menlo Park California Beyond the
                                                     Gate, San Francisco: Custom & Limited Editions.
                                                            2 US Department of Commerce Economics and Statistics Administration Bureau of
                                                     the Census, 1990. CPH-2-1 1990 Census of Population and Housing Population and
                                                     Housing Unit Counts United States.
                                                            3 Bureau of Labor Statistics CPI Inflation Calculator. http://www.bls.gov/
                                                     data/inflation_calculator.htm, accessed October 13, 2014.
                                                            4 Svanevik, Michael and Shirley Burgett, 2000. Menlo Park California Beyond the
                                                     Gate, San Francisco: Custom & Limited Editions.
I-4

                                                                                    C I T Y  O F   M E N L O  P A R K    G E N E R A L  P L A N
                                                                                                                        I N T R O D U C T I O N
mouse to the 9-1-1 emergency call system. The 1950s brought increased
industrial development to Menlo Park near the San Francisco Bay. Job
opportunities in what is now the M-2 Area led to an increasingly diverse
population in Menlo Park, especially in the areas between US 101 and
the Bay. By 2000, the Belle Haven housing stock that had been valued at
$6,000 in the 1930s was now valued as high as $375,000. 5
THE INFLUENCE OF SILICON VALLEY
                                                                                            Office construction in the 1980s
The expansion of the Silicon Valley economy in the 1980s and 1990s
made Menlo Park and the entire San Francisco Peninsula increasingly
popular and an expensive place to live. The “Dot-Com Boom” in the late
1990s drove up demand for housing in Menlo Park and similar areas with
good schools, convenient access to job centers, and high quality of life.
Although the recessions that began in 2001 and more recently in 2008
slowed or even temporarily reversed regional job growth, Menlo Park
has remained a highly desired community. The latest and ongoing
economic expansion has brought new growth and real estate demand to
Menlo Park. The bayside campus that once hosted Sun Microsystems is
now the international headquarters of Facebook, one the world’s leading
tech firms, which continues to grow and build additional office facilities.
                                                                                            Development of tech firm offices continue today
EVOLUTION OF MENLO PARK’S PLANNING
Menlo Park first issued a citywide “Master Plan” in 1952, which was
updated as a General Plan in 1966 after a two-year process involving a
citizen committee of more than 100 members. A subsequent effort
began in 1972 when the City Council and members from City
commissions, boards, and advisory committees formed a task force to
examine pressing issues. The “Toward 2000” General Plan adopted in
1974 included an Open Space and Conservation Element for the first
time. New State mandates led to updates of the Safety (1976) and Noise
(1978) Elements. Review in 1984 by an ad hoc committee of Planning
       5
         Svanevik, Michael and Shirley Burgett, 2000. Menlo Park California Beyond the
Gate, San Francisco: Custom & Limited Editions.
                                                                                                                                             I-5

C I T Y  O F  M E N L O P A R K G E N E R A L P L A N
I N T R O D U C T I O N
                                                   Commission and City Council members concluded that while most of the
                                                   General Plan remained valid, the Land Use, Circulation, and Housing
                                                   Elements required updating. A series of community forums in 1984 led
                                                   to updates of those elements by 1986, and a subsequent update of the
                                                   Housing Element in 1992.
                                                   In 1988 the City initiated another General Plan update largely to
                                                   incorporate new standards for development that could be used to
                                                   conduct traffic analyses. This was a six year undertaking with updated
                                                   Land Use and Circulation Elements adopted in 1994. The Open
                                                   Space/Conservation, Noise, and Safety, Elements were consolidated and
                                                   updated in 2013. Updating of the Housing Element follows a separate
                                                   State-mandated cycle, and an update was adopted in 2014 for the 2015–
                                                   2023 planning period.
                                                   A variety of additional plans and studies have supplemented the General
                                                   Plan since the 1994 update, including:
                                                        Center City Design Plan (1996–1998)
                                                        Willow Road Land Use Plan (1997)
                                                        Smart Growth Initiative (1999)
                                                        Land Use and Circulation Study (2000)
                                                        Comprehensive Bicycle Development Plan (2004)
                                                        Commercial Streamlining and Zoning (2004–2006)
                                                        Imagine a Downtown (2005)
                                                        El Camino Real and Downtown Vision Plan (2008)
                                                        City Sidewalk Master Plan (2008)
 El Camino Real and Downtown Specific Plan              El Camino Real/Downtown Specific Plan (2012)
                                                        Belle Haven Vision Plan (2013)
                                                   In addition, the City first adopted a Climate Action Plan (CAP) in 2009
                                                   designed to help reduce local greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions. In 2011
                                                   the City Council adopted a GHG reduction target of 27 percent below
                                                   2005 levels by 2020. The CAP strategies, updated periodically (including
                                                   in 2015), focus on areas such as energy use, transportation, solid waste,
                                                   and recycling to help meet emission reduction goals.
                                                   In Menlo Park, the Land Use and Circulation Elements are part of this
                                                   document while the Housing and a combined Open Space/Conservation,
                                                   Noise and Safety Elements are maintained as stand-alone documents.
I-6

                                                                        C I T Y O F  M E N L O   P A R K   G E N E R A L  P L A N
                                                                                                          I N T R O D U C T I O N
CONNECTMENLO
The 2014-2016 update of the Land Use and Circulation Elements,
identified as ConnectMenlo, was initiated with a broad and
comprehensive public outreach program, and guided by a General Plan
Advisory Committee comprised of Council members, representatives of
various City Commissions, and community members.
FOCUS AREAS
The City Council identified the area generally between US 101 and the
Bay adjoining the Belle Haven Neighborhood, where the transition from           Transitioning industrial area
traditional industrial uses was well underway, as the primary location for       “Mas escuelas; mas parques
potential change in the city over the coming decades. This is an area with       ninos puedan jugar areas
a unique opportunity to foster a sustainable environment that balances           cerradas; menos
growth, creates a sense of place, enhances the quality of life, and              contaminacion; menos trafico.”
minimizes impacts
                                                                                 “More schools; more parks
COMMUNITY ENGAGEMENT                                                             where children can play in
                                                                                 closed areas; less pollution; less
A combination of in-person and survey-based public engagement and                traffic.”
community workshops led to a community vision in the form of Guiding
Principles (see following section) for maintaining and enhancing the             Land Use Survey Response,
quality of life in Menlo Park in the face of unprecedented growth and            January 2015
desirability of the city as a place to live and do business. Through
ConnectMenlo, it became clear that area property owners, major
companies, their employees, and nearby residents shared a strong vision
for creating “live/work/play” environments with a comfortable and
attractive mixture of employment, housing, and retail and service uses.
COMMUNITY BENEFITS                                                               “I wish Menlo Park had more
                                                                                 restaurants, cafes, and retail in
As embodied in the Guiding Principles, the Menlo Park community also             Belle Haven, as well as a full
concluded that any new significant development should be required to             service grocery store and better
provide tangible community amenities as part of the right to proceed. Of         elementary schools.”
course, these live/work/play environments must also be carefully
planned to complement and not detract from the highly-valued                     Community Workshop
residential character of Menlo Park’s many and diverse neighborhoods,            Participant,
nor the well-established live/work/play environment in the downtown.             September 2014
                                                                                                                               I-7

C I T Y  O F  M E N L O P A R K G E N E R A L P L A N
I N T R O D U C T I O N
                                                   Consistent with this preferred approach, as new development occurs,
                                                   the City may grant added development potential in exchange for
                                                   community benefits provided by individual projects and acquired
“Set clear requirements for                        through implementation of General Plan programs by way of the Zoning
public benefits and fees up front                  Ordinance. These amenities will support key resources of the
rather than requiring a long,                      community, including jobs, housing, schools, libraries, neighborhood
drawn-out negotiation with                         retail, childcare, public open space, telecommunications access, and
developers.”                                       transportation choices. Zoning provisions include specific formulas and
                                                   processes for providing amenities.
Land Use Survey Response,
January 2015
I-8

                                                                       C I T Y O F M E N L O P A R K  G E N E R A L  P L A N
                                                                                                     I N T R O D U C T I O N
GUIDING PRINCIPLES
Guiding Principles were established by the Menlo Park community. These
principles emanated from numerous community meetings and
workshops, the recommendations of the General Plan Advisory
Committee, review by the Planning Commission, and acceptance by the
City Council. Each policy statement in the Land Use and Circulation
Element supports at least one, and often many, of the Guiding Principles.
The goals, policies, and programs in the Housing Element and Open
Space/Conservation, Noise and Safety Elements were carefully analyzed
to ensure consistency between them and the Guiding Principles. The
goals, policies, and programs promote the values established in the
Guiding Principles.
The Guiding Principles describe the kind of place that community
members want Menlo Park to be. City representatives and community
members developed them collaboratively to guide growth and preserve
the city's unique features. Future change in Menlo Park will involve a
careful balance of benefits and impacts, as charted in the General Plan
goals, policies, and programs. While growth is planned to occur generally
between US 101 and the Bay, the nine inspirational Principles have
community-wide application, including protecting the character of
residential neighborhoods and expanding transportation options.
The Guiding Principles embody the notion that sustainability involves a
balanced array of land use including strong residential neighborhoods
and a diversified business base that can survive economic cycles, as well
as equity in the provision of education, and public services for all
community members.
The City’s nine Guiding Principles are as follows.
                                                                                                                          I-9

C I T Y  O F  M E N L O  P A R K  G E N E R A L P L A N
I N T R O D U C T I O N
                                           Menlo Park neighborhoods are protected from
                                           unreasonable development and unreasonable cut-through
                                           traffic, share the benefits and impacts of local growth, and
                       Citywide            enjoy equal access to quality services, education, public
                            Equity         open space, housing that complements local job
                                           opportunities with affordability that limits displacement of
                                           current residents, and convenient daily shopping such as
                                           grocery stores and pharmacies.
                                           Everyone in Menlo Park enjoys healthy living spaces, high
                                           quality of life, and can safely walk or bike to fresh food,
                                           medical services, employment, recreational facilities, and
                                           other daily destinations; land owners and occupants take
                        Healthy            pride in the appearance of property; Menlo Park achieves
                Community                  code compliance and prioritizes improvements that
                                           promote safety and healthy living; and the entire city is
                                           well-served by emergency services and community
                                           policing.
               Competitive                 Menlo Park embraces emerging technologies, local
                                 and       intelligence, and entrepreneurship, and welcomes
                                           reasonable development without excessive traffic
                    Innovative             congestion that will grow and attract successful companies
                        Business           and innovators that generate local economic activity and
                  Destination              tax revenue for the entire community.
                                           In exchange for added development potential,
                                           construction projects provide physical benefits in the
                    Corporate              adjacent neighborhood (such as Belle Haven for growth
               Contribution                north of US 101), including jobs, housing, schools, libraries,
                                           neighborhood retail, childcare, public open space, high
                                           speed internet access, and transportation choices.
I-10
                                                          C I T Y O F  M E N L O P A R K  G E N E R A L  P L A N
                                                                                         I N T R O D U C T I O N
Menlo Park children and young adults have equal access                Youth Support
to excellent childcare, education, meaningful employment
opportunities, and useful training, including internship              and Education
opportunities at local companies.                                     Excellence
Menlo Park provides thoroughly-connected, safe and
convenient transportation, adequate emergency vehicle                 Great
access, and multiple options for people traveling by foot,            Transportation
bicycle, shuttle, bus, car, and train, including daily service
along the Dumbarton Rail Corridor.                                    Options
Menlo Park neighborhoods are complete communities,                    Complete
featuring well integrated and designed development along
vibrant commercial corridors with a live-work-play mix of
                                                                      Neighborhoods
community-focused businesses that conveniently serve                  and
adjacent neighborhoods while respecting their residential             Commercial
character.
                                                                      Corridors
Menlo Park provides safe and convenient access to an
ample amount of local and regional parks and a range of               Accessible
public open space types, recreational facilities, trails, and         Open Space
enhancements to wetlands and the Bay.                                 and Recreation
Menlo Park is a leader in efforts to address climate change,
                                                                      Sustainable
adapt to sea-level rise, protect natural and built resources,
conserve energy, manage water, utilize renewable energy,              Environmental
and promote green building.                                           Planning
                                                                                                            I-11
C I T Y  O F  M E N L O P A R K G E N E R A L P L A N
I N T R O D U C T I O N
                                                   This page intentionally left blank
I-12
CIRCULATION
               ELEMENT
  ADOPTED NOVEMBER 29, 2016

CIRCULATION
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Overview........................................................................................ 1
Safety for All................................................................................... 1
  Vision Zero ................................................................................................ 2
  Emergency Services .............................................................................. 3
Street Network............................................................................... 3
  Complete Streets ................................................................................... 3
  Street Classifications .............................................................................. 5
Mobility Options ............................................................................ 9
  Sustainable Transportation ................................................................... 9
  Health and Wellness .............................................................................. 9
  Transit ...................................................................................................... 10
  Transportation Demand Management ........................................... 13
  Parking .................................................................................................... 14
Goals, Policies, and Programs .................................................. 15
  Safe Transportation System ................................................................ 15
  Complete Streets ................................................................................. 17
  Sustainable Transportation ................................................................. 22
  Health and Wellness ............................................................................ 23
  Transit ...................................................................................................... 24
  Transportation Demand Management ........................................... 25
  Parking .................................................................................................... 27
                                                                                                                    CIRC-i
C I T Y  O F  M E N L O   P A R K  G E N E R A L P L A N
C I R C U L A T I O N E L E M E N T
                                                      F IGURES
                                                      Figure 1 Emergency Routes ................................................................. 4
                                                      Figure 2 Street Classifications .............................................................. 6
                                                      Figure 3 Bicycle Facilities – Existing and Proposed ............................ 11
                                                      Figure 4 Transit Infrastructure – Existing and Proposed.................... 12
                                                      T ABLES
                                                      Table 1  Description of Street Classifications ...................................... 7
CIRC-ii

CIRCULATION
OVERVIEW
The Circulation Element describes distinct issues and opportunities the      The Menlo Park Circulation
Menlo Park community is likely to face during the 2040 horizon of the        Element meets State
General Plan, as well as key strategies for addressing them. The focus of    requirements, containing “the
the goals, policies, and programs in this Element will create the most       general location and extent of
functional circulation system possible for the full range of users and       existing and proposed major
travel modes.                                                                thoroughfares, transportation
                                                                             routes, terminals, any military
Menlo Park has a high-quality transportation system connecting well          airports and ports, and other
internally and to the region, but can be overmatched at times by the         local public utilities and
volume of vehicle traffic, most commonly due to regional commute             facilities, all correlated with the
traffic at peak travel times. Shifting some of that volume into other travel land use element of the plan”
modes, such as walking, biking, transit, and high-occupancy vehicles, can    per Government Code Section
reduce vehicle travel demand and help establish more vibrant,                65302(b). Further, it satisfies
sustainable, comfortable, safe, and economically productive streets.         additional “complete streets”
                                                                             requirements (effective 2011), of
The community’s mobility vision includes an important focus on walking,
                                                                             “planning for a balanced, multi-
bicycling, and public transit in an effort to provide residents and
                                                                             modal transportation network
employees transportation options and reduce the dependency on
                                                                             that meets the needs of all users
private automobiles. These travel modes improve street safety, reduce
                                                                             of streets, roads, and highways
greenhouse gas emissions, and improve Menlo Park’s overall health and
                                                                             for safe and convenient travel in
livability. By making corridors and neighborhoods more pleasant and
                                                                             a manner that is suitable to the
attractive places, improving access for all modes of travel can
                                                                             rural, suburban, or urban context
significantly support environmental and economic sustainability.
                                                                             of the general plan.”
SAFETY FOR ALL
Menlo Park has a diverse circulation system used for local and regional
travel. It consists of a network of roadways, transit routes, bicycle
facilities, sidewalks, and pathways for bicycle and pedestrian use. The top
transportation-related priority for the community is safety. The
geography of the city inherently creates potential safety issues, as the
                                                                                                            CIRC-1

C I T Y  O F   M E N L O   P A R K  G E N E R A L P L A N
C I R C U L A T I O N  E L E M E N T
                                                       relatively narrow band that comprises Menlo Park traverses a major
                                                       freeway and two rail arteries, and depends on several thoroughfares to
                                                       serve school, commercial, neighborhood, crosstown, and regional traffic.
                                                       The City has installed a range of features promoting safety for
                                                       pedestrians and bicyclists, from vehicle turn barriers to rail crossing
                                                       gates, crosswalk lighting and pedestrian visibility flags, a bicycle/
                                                       pedestrian freeway overpass, bicycle and pedestrian paths, and on-street
                                                       bicycle lanes. The City also has installed speed tables, traffic circles,
                                                       medians, landscaping, and other streetscape features to not only
Pedestrian and bicycle Highway 101 overpass
                                                       promote pedestrian and bicycle safety but also encourage slower driving
                                                       to reduce collisions.
                                                       VISION ZERO
                                                       Still, transportation safety can always be improved. “Vision Zero” is the
                                                       simple notion that any loss of life on city streets is unacceptable.
                                                       Humans, by nature make mistakes, and Vision Zero includes design
                                                       practices to keep road networks safe and protect all users of the street
                                                       and adjacent spaces. Menlo Park has established a Vision Zero goal
                                                       incorporating four key efforts: (1) project prioritization through Capital
                                                       Improvement Plan projects, (2) engineering, (3) education, and (4)
                                                       enforcement to create safer streets by slowing vehicle traffic and
                                                       reducing the impacts associated with vehicle travel.
                                                       Project prioritization through the City’s Capital Improvement Plan
                                                       promotes review of projects to ensure that the needs of non-motorized
                                                       travelers are met in all stages of the design and implementation process.
                                                       This effort also aims to upgrade existing infrastructure before incurring
                                                       the costs associated with building new infrastructure. By using data
                                                       driven findings, engineering efforts can more easily focus on critical
                                                       safety components.
                                                       Education and enforcement addresses human behavior on roadways.
                                                       The City of Menlo Park promotes education efforts introducing safety
Bicyclist navigating traffic                           programs for adults and youth to educate road users on their
                                                       responsibilities. Enforcement encourages safety and reduces unsafe
                                                       behavior among pedestrians, bicyclists, and drivers.
CIRC-2

                                                                          C I T Y  O F  M E N L O   P A R K  G E N E R A L   P L A N
                                                                                                C I R C U L A T I O N  E L E M E N T
EMERGENCY SERVICES
Emergency response coordination is also part of planning for a safe
transportation system. The Emergency Routes map in Figure 1 shows
routes identified by the Menlo Park Fire Protection District. These routes
are used in response to emergency medical calls, vehicle collisions,
hazardous material incidents, and fire incidents.
STREET NETWORK
As measured in land coverage and usage, the primary component of the
Menlo Park circulation system is the city street network. Streets consist
of more than just the pavement over which cars travel. Streets and the
spaces adjacent to them can be environments for all kinds of activity,
from fairs and block parties, to dog walking, ad hoc sidewalk
conversations with neighbors, and even comfortable places to enjoy a
meal. The significance of streets in determining the quality of
neighborhoods and commercial areas depends on them being
“complete,” by providing safe, convenient, and attractive transportation
options for all users and all travel modes.
COMPLETE STREETS
First adopted in 2013, the complete streets policy of the City of Menlo
Park expresses the City’s commitment to create and maintain streets
that are routinely planned, designed, operated, and maintained with
consideration of the needs and safety of all travelers along and across
the entire public right of way. This includes people of all ages and
abilities who are walking, bicycling, using transit, traveling with mobility
aids, driving vehicles, and transporting commercial freight.
Complete streets establish comprehensive, integrated transportation               “Develop a cycling network of
networks and allow users to move easily around the City using multiple            connected infrastructure to
modes of transportation. Successful design of complete streets involves           make bicycling a safe and
“livable street” design practices to preserve and enhance the aesthetics          viable option to help mitigate
of the city. Carefully crafted design components can also support equity          traffic congestion.”
within Menlo Park by identifying low-income and transit-dependent
areas and establishing attractive pedestrian and bicycle facilities to,           Land Use Survey Response,
from, and within these neighborhoods.                                             January 2015
                                                                                                                           CIRC-3

    REDWOOD                                                                                                                HAVE
      CITY                                                                                                                        N AV
                                                                                                                                      E
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     UN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      IVER
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              VE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       SITY A
                                                                                                                                      RD
                                                                                                                            MA
                                                                                                                              RS H
                                                                                                                                                    CHILC O ST                                    ß
                                                                                                                                                                                                  Þ
                                                                                                                                                                                   FIRE STATION #77
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        a" BELLE HAVEN
                                              NORTH FAIR OAKS                                                                                                BA Y                                                                          NEIGHBORHOOD
                                               (Unincorporated)
                                                                                                        Þ FIRE STATION #5
                                                                                                        ß                                                              RD                         NE
                                                                                                                                                                                                     W   B RI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                DG
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      IVY DR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ES
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          T
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           SERVICE CENTER
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           AND SUBSTATION
                                                                                                                             MI
                                                                                                                                                                                     E
                                                                                                                                                                                    AV
                                                                                                                                                                                   OD                                                                ß
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Þ
                                                                                                                                DD
                                                                                                                                       LEF
                                                                                                                                             IEL
                                                                                                                                                   DR
                                                                                                                                                                              GW
                                                                                                                                                                                 O      CO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         FIRE STATION #2     EAST PA
                  FIRE STATION #3
                                                       ß
                                                       Þ                                      EL
                                                                                                                                                        D                    RIN
                                                                                                                                                                                           LEMA
                                                                                                                                                                                               NA
                                                                                                                                                                                                 VE
                                                                                                   CA                                                                                                 RD
                                                                                                     MI
                                                                                                       NO
                                                                                                                RE                                   MENLO PARK                                  WIL
                                                                                                                   A   L                                                                            L OW
                 ATHERTON                                                                                                              !
                                                                                                                                       (
                                                                                                                                       Ã
                                                                                                                                                    POLICE STATION
                                                                                                                                                                                    ß
                                                                                                                                                                                    Þ                                         ND
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   AV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   E
                                                                                      FIRE STATION #6                      ß
                                                                                                                           Þ                                a"   LA
                                                                                                                                                                      UR
                                                                                                                                                                         E
                                                                                                                                                                              FIRE STATION #1
                                                                                                                                                                             LS
                                                                                                                                                                               T
                                                                                                                                                                                                           WO O
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     DL A
                                                                                                                            UN
                                                           erton C han ne
                                                                                                                                 IV
                                                                                              AV                                      ER
                                                                                                                                           S IT
                                                       Ath
                                                                                                 E                                             YD
                                                                                        RA                                                          R
                                                                         l
                                                                                          IS O                    AV
                                                                                                                     E
                                                                                    VA                          UZ
                                                                                       LP A
                                                                                                            CR
                                                                                                        TA                        EA
                                                                                                                                    VE
              AL
                 A
                                                                                                    SA
                                                                                                       N
                                                                                                                            MI
                                                                                                                              DL
                                                                                                                               D
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        PALO ALTO
                     ME
                          DA                                                                              OL
                               DE                                                                           IV
                                                                                                                 ES
                                  L   AS                                                                               T
                                           PU
                                             LG
                                                  AS
                                                   ß
                                                   Þ
                        FIRE STATION #4
                                                          E RO S
                                                       NT        A
                                                  MO                         DR
                                                                                                     ALPI N E
                                                              S HA
                                                                         R O N P AR K D R
                                                                        S AN D
                                                                               HIL L
                                                                                      RD                                                                     STANFORD                                                          Planning Area
                                                                                                                                                               LANDS
                                                                                                        RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Sphere of Influence
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               City Limits
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               MPFFD Boundary
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Emergency Response Routes
            Sa
            n    Fr
                   a n cis
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Þ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ß         Fire Station
                               q uit o C
                                            re e k
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     a"        Police Facility
0    0.25   0.5 Miles
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Ã         Caltrain Station
                                                                                                                                                                                            FIGURE 1: EMERGENCY ROUTES

                                                                          C I T Y  O F   M E N L O    P A R K  G E N E R A L   P L A N
                                                                                                 C I R C U L A T I O N   E L E M E N T
In addition to completing the streets, Menlo Park has the opportunity to
incorporate “green street” designs when retrofitting and designing
streets. Green streets contain environmental features like trees, rain
gardens, and infiltration planters to slow the course of runoff and filter it
naturally before it reaches major waterways and sensitive plant and
animal life.
STREET CLASSIFICATIONS
Another key component of providing complete streets is establishing and
promoting the suitability of streets for various travel modes and adjacent
land uses. The Street Classifications map in Figure 2 and Table 1 depict
and explain how the classifications are applied to the Menlo Park
roadway network and define objectives to be met when the City
resurfaces or redesigns a specific street.
The list of objectives in the Street Classifications Table 1 is one means of
ensuring the City fulfills its complete streets mission. Prior to the
adoption of this multi-modal approach, Menlo Park, like most cities,
relied on classifications required by the Federal Highway Administration
(FHWA) for projects seeking federal funding. This system is primarily
automobile focused and does not take into consideration local context,
land use, or built form. The Street Classifications table retains a
correlation to the FHWA classification to ensure that Menlo Park remains
eligible for federal transportation funds.
Some uses are independent of a street's normal form and function, such
as routes for emergency vehicles, streets adjacent to major transit
stations or school zones, and bicycle priority streets. These uses do not
necessarily dictate the specific design of a street, but instead encourage
design flexibility to better serve the specific purposes. For example, local
access streets that can best serve bicycles should be clearly identified so
that roadway and intersection features that would discourage bicyclists
are not emphasized in their design. Similarly, emergency routes may
require width and design exceptions to accommodate movements of
emergency vehicles; for example, where a roundabout is appropriate for
                                                                                  Appropriate classifications lead to context-
a particular intersection, its edges may need to be rounded so that large         sensitive street infrastructure for existing and
fire trucks can roll over rather than have to swerve around them.                 new neighborhoods
                                                                                                                             CIRC-5

                                                                                                             HAVEN
                                                                                                                                     CON
                                                                                                                                              STIT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             UNIV
                                                                                                                                                     UTIO
                                                                                                                                                             N
                                                                                                                       H                           JEF F
                                                                                                                    RS                                   E RS                                                                                 E RS
                                                                                                                  A                                           ON
                                                                                                               M                                                                                                                                IT Y
                                                                                                                                                                         CHILCO
                                                                                                                                                                                                       HAMI LTON                 HAMILTO
                                                                                                                                                                                           N                                            N
                                                                                                                                                                                     TO
                                                                                                                                                                                  MIL
                                                                                                                                                                                HA         CHIL              WIL                     O'BRIEN
                                                                                                                                                                                               CO               LOW
                                                                                                                                                         BA                          NEW
                                                                                                                                                           Y                                   BRID
                                                                                                                                                                                                      GE
                                                                                                                                                                                                      BAY
                                                                                                                                                              D
                                                                                                                                                          OO                                               DURH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                AM
                                                                                                                                                         GW
                                                                                              AL                                                                                CO
                                                                                                                                                        RIN                          LEM                             O
                                                                                            CIN                                                                                         AN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ME NA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         O'CON
                                                                                    EN                                                                             SEMINARY                                 ELM                  NOR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        LT
                                                                                                                           E                                                                    GILBE
                                                                                                                          OV                                                                          RT
                                                                                                                      GR
                                                                                                                                                              MI                     LOW               PO
                                                                                                                  OA                                            DD
                                                                                                                     K                                             LEF                                     PE                D
                                                                                                                                                                       IEL       WIL                               LAN
                                                                                                             !
                                                                                                             (
                                                                                                             Ã                       LA
                                                                                                                                       UR
                                                                                                                                              EL
                                                                                                                                                                            D
                                                                                                                                                                                                           WO
                                                                                                                                                                                                              OD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         San Francisq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        u it
                                                                                                                                 AL
                                                                                                       E
                                                                                                     OV                                                                                                                                                                        oC
                                                                                                                                     M                                   W                                                                                                       ree
                                                                                                                                          A                          ILLO                                                                                                            k
                                                                                                   GR
                                                                                                K                          EL                                      W
                                                                                              OA        CR
                                                                                                          AN                    CA
                                                                                                              E                   M
                                                                                                     UN                               IN
                                                                                                UZ
                                                                                                         IV                               O
                                                                                             CR              ER                               RE
                                                                SA                                                SIT                              AL
                                                                     N
                                                                         M
                                                                                        NTA                           Y                                                                                                             Street Classifications
                                                                             AT SA
                                                  SO                            E   O                                     GE
                                                                                            WA                DD
                                                                                                                  LE    LLE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Freeway/Expressway
                                                                                               L
                                                 AI                                                                CO
                                                                                                LE
                                           VA                                                      A      MI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Boulevard
                                             LPAR
                                                               UZ                                                                                                                                                                          Thoroughfare
                                                           CR            OL
                                                          NT                    IV
                                                                                        E                                                                                                                                                  Main Street
                                                            A
                                                      SA
                                                          LE
                                                            MO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Avenue - Mixed Use
                                                                N
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Avenue - Neighborhood
                                                                         L
                                                                     EL                     K
                                            AV Y                 KD                 OA
                                                                OA                                                                                                                                                                         Mixed Use Collector
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Mixed Use Collector - future
                                       Y                                 OAK
                                    AV                                                                                                                                                                                                     Neighborhood Collector
                                            SH
                                              AR                                                                                                                                                                                           Neighborhood Connector
                       MONTE RO
                                                     ON
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Bicycle Boulevard
                               SA
                                    SHARON PARK
                                                                     ALPINE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Local Access
                                             IL  L
                                      SAND H                                                                                                                                                                                               Multi-use Pathway
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Multi-use Pathway - future
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Paseo - future
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Ã Caltrain Station
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           City Limits
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Planning Area
0   0.25   0.5 Miles                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Source: City of Menlo Park
                                                                                                                                                                                               FIGURE 2: STREET CLASSIFICATIONS

                                                                                      C I T Y  O F  M E N L O   P A R K   G E N E R A L   P L A N
                                                                                                            C I R C U L A T I O N   E L E M E N T
TABLE 1        DESCRIPTION OF STREET CLASSIFICATIONS
                                                                                                                    FHWA
Classification         Mode Priority               Description and Guidelines                    Examples         Category
                                          Limited access, major regional freeways and
                   Vehicle:
Freeway/                                  expressways that are part of the state and          Bayfront
                   Other modes:                                                                                  Expressway
Expressway                                regional network of highways and subject to         Expressway
                            N/A           state design standards.
                                          Major thoroughfare with higher frequency of
                                          transit service and mixed commercial and
                                          retail frontages.
                                          Provides access and safe crossings for all
                   Bicycle:               travel modes along a regional transportation
                                          corridor. Emphasizes walking and transit and
                   Pedestrian:                                                                                   Primary
Boulevard                                 accommodates regional vehicle trips in order        El Camino Real
                   Transit:                                                                                      Arterial
                                          to discourage such trips on nearby local
                   Vehicle:               roadways, through collaborations with other
                                          cities and agencies. In areas of significant
                                          travel mode conflict, bicycle improvements
                                          may have lower priority if appropriate
                                          parallel corridors exist.
                                          Major thoroughfare, limited mixed
                                          commercial frontages.
                   Bicycle:               Provides access and safe crossings for all
                   Pedestrian:            travel modes along a regional transportation        Marsh Road,        Primary
Thoroughfare
                   Transit:               corridor. Emphasizes regional vehicle trips in      Sand Hill Road     Arterial
                   Vehicle:               order to discourage such trips on nearby
                                          local roadways, through collaborations with
                                          other cities and agencies.
                                          High intensity, pedestrian-oriented retail
                                          street. Provides access to all travel modes in
                   Bicycle:               support of Downtown, includes on-street
                                          parking. Service to pedestrian-oriented retail
                   Pedestrian:                                                                Santa Cruz         Minor
Main Street                               is of prime importance. Vehicle performance
                   Transit:                                                                   Avenue             Arterial
                                          indicators may be lowered to improve the
                   Vehicle:               pedestrian experience. Bicycle priority may
                                          be lower where appropriate parallel bicycle
                                          corridors exist.
                                          Streets with mixed residential and
                                          commercial frontages that serve as a main
                                          route for multiple modes. Distributes trips to
                   Bicycle:               residential and commercial areas. Provides a        Willow Road
Avenue –           Pedestrian:            balanced level of service for vehicles, transit,    (south of Bay),    Minor
Mixed Use          Transit:               bicycles, and pedestrians, wherever possible.       Middlefield        Arterial
                   Vehicle:               Bicycle priority is greater along identified        Road
                                          bicycle corridors. Pedestrian improvements
                                          are comfortable to walk along, and provide
                                          safe crossings at designated locations.
   = High Priority   = Medium Priority  = Low Priority
                                                                                                                                        CIRC-7

  C I T Y O F   M E N L O       P A R K   G E N E R A L   P L A N
                      C I R C U L A T I O N      E L E M E N T
            TABLE 1            DESCRIPTION OF STREET CLASSIFICATIONS (CONTINUED)
                                                                                                                                FHWA
              Classification         Mode Priority                  Description and Guidelines                  Examples      Category
                                                            Streets with residential frontages that serve
                                                            as a main route for multiple modes.
                                                            Distributes trips to residential areas. Provides  Santa Cruz
                                 Bicycle:                   a balanced level of service for vehicles,         Avenue (south
             Avenue –            Pedestrian:                transit, bicycles, and pedestrians, wherever      of University  Minor
             Neighborhood        Transit:                   possible. Bicycle priority is greater along       Drive),        Arterial
                                 Vehicle:                   identified bicycle corridors. Pedestrian          Valparaiso
                                                            improvements are comfortable to walk              Avenue
                                                            along, and provide safe crossings at
                                                            designated locations.
                                 Bicycle:                   Mixed-use street that serves a significant        Chilco St
                                                            destination. Prioritizes walking and bicycling.   (north of rail
             Mixed-Use           Pedestrian:
                                                            Accommodates intra-city trips while also          corridor),     Collector
             Collector           Transit:                   distributing local traffic to other streets and   O’Brien Drive,
                                 Vehicle:                   areas.                                            Haven Avenue
                                                            Primarily residential street that serves a
                                 Bicycle:                   significant destination. Prioritizes walking
                                                                                                              Bay Road,
                                                            and bicycling. Accommodates intra-city trips
             Neighborhood        Pedestrian:                                                                  Laurel Street,
                                                            while also distributing local traffic to other                   Collector
             Collector           Transit:                                                                     Hamilton
                                                            streets and areas. Accommodating vehicle
                                 Vehicle:                                                                     Avenue
                                                            traffic while ensuring a high quality of life for
                                                            residents is a key design challenge.
                                                            Low-medium volume residential through
                                 Bicycle:                   street. Primarily serves residential              Monte Rose
             Neighborhood        Pedestrian:                neighborhoods. Provides high quality              Avenue,
                                                                                                                             Local
             Connector           Transit:                   conditions for walking and bicycling and          Woodland
                                 Vehicle:                   distributes vehicle, pedestrian, and bicycle      Avenue
                                                            trips to and from other streets.
                                 Bicycle:                   Low volume residential street, serving mostly
                                                                                                              San Mateo
                                                            local traffic, connecting key bicycle facilities.
             Bicycle             Pedestrian:                                                                  Drive,
                                                            Provides access primarily to abutting uses.                      Local
             Boulevard           Transit:                   These streets should offer safe and inviting
                                                                                                              Hamilton
                                 Vehicle:                                                                     Avenue
                                                            places to walk and bike.
                                 Bicycle:                   Low volume residential street, serving mostly
                                 Pedestrian:                local traffic. Provides access primarily to       San Mateo
             Local Access                                                                                                    Local
                                 Transit:                   abutting uses. These streets should offer safe    Drive
                                 Vehicle:                   and inviting places to walk and bike.
                                                            Pedestrian and bicycle pathway.
                                 Bicycle:                   Provides priority access to pedestrians and
             Multi-Use           Pedestrian:                bicycles only, per Caltrans pathway minimum
                                                                                                              Bay Trail      N/A
             Pathway             Transit: N/A               standards. Multi-use pathways feature high-
                                 Vehicle: N/A               quality crossings where they traverse major
                                                            roadways.
                 = High Priority   = Medium Priority      = Low Priority
CIRC-8

                                                                           C I T Y O F  M E N L O    P A R K  G E N E R A L   P L A N
                                                                                                 C I R C U L A T I O N  E L E M E N T
MOBILITY OPTIONS
Providing transportation options for the Menlo Park community is                   “I wish Menlo Park had better,
essential to maintaining and enhancing quality of life in the city. Even           safer, more convenient bike
with a strong multi-modal transportation network, some single-occupant
                                                                                   corridors.”
vehicle trips may still be necessary and must be considered in the design
and modification of the circulation system. The nature of single-occupant          Community Workshop
vehicles may change significantly over the timeframe of the General                Participant, September 2014
Plan, with non-emitting, self-propelling, and other vehicle technology
advances on the horizon. For people to be able to use travel means other
than driving alone, those other options must be safe, convenient, and if
possible, even fun.
SUSTAINABLE TRANSPORTATION
Sustainable transportation systems are those supporting safe and
healthy transportation, active living, and a sense of community where
walking, bicycling, and transit are integral parts of daily life. Sustainable
transportation promotes the reduction of greenhouse gas (GHG)
emissions and per capita vehicle-miles traveled (VMT), which are major
goals of the City’s Climate Action Plan. Both GHG and VMT can be
reduced through transportation improvements making travel modes
other than driving alone more accessible and safe to use. GHG can be
further reduced through “green” vehicle technologies, including electric
vehicles, bicycles, and scooters, and transportation advancements such
as connected and autonomous vehicles, and the sharing economy (e.g.,               Walking and biking route under Bayfront
ride sharing, bike sharing, and car sharing).                                      Expressway
HEALTH AND WELLNESS
The complete streets approach is also a public health initiative, as it
promotes walking, bicycling, and access to public transit, which help
increase recreation and also reduce local vehicle trips and vehicle-miles
traveled, as well as local air pollution and GHG emissions. When people
have safe places to walk near their homes, they are more likely to meet
recommended levels of physical activity, ultimately improving public
health through reduced rates of obesity and chronic disease, and
increased life expectancy.
Complete streets and sustainable transportation systems also improve
traffic safety by reducing speeds and making drivers more aware of other           Pedestrian-friendly streetscape design
                                                                                                                            CIRC-9

C I T Y  O F  M E N L O   P A R K  G E N E R A L P L A N
C I R C U L A T I O N E L E M E N T
                                                      roadway users. Streets designed with public health and wellness in mind
                                                      are associated with lower rates of vehicle collisions and
                                                      pedestrian/bicyclist injuries than are street systems focused only on
                                                      moving automobiles most efficiently. By slowing traffic and improving
                                                      visibility for pedestrians and bicyclists, complete, livable, green, and
                                                      therefore sustainable, streets decrease the severity of injuries sustained
                                                      by bicyclists and pedestrians. The Bicycle Infrastructure map (Figure 3)
                                                      highlights routes in Menlo Park promoting travel by bicycle.
                                                      Reducing vehicle trips and vehicle-miles traveled leads directly to a
                                                      reduction in local air pollution. People experiencing chronic exposure to
                                                      pollution from heavy truck traffic, freeways, and other high-traffic
                                                      arterials face an increased risk of respiratory diseases, chronic illnesses,
                                                      and premature death. Traffic-related air pollution is linked to asthma,
                                                      especially among children.
                                                      TRANSIT
                                                      Transit service is an essential component of the Menlo Park
                                                      transportation system. Encouraging the use of transit can help reduce
                                                      vehicular emissions and pollution, increase access to employment and
                                                      activity centers for those without a car, and help individuals meet daily
                                                      needs of physical activity. Increased transit frequency and corridor
                                                      improvements are critical to the City’s efforts to improve public
                                                      transportation choices and regional access. The Transit Infrastructure
““No matter where a transit                           map (Figure 4) shows both the existing and planned transit routes in
station is added, it should be co-                    Menlo Park.
located with retail −coffee shop,
restaurant, dry cleaner− and                          The City can improve local and regional bus service by collaborating with
anything else the commuters                           San Mateo County Transit (SamTrans), the Santa Clara Valley
may want on their way to or                           Transportation Authority (VTA), Stanford University, and private
from work.”                                           organizations to expand public and private service and to improve stops
                                                      near attractors such as employment centers, commercial destinations,
Land Use Survey Response,                             schools, and public facilities.
January 2015
CIRC-10

                                                                                                                                                                                   San Francisco Bay
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   E
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 G
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ID
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            BR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        N
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    O
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 RT
                                                                                                                                                                                                               BA
                                                                                                                                                                                                            M
                                                                                                                                                                                                          DU
                                                                                                                                                                                                   IT Y
                                                                                                                                                                                               E RS
                                                                                                  H                                                                                        UNIV
                                                                                              RS                                                 CHILCO
                                                                                             MA                                                                     HAMILTON
                                                                                                                                                                             LOW
                                                                                                                                                                                       O'BRIEN
                                                                                                                                                                          WIL
                                                                                                                                 BA
                                                                                                                                   Y
                                                                                                                                                                    BAY
                                                                                                                                       D
                                                                                                                                     OO
                                                                                                                                 GW
                                                                                            AL                                  RIN              CO
                                                                                        CIN                                                        LEM
                                                                                                                                                         AN
                                                                                        EN
                                                                                                                                MI                                   GILBE
                                                                                                                                  DD                                      RT
                                                                                                                                      LEF             WIL
                                                                                                                                          IEL             LOW
                                                                                              E
                                                                                             OV
                                                                                             GR
                                                                                                  !
                                                                                                  (
                                                                                                  Ã       EL
                                                                                                                 AL
                                                                                                                    M
                                                                                                                      LA
                                                                                                                      A
                                                                                                                        UR
                                                                                                                           EL
                                                                                                                                        LO
                                                                                                                                          W
                                                                                                                                             D
                                                                                                                                                                WOO
                                                                                                                                                                    D  LAN
                                                                                                                                                                             D
                                                                                                              CA                     WIL
                                                                                          K
                                                                                        OA
                                                                                                                 M
                                                                                              UN                  IN
                                                                                                  IV                O
                                                                                                      ER               RE
                                                                                                        SIT              AL
                                                                                                            Y
                                                                                                            GE
                                                            VA                          WA                 LLE
                                                              LP                          LL E
                                                                AR                            A
                                                                                                           CO
                                                                  AI
                                                                    SO   CR
                                                                           UZ
                                                                            OL               LE
                                                                                IV       DD
                     AL                                           SA                E
                       AM                                           NT
                                                                                        MI
                          ED                                          A
                            A
                                DE
                                                                                 L
                                                                                EL
                                     LA                                     KD
                                         SP                                             K
                                                  UL                      OA         OA
                                                    GA     AV
                                                       S      Y
                                     MONTE RO
                                             SA                            ALPINE
                                                  SHARON PARK
                                                          LL
                                                   SAND HI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Bicycle Facilities
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Existing, Class I
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Proposed, Class I
                    S an Francis quit reek
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Existing, Class II
                                     o C
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Proposed, Class II
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Existing, Class III
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Proposed, Class III
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Existing, Class IV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Proposed, Class IV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Multi-use Pathway
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Multi-use Pathway - future
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          City Limits
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Ã Caltrain Station
0   0.5   1 Miles                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Source: City of Menlo Park
                                                                                                                                FIGURE 3: BICYCLE FACILITIES - EXISTING AND PROPOSED

                                                                                                                                                                                                               San Francisco Bay
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              E
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             G
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ID
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    BR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                N
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            O
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       RT
     SAN                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           BA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  M
    CARLOS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   DU
                                      REDWOOD
                  Gr                                                                                                            HAVE                                                                                      UN
                                                                                                                                    N AV
                                        CITY                                                                                                                                                                                           E
                       an
                                                                                                                                        E
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   TYAV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ERRSSI
                            d                                                                                                                                                                                              IV
                                Bo                                                                                                    MA
                                                                                                                                             RD                                                                           N
                                     ul                                                                                                  RS H                                 CHILCO ST
                                          ev                                                                                                 R
                                               ar                                NORTH FAIR OAKS                                                        BAY                                  IVY DR
                                                    d                                                                                                       RD                      NEW
                                                                                                                                                                                       BRID
                                                        In                        (Unincorporated)                                                                                          GE
                                                                                                                                                                                               ST
                                                             iti
                                                                   at
                                                                        iv                                                                                             DA
                                                                                                                                                                         VE
                                                                             e
                                                                                 BR
                                                                                                                                                                     OO
                                                                                                                                                                          CO                                                               EAST PALO ALTO
                                                                                      T C ELC
                                                                                                                                                                     GW      LEM
                                                                                                                                                                                 AN
                                                                                                                                                                 RIN                AVE
                                                                                         o r r AMINO                                                   MI
                                                                                                                                                          DD
                                                                                              i d o REAL                                                     LEF
                                                                                                                                                                 IEL               W IL
                                                        ATHERTON                                   r
                                                                                                                                                                     D
                                                                                                                                                                         RD            LOW            NNDD   AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                           RD          A
                                                                                                                                                                                                     LL A
                                                                                                                                                     LA                                           ODD
                                                         Proposed BRT Stop                                                                              UR
                                                                                                                                                           EL
                                                                                                                                                                ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                WO
                                                                                                                                 UN
                                                                                                                                    IV
                                                                                                           AV E
                                                                                                                         CR
                                                                                                                                       ER
                                                                                                                                          SIT                                 Fu
                                                                                                 VA                         UZ                YD
                                                                                                                                                 R                                 tu
                                                                                                    LPA
                                                                                                        RA
                                                                                                                               AV
                                                                                                                                  E                                                     re
                                                                                                           ISO   SA
                                                                                                                    NT
                                                                                                                                         AV E
                                                                                                                                                                                                Sh                       PALO ALTO
                                                                                                                      A          MI
                                                                                                                                                                                                     ar
                                                                                                                                                                                                          ed
                                                                                                                 OL                 DD
                                                                                                                    IV                 LE
                                                                                                                       ES
                                                                                                                          T
                                                                                                                                                                                                               Hi
ODSIDE
                                                                        AL
                                                                             AM
                                                                                ED                                                                                                                                  gh
                                                                                  A
                                                                                    DE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Sp
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ee
                                                                                       LA
                                                                                          S   PU
                                                                                                LG
                                                                                                   AS                                                                                                                               d
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Ra
                                                                                      ERO
                                                                                  NNTT SA                                                                                                                                                       il/
                                                                             MO
                                                                                 SHARON
                                                                                          DR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Ca
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ltr
                                                                                                                  ALP I NE RD
                                                                                          PA         R
                                                                                             R   K D
                                                                                                                                                        STANFORD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ain
                                                                                                 D
                                                                                           ILL R
                                                                                     SANDH
                                                                                                                                                          LANDS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Co
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            rri
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    do
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         r
                                                         S an Francis quit reek
                                                                          o C
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  EXISTING TRANSIT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Caltrain Stations
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Shuttle Routes
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Bus Routes
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Caltrain
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  PROPOSED TRANSIT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Dumbarton Line Station
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Dumbarton Line
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       City Limits
             0   0.5             1 Miles
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Source: City of Menlo Park
                                                                                                                                FIGURE 4: TRANSIT INFRASTRUCTURE - EXISTING AND PROPOSED
                                                                        C I T Y O F M E N L O   P A R K  G E N E R A L   P L A N
                                                                                            C I R C U L A T I O N  E L E M E N T
Electrification of Caltrain between San Jose and San Francisco is planned
to improve travel times and increase service frequency in the Caltrain
corridor, and lays the framework for a future Caltrain/High Speed Rail
blended system operating within the Caltrain right-of-way. Electrified rail
service allows faster speeds, shorter travel times, reduced wait times,
and better overall connectivity with other regional transit systems. An
increase in train frequency also supports an increased number of trains
stopping at Menlo Park.
The City of Menlo Park has formed a City Council Rail Subcommittee to
advocate for reducing the negative impacts and enhancing the benefits
                                                                                “Activate Dumbarton Rail!”
of High Speed Rail in Menlo Park. The Subcommittee has also established
principles based on the City Council’s position on High Speed Rail. Menlo
                                                                                Guiding Principles Survey
Park supports the extension of Caltrain to Downtown San Francisco’s
                                                                                Response, October 2014
Transbay Terminal, as well as grade separation efforts to make crossing
the rail corridor safer. Reactivation of the Dumbarton Rail Corridor
between Redwood City and Menlo Park is another means to provide
additional fast and reliable transportation, by rail, bus rapid transit
and/or pedestrian and bicycle paths that may ultimately connect to the
Dumbarton Bridge.
TRANSPORTATION DEMAND MANAGEMENT
Transportation Demand Management (TDM) programs are intended to
reduce vehicle trips and parking demand by promoting the use of a
variety of transportation options and shifting travel mode and time of
day to take advantage of available capacity to reduce crowding and
congestion. By implementing TDM programs, municipalities and private
entities can use available transportation resources more efficiently.
TDM programs can incorporate intelligent transportation systems and
other technological solutions to offer applications providing real-time
information on transportation options. To ensure effectiveness, the City
of Menlo Park can also encourage the development and maintenance of
a Transportation Management Association (TMA). The primary goal of a
TMA is to reduce vehicle trips to existing and planned developments in a
particular area. A TMA can also assist residents, employees, business
owners, and other community members in identifying and taking
advantage of transportation options between activity centers and public
transportation hubs. The City of Menlo Park can coordinate efforts with
other agencies providing similar service within San Mateo and Santa
                                                                                                                      CIRC-13

C I T Y   O F  M E N L O    P A R K  G E N E R A L P L A N
C I R C U L A T I O N   E L E M E N T
                                                        Clara Counties and participate in efforts to increase transportation
                                                        options near major activity centers.
                                                        PARKING
                                                        Encouraging the development of an efficient and adequate parking
                                                        supply can reduce the negative effects of parking on the pedestrian
                                                        environment and surrounding neighborhoods, and support the City’s
                                                        goals for complete streets, walkability, bikeability, and effective transit.
                                                        The cost of providing parking can significantly affect the economic
                                                        feasibility of both private development and City projects. Allowing
                                                        appropriately sized parking requirements can reduce barriers to new
                                                        development and renovation of existing buildings while creating a
                                                        healthy market for parking where parking spaces may be bought, sold,
                                                        rented, and leased like any other commodity.
                                                        New developments can be encouraged to provide appropriate parking
                                                        ratios with “unbundled” (separately costed) spaces while also making
                                                        space for car sharing and electric-vehicle charging stations. A shared
                                                        public parking approach and “park-once” strategies allow motorists to
                                                        complete multiple daily tasks before moving their vehicle, thereby
                                                        reducing both vehicle trips and parking demand, particularly in mixed-
                                                        use areas. With decreased parking demand and establishment of public
                                                        parking management strategies, the on- and off-street parking supply
                                                        can be used more efficiently, ensuring that adequate parking is available
                                                        for short-term and nearby uses. The inclusion of parking pricing at new
                                                        developments or public parking facilities may be considered as part of a
                                                        public parking management strategy to further manage this resource.
Electric vehicle charging at City Hall                  The Goals, Policies, and Programs on the following pages are intended to
                                                        provide the Menlo Park community with quality services that encompass
                                                        all of the mobility options outlined above, and as called for in the
                                                        ConnectMenlo Guiding Principles.
CIRC-14

                                                                            C I T Y O F M E N L O   P A R K  G E N E R A L   P L A N
                                                                                                C I R C U L A T I O N  E L E M E N T
GOALS, POLICIES, AND PROGRAMS
SAFE TRANSPORTATION SYSTEM
GOAL CIRC-1 Provide and maintain a safe, efficient, attractive,
                    user-friendly circulation system that promotes a
                    healthy, safe, and active community and quality of
                    life throughout Menlo Park.
POLICIES
Policy CIRC-1.1 Vision Zero. Eliminate traffic fatalities and reduce the
                number of non-fatal collisions by 50 percent by 2040.
Policy CIRC-1.2 Capital Project Prioritization. Maintain and upgrade existing
                rights-of-way before incurring the cost of constructing new
                infrastructure, and ensure that the needs of non-motorized
                travelers are considered in planning, programming, design,
                reconstruction, retrofit, maintenance, construction,
                operations, and project development activities and
                products.
Policy CIRC-1.3 Engineering. Use data-driven findings to focus engineering
                efforts on the most critical safety projects.
Policy CIRC-1.4 Education and Encouragement. Introduce and promote
                effective safety programs for adults and youths to educate
                all road users as to their responsibilities.
Policy CIRC-1.5 Enforcement Program. Develop and implement an
                enforcement program to encourage safe travel behavior and
                to reduce aggressive and/or negligent behavior among
                drivers, bicyclists, and pedestrians.
Policy CIRC-1.6 Emergency Response Routes. Identify and prioritize
                emergency response routes in the citywide circulation
                system.
Policy CIRC-1.7 Bicycle Safety. Support and improve bicyclist safety through
                roadway maintenance and design efforts.
Policy CIRC-1.8 Pedestrian Safety. Maintain and create a connected network
                of safe sidewalks and walkways within the public right of
                way ensuring that appropriate facilities, traffic control, and
                                                                                                                          CIRC-15
C I T Y  O F  M E N L O   P A R K  G E N E R A L P L A N
C I R C U L A T I O N E L E M E N T
                                                                       street lighting are provided for pedestrian safety and
                                                                       convenience, including for sensitive populations.
                                                      Policy CIRC-1.9  Safe Routes to Schools. Support Safe Routes to School
                                                                       programs to enhance the safety of school children who walk
                                                                       and bike to school.
                                                      PROGRAMS
                                                      Program CIRC-1.A Pedestrian and Bicyclist Safety. Include pedestrian and
                                                                       bicyclist safety in the design of streets, intersections, and
                                                                       traffic control devices.
                                                      Program CIRC-1.B Safe Routes to Schools. Work with schools and neighboring
                                                                       jurisdictions to develop, implement and periodically update
                                                                       Safe Routes to School programs. Schools that have not
                                                                       completed a Safe Routes to Schools plan should be
                                                                       prioritized before previously completed plans are updated.
                                                      Program CIRC-1.C Capital Improvement Program. Annually review progress
                                                                       implementing General Plan policies, and update the Capital
                                                                       Improvement Program to reflect the latest City and
                                                                       community priorities embodied in the General Plan,
                                                                       including for physical projects related to transportation.
                                                      Program CIRC-1.D Travel Pattern Data. Bi-annually update data regarding travel
                                                                       patterns for all modes to measure circulation system
                                                                       efficiency (e.g., vehicle miles traveled per capita, traffic
                                                                       volumes) and safety (e.g., collision rates) standards.
                                                                       Coordinate with Caltrans to monitor and/or collect data on
                                                                       state routes within Menlo Park.
                                                      Program CIRC-1.E Emergency Response Routes Map. In collaboration with the
                                                                       Menlo Park Fire Protection District and Menlo Park Police
                                                                       Department, adopt a map of emergency response routes
                                                                       that considers alternative options, such as the Dumbarton
                                                                       Corridor, for emergency vehicle access. Modifications to
                                                                       emergency response routes should not prevent or impede
                                                                       emergency vehicle travel, ingress, and/or egress.
                                                      Program CIRC-1.F Coordination with Emergency Services. Coordinate and
                                                                       consult with the Menlo Park Fire Protection District in
                                                                       establishing circulation standards to assure the provision of
CIRC-16
                                                                             C I T Y O F M E N L O   P A R K  G E N E R A L   P L A N
                                                                                                 C I R C U L A T I O N  E L E M E N T
                high quality fire protection and emergency medical services
                within the City.
COMPLETE STREETS
GOAL CIRC-2 Increase accessibility for and use of streets by
                   pedestrians, bicyclists, and transit riders.
POLICIES
Policy CIRC-2.1 Accommodating All Modes. Plan, design and construct
                transportation projects to safely accommodate the needs of
                pedestrians, bicyclists, transit riders, motorists, people with
                mobility challenges, and persons of all ages and abilities.
Policy CIRC-2.2 Livable Streets. Ensure that transportation projects preserve
                and improve the aesthetics of the city.
Policy CIRC-2.3 Street Classification. Utilize measurements of safety and
                efficiency for all travel modes to guide the classification and
                design of the circulation system, with an emphasis on
                providing “complete streets” sensitive to neighborhood
                context.
Policy CIRC-2.4 Equity. Identify low-income and transit-dependent districts
                that require pedestrian and bicycle access to, from, and
                within their neighborhoods.
Policy CIRC-2.5 Neighborhood Streets. Support a street classification system
                with target design speeds that promotes safe, multimodal
                streets, and minimizes cut-through and high-speed traffic
                that diminishes the quality of life in Menlo Park’s residential
                neighborhoods.
Policy CIRC-2.6 Local Streets as Alternate Routes. Work with appropriate
                agencies to discourage use of city streets as alternatives to,
                or connectors of, State and federal highways; to encourage
                improvement of the operation of US 101; and to explore
                improvements to Bayfront Expressway (State Route 84) and
                Marsh Road (and its connection to US 101), with
                environmental protection for adjacent marsh and wetland
                areas, to reduce regional traffic on Willow Road (State Route
                114).
                                                                                                                           CIRC-17

C I T Y  O F  M E N L O   P A R K  G E N E R A L P L A N
C I R C U L A T I O N E L E M E N T
                                                      Policy CIRC-2.7  Walking and Biking. Provide for the safe, efficient, and
                                                                       equitable use of streets by pedestrians and bicyclists
                                                                       through appropriate roadway design and maintenance,
                                                                       effective traffic law enforcement, and implementation of the
                                                                       City’s Transportation Master Plan (following completion;
                                                                       until such time the Comprehensive Bicycle Development
                                                                       Plan, Sidewalk Master Plan and the El Camino
                                                                       Real/Downtown Specific Plan represent the City’s proposed
                                                                       walking and bicycling networks).
                                                      Policy CIRC-2.8  Pedestrian Access at Intersections. Support full pedestrian
                                                                       access across all legs of signalized intersections.
                                                      Policy CIRC-2.9  Bikeway System Expansion. Expand the citywide bikeway
                                                                       system through appropriate roadway design, maintenance,
                                                                       effective traffic law enforcement, and implementation of the
                                                                       City’s Transportation Master Plan (following completion;
                                                                       until such time the Comprehensive Bicycle Development
                                                                       Plan and the El Camino Real/Downtown Specific Plan
                                                                       represent the City’s proposed bicycle network).
                                                      Policy CIRC-2.10 Green Infrastructure. Maximize the potential to implement
                                                                       green infrastructure by: a) Reducing or removing
                                                                       administrative, physical, and funding barriers; b) Setting
                                                                       implementation        priorities   based      on    stormwater
                                                                       management needs, as well as the effectiveness of
                                                                       improvements and the ability to identify funding; and c)
                                                                       Taking advantage of opportunities such as grant funding,
                                                                       routine repaving or similar maintenance projects, funding
                                                                       associated with Priority Development Areas, public private
                                                                       partnerships, and other funding opportunities.
                                                      Policy CIRC-2.11 Design of New Development. Require new development to
                                                                       incorporate design that prioritizes safe pedestrian and
                                                                       bicycle travel and accommodates senior citizens, people
                                                                       with mobility challenges, and children.
                                                      Policy CIRC-2.12 State-Controlled Signals. Work with Caltrans to ensure use of
                                                                       appropriate modern technology traffic signal equipment on
                                                                       State routes with the objective of meeting Caltrans’ adopted
                                                                       performance metrics for state-controlled facilities in
                                                                       conjunction with good fiscal planning.
CIRC-18

                                                                             C I T Y O F M E N L O   P A R K  G E N E R A L   P L A N
                                                                                                 C I R C U L A T I O N  E L E M E N T
Policy CIRC-2.13 County Congestion Management. Work with the County
                 Congestion Management Agency to implement the
                 Countywide Congestion Management Program and
                 Deficiency Plans for City and State facilities, and avoid
                 adding any Menlo Park streets or intersections to the
                 Countywide Congestion Management Program.
Policy CIRC-2.14 Impacts of New Development. Require new development to
                 mitigate its impacts on the safety (e.g., collision rates) and
                 efficiency (e.g., vehicle miles traveled (VMT) per service
                 population or other efficiency metric) of the circulation
                 system. New development should minimize cut-through and
                 high-speed vehicle traffic on residential streets; minimize
                 the number of vehicle trips; provide appropriate bicycle,
                 pedestrian, and transit connections, amenities and
                 improvements in proportion with the scale of proposed
                 projects; and facilitate appropriate or adequate response
                 times and access for emergency vehicles.
Policy CIRC-2.15 Regional Transportation Improvements. Work with
                 neighboring jurisdictions and appropriate agencies to
                 coordinate transportation planning efforts and to identify
                 and secure adequate funding for regional transportation
                 improvements to improve transportation options and
                 reduce congestion in Menlo Park and adjacent communities.
PROGRAMS
Program CIRC-2.A Manage Neighborhood Traffic. Following the adoption of a
                 street classification system with target design speeds,
                 establish design guidelines for each street classification.
                 Periodically review streets for adherence to these guidelines,
                 with priority given to preserve the quality of life in Menlo
                 Park’s residential neighborhoods and areas with community
                 requests. Utilize a consensus-oriented process of
                 engagement to develop an appropriate set of modifications
                 when needed to meet the street classification guidelines.
Program CIRC-2.B NACTO Design Guidelines. Adopt the National Association of
                 City Transportation Officials (NACTO) Urban Street Design
                 Guide and Urban Bikeway Design Guide as supplements to
                 the California Manual for Uniform Traffic Control Devices to
                 enhance safety for users of all travel modes and improve
                 aesthetics.
                                                                                                                           CIRC-19

C I T Y  O F  M E N L O   P A R K  G E N E R A L P L A N
C I R C U L A T I O N E L E M E N T
                                                      Program CIRC-2.C Transportation Master Plan. Prepare a citywide
                                                                       Transportation Master Plan that includes roadway system
                                                                       improvements and combines and updates the existing
                                                                       Bicycle Plan, includes provisions for overcoming barriers and
                                                                       identifying safe multi-modal routes to key destinations in the
                                                                       City, and replaces the existing Sidewalk Master Plan with a
                                                                       section that identifies areas in Menlo Park where the
                                                                       community and neighborhood have expressed a desire for
                                                                       sidewalk improvements. Update the Transportation Master
                                                                       Plan at least every five years, or as necessary.
                                                      Program CIRC-2.D Pedestrian and Bicycle Facility Maintenance. Remove debris
                                                                       on roadways and pedestrian/bike facilities, monitor
                                                                       intersection sight clearance, and repair pavement along all
                                                                       roadways and sidewalks; prioritize improvements along
                                                                       bicycle routes and at pedestrian crossing locations.
                                                      Program CIRC-2.E Bikeway System Planning. Review the citywide bikeway
                                                                       system pursuant to the Transportation Master Plan
                                                                       (following completion; until such time the Comprehensive
                                                                       Bicycle Development Plan and El Camino Real/Downtown
                                                                       Specific Plan represent the City’s proposed bicycle network),
                                                                       and other recent planning efforts every five years and
                                                                       update as necessary.
                                                      Program CIRC-2.F Bicycle Improvement Funding. Pursue funding for
                                                                       improvements identified in the Transportation Master Plan
                                                                       (following completion; until such time, the Comprehensive
                                                                       Bicycle Development Plan and El Camino Real/Downtown
                                                                       Specific Plan represent the City’s proposed bicycle network).
                                                      Program CIRC-2.G Zoning Requirements for Bicycle Storage. Establish Zoning
                                                                       Ordinance requirements for new development to provide
                                                                       secure bicycle and convenient storage and/or bike-sharing
                                                                       facilities.
                                                      Program CIRC-2.H Zoning Requirements for Paseos. Establish Zoning Ordinance
                                                                       requirements for new development to include public
                                                                       easements for paseos.
                                                      Program CIRC-2.I Bike Sharing Program. Work with local and regional
                                                                       organizations to develop and implement a citywide bike
                                                                       sharing program.
CIRC-20

                                                                               C I T Y O F M E N L O   P A R K  G E N E R A L   P L A N
                                                                                                   C I R C U L A T I O N  E L E M E N T
Program CIRC-2.J Multi-modal Stormwater Management. Identify funding
                 opportunities for stormwater management that can be used
                 to support implementation of multimodal improvements to
                 Menlo Park’s streets.
Program CIRC-2.K Zoning Ordinance Requirements. Establish Zoning Ordinance
                 requirements for all new development to incorporate safe
                 and attractive pedestrian and bicycle facilities, including
                 continuous shaded sidewalks, pedestrian lighting, and other
                 amenities.
Program CIRC-2.L Transportation Impact Analysis Guidelines. Review and
                 update the City’s Transportation Impact Analysis (TIA)
                 Guidelines, as needed. Consider factors such as preserving
                 residential quality of life, appropriate accounting for mixed
                 land uses, use of multiple transportation modes, and
                 induced travel demand.
Program CIRC-2.M Transportation Management Program. Establish goals and
                 metrics for the City’s Transportation Management Program,
                 and annually assess progress toward meeting those
                 objectives.
Program CIRC-2.N Transportation Design Details. Develop a signage and
                 pavement marking inventory. Prepare and periodically
                 update design details for transportation improvements.
Program CIRC-2.O Traffic Signal Timing. Periodically adjust traffic signal timing
                 to support efficient and safe travel for all modes and
                 emergency vehicles, including in conjunction with Caltrans
                 on its rights-of-way.
Program CIRC-2.P Plan Lines. Review all “plan lines” indicating where City-
                 owned rights-of-way exist but have not been constructed to
                 determine whether those alignments should be maintained,
                 modified, or abandoned, and identify locations where
                 additional right-of-way is needed to accommodate roadway
                 or bicycle/pedestrian improvements.
Program CIRC-2.Q Caltrans. Collaborate with Caltrans to achieve and maintain
                 travel efficiency along Caltrans rights-of-way in Menlo Park
                 consistent with the San Mateo County Congestion
                 Management Plan.
                                                                                                                             CIRC-21

C I T Y  O F  M E N L O   P A R K  G E N E R A L P L A N
C I R C U L A T I O N E L E M E N T
                                                      Program CIRC-2.R Caltrans Relinquishment. Investigate the potential for
                                                                       relinquishment by Caltrans of State Route 114 (the portion
                                                                       of Willow Road between Bayfront Expressway and US 101
                                                                       near Bay Road).
                                                      SUSTAINABLE TRANSPORTATION
                                                      GOAL CIRC-3 Increase mobility options to reduce traffic
                                                                           congestion, greenhouse gas emissions, and commute
                                                                           travel time.
                                                      POLICIES
                                                      Policy CIRC-3.1  Vehicle-Miles Traveled. Support development and
                                                                       transportation improvements that help reduce per service
                                                                       population (or other efficiency metric) vehicle miles
                                                                       traveled.
                                                      Policy CIRC-3.2  Greenhouse Gas Emissions. Support development,
                                                                       transportation improvements, and emerging vehicle
                                                                       technology that help reduce per capita (or other efficiency
                                                                       metric) greenhouse gas emissions.
                                                      Policy CIRC-3.3  Emerging Transportation Technology. Support efforts to fund
                                                                       emerging technological transportation advancements,
                                                                       including connected and autonomous vehicles, emergency
                                                                       vehicle pre-emption, sharing technology, electric vehicle
                                                                       technology, electric bikes and scooters, and innovative
                                                                       transit options.
                                                      Policy CIRC-3.4  Level of Service. Strive to maintain level of service (LOS) D at
                                                                       all City-controlled signalized intersections during peak hours,
                                                                       except at the intersection of Ravenswood Avenue and
                                                                       Middlefield Road and at intersections along Willow Road
                                                                       from Middlefield Road to US 101. The City shall work with
                                                                       Caltrans to ensure that average stopped delay on local
                                                                       approaches to State-controlled signalized intersections does
                                                                       not exceed LOS E.
CIRC-22
                                                                              C I T Y O F M E N L O   P A R K  G E N E R A L   P L A N
                                                                                                  C I R C U L A T I O N  E L E M E N T
PROGRAMS
Program CIRC-3.A Transportation Impact Metrics. Supplement Vehicle Miles
                 Traveled (VMT) and greenhouse gas emissions per service
                 population (or other efficiency metric) metrics with Level of
                 Service (LOS) in the transportation impact review process,
                 and utilize LOS for identification of potential operational
                 improvements, such as traffic signal upgrades and
                 coordination, as part of the Transportation Master Plan.
Program CIRC-3.B Emergency Response Coordination. Equip all new traffic
                 signals with pre-emptive traffic signal devices for emergency
                 services. Existing traffic signals without existing pre-emptive
                 devices will be upgraded as major signal modifications are
                 completed.
HEALTH AND WELLNESS
GOAL CIRC-4 Improve Menlo Park’s overall health, wellness, and
                    quality of life through transportation
                    enhancements.
POLICIES
Policy CIRC-4.1  Global Greenhouse Gas Emissions. Encourage the safer and
                 more widespread use of nearly zero-emission modes, such
                 as walking and biking, and lower emission modes like transit,
                 to reduce greenhouse gas emissions.
Policy CIRC-4.2  Local Air Pollution. Promote non-motorized transportation to
                 reduce exposure to local air pollution, thereby reducing risks
                 of respiratory diseases, other chronic illnesses, and
                 premature death.
Policy CIRC-4.3  Active Transportation. Promote active lifestyles and active
                 transportation, focusing on the role of walking and bicycling,
                 to improve public health and lower obesity.
Policy CIRC-4.4  Safety. Improve traffic safety by reducing speeds and making
                 drivers more aware of other roadway users.
                                                                                                                            CIRC-23

C I T Y  O F  M E N L O   P A R K  G E N E R A L P L A N
C I R C U L A T I O N E L E M E N T
                                                      PROGRAMS
                                                      Program CIRC-4.A Partnerships. Explore partnerships with private and public
                                                                       organizations (e.g., the County of San Mateo Health
                                                                       Department) to fund incentive programs and events that
                                                                       encourage multimodal transportation.
                                                      TRANSIT
                                                      GOAL CIRC-5 Support local and regional transit that is efficient,
                                                                          frequent, convenient, and safe.
                                                      POLICIES
                                                      Policy CIRC-5.1  Transit Service and Ridership. Promote improved public
                                                                       transit service and increased transit ridership, especially to
                                                                       employment centers, commercial destinations, schools, and
                                                                       public facilities.
                                                      Policy CIRC-5.2  Transit Proximity to Activity Centers. Promote the clustering
                                                                       of as many activities as possible within easy walking distance
                                                                       of transit stops, and locate any new transit stops as close as
                                                                       possible to housing, jobs, shopping areas, open space, and
                                                                       parks.
                                                      Policy CIRC-5.3  Rail Service. Promote increasing the capacity and frequency
                                                                       of commuter rail service, including Caltrain; protect rail
                                                                       rights-of-way for future transit service; and support efforts
                                                                       to reactivate the Dumbarton Corridor for transit, pedestrian,
                                                                       bicycle, and emergency vehicle use.
                                                      Policy CIRC-5.4  Caltrain Enhancements. Support Caltrain safety and
                                                                       efficiency improvements, such as positive train control,
                                                                       grade separation (with priority at Ravenswood Avenue),
                                                                       electrification, and extension to Downtown San Francisco
                                                                       (Transbay Terminal), provided that Caltrain service to Menlo
                                                                       Park increases and use of the rail right-of-way is consistent
                                                                       with the City’s Rail Policy.
                                                      Policy CIRC-5.5  Dumbarton Corridor. Work with SamTrans and appropriate
                                                                       agencies to reactivate the rail spur on the Dumbarton
                                                                       Corridor with appropriate transit service from Downtown
CIRC-24

                                                                            C I T Y O F M E N L O   P A R K  G E N E R A L   P L A N
                                                                                                C I R C U L A T I O N  E L E M E N T
                 Redwood City to Willow Road with future extension across
                 the San Francisco Bay.
Policy CIRC-5.6  Bicycle Amenities and Transit. Encourage transit providers to
                 improve bicycle amenities to enhance convenient access to
                 transit, including bike share programs, secure storage at
                 transit stations and on-board storage where feasible.
Policy CIRC-5.7  New Development. Ensure that new nonresidential, mixed-
                 use, and multiple-dwelling residential development provides
                 associated needed transit service, improvements and
                 amenities in proportion with demand attributable to the
                 type and scale of the proposed development.
PROGRAMS
Program CIRC-5.A Long-Term Transit Planning. Work with appropriate agencies
                 to agree on long-term peninsula transit service that reflects
                 Menlo Park's desires and is not disruptive to the city.
Program CIRC-5.B SamTrans. Work with SamTrans to provide appropriate
                 community-serving transit service and coordination of
                 schedules and services with other transit agencies.
TRANSPORTATION DEMAND MANAGEMENT
GOAL CIRC-6 Provide a range of transportation choices for the
                    Menlo Park community.
POLICIES
Policy CIRC-6.1  Transportation Demand Management. Coordinate Menlo
                 Park’s transportation demand management efforts with
                 other agencies providing similar services within San Mateo
                 and Santa Clara Counties.
Policy CIRC-6.2  Funding Leverage. Continue to leverage potential funding
                 sources to supplement City and private monies to support
                 transportation demand management activities of the City
                 and local employers.
Policy CIRC-6.3  Shuttle Service. Encourage increased shuttle service
                 between employment centers and the Downtown Menlo
                 Park Caltrain station.
                                                                                                                          CIRC-25

C I T Y  O F  M E N L O   P A R K  G E N E R A L P L A N
C I R C U L A T I O N E L E M E N T
                                                      Policy CIRC-6.4  Employers and Schools. Encourage employers and schools to
                                                                       promote walking, bicycling, carpooling, shuttles, and transit
                                                                       use.
                                                      PROGRAMS
                                                      Program CIRC-6.A Transportation Demand Management Guidelines. Update the
                                                                       City’s Transportation Demand Management Guidelines to
                                                                       require new non-residential, mixed use and multi-family
                                                                       residential development to provide facilities and programs
                                                                       that ensure a majority of associated travel can occur by
                                                                       walking, bicycling, and/or transit, and that include vehicle
                                                                       trip reduction reporting goals, requirements, and monitoring
                                                                       and enforcement mechanisms.
                                                      Program CIRC-6.B Transportation Management Association. Participate in the
                                                                       formation of a Transportation Management Association
                                                                       (TMA) to assist local residents, employees, students, and
                                                                       other community members in identifying and taking
                                                                       advantage of travel options between employment centers
                                                                       and rail connections, downtown, and nearby cities. Require
                                                                       new, large commercial and residential development to
                                                                       participate in the TMA. Establish goals for the TMA, such as
                                                                       those for mode share, vehicle trips, or VMT by geographic
                                                                       areas in the City. Collaborate or partner with adjacent cities’
                                                                       TMAs to ensure regional consistency.
                                                      Program CIRC-6.C Transportation Impact Fee. Require new and expanded
                                                                       development to pay a transportation impact fee, and update
                                                                       the fee periodically to ensure that development is paying its
                                                                       fair share of circulation system improvement costs for all
                                                                       modes of transportation.
                                                      Program CIRC-6.D Peninsula Traffic Congestion Relief Alliance. Consider joining
                                                                       the Peninsula Traffic Congestion Relief Alliance
                                                                       (“commute.org”) to assist local employers with increasing
                                                                       biking and walking, transit, carpool, and vanpool and shuttle
                                                                       use for their employees.
                                                      Program CIRC-6.E Employer Programs. Work with local employers to develop
                                                                       programs that encourage walking, bicycling, and transit use.
CIRC-26

                                                                              C I T Y O F M E N L O   P A R K  G E N E R A L   P L A N
                                                                                                  C I R C U L A T I O N  E L E M E N T
Program CIRC-6.F Trip Reduction Goals. Maintain an adopted vehicle trip
                 reduction goal in the Zoning Ordinance to encourage
                 transportation demand management programs and reduce
                 vehicle traffic and update the goal with major changes in
                 transit service, every five years, or as needed.
PARKING
GOAL CIRC-7 Utilize innovative strategies to provide efficient and
                    adequate vehicle parking.
POLICIES
Policy CIRC-7.1  Parking and New Development. Ensure new development
                 provides appropriate parking ratios, including application of
                 appropriate minimum and/or maximum ratios, unbundling,
                 shared parking, electric car charging, car sharing, and Green
                 Trip Certified strategies to accommodate residents,
                 employees, customers and visitors.
Policy CIRC-7.2  Off-Street Parking. Ensure both new and existing off-street
                 parking is properly designed and used efficiently through
                 shared parking agreements and, if appropriate, parking in-
                 lieu fees.
Policy CIRC-7.3  Park Once. Support the establishment of shared public
                 parking, particularly in mixed-use and retail areas, and of
                 Park-Once strategies that allow motorists to park once and
                 complete multiple daily tasks on foot before returning to
                 their vehicle, helping to reduce vehicle trips and parking
                 demand.
Policy CIRC-7.4  Public Parking Management. Improve the efficiency of the
                 on- and off-street public parking system via parking
                 management strategies that ensure adequate parking is
                 available for nearby uses. Prioritize allocation of short-term
                 retail customer parking in convenient on-street and off-
                 street facilities. Locate long-term employee parking in such a
                 manner that it does not create a shortage of customer
                 parking adjacent to retail. Consider utilizing parking pricing
                 as a strategy to balance demand and supply.
Policy CIRC-7.5  Parking Technology. Utilize real-time wayfinding and parking
                 technology to guide drivers to facilities with available
                 parking.
                                                                                                                            CIRC-27
C I T Y  O F  M E N L O   P A R K  G E N E R A L P L A N
C I R C U L A T I O N E L E M E N T
                                                      Policy CIRC-7.6  Caltrain Parking and Access. Work with the Joint Powers
                                                                       Board to improve bicycle and pedestrian access to Caltrain
                                                                       stations while providing adequate parking at the Menlo Park
                                                                       Caltrain station that does not negatively impact nearby uses.
                                                      PROGRAMS
                                                      Program CIRC-7.A Parking Requirements. Periodically evaluate and update
                                                                       parking requirements, including bicycle and electric vehicle
                                                                       spaces. Update the Parking Stall and Driveway Design
                                                                       Guidelines. Consider the effect on demand due to various
                                                                       contextual conditions such as parking pricing, transportation
                                                                       demand management strategies, transit accessibility,
                                                                       walkability and bikeability.
                                                      Program CIRC-7.B Parking In-Lieu Fees. Explore adoption of a parking in-lieu fee
                                                                       to fund a variety of tools that provide additional parking,
                                                                       improve access to parking, or reduce parking demand.
CIRC-28
GENERAL
          PLAN
  City of Menlo Park
ADOPTED NOVEMBER 29, 2016

       ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
                                 CITY COUNCIL
                                 Richard Cline, Mayor
                        Kirsten Keith, Mayor Pro Tem
                                    Catherine Carlton
                                           Ray Mueller
                                        Peter I. Ohtaki
                  PLANNING COMMISSION
                               Katherine Strehl, Chair
                            Drew Combs, Vice Chair*
                                       Andrew Barnes
                                     Susan Goodhue*
                                            Larry Kahle
                                          John Onken*
                                           Henry Riggs
  FORMER PLANNING COMMISSION MEMBERS
                                      Vincent Bressler
                          John Kadvany, Katie Ferrick
                                              Ben Eiref
GENERAL PLAN ADVISORY COMMITTEE (GPAC)
                                            Harry Bims
                                    David Bohannon II
                                        James Cebrian
                                       Kristin Duriseti
                                            Adina Levin
                                           Roger Royse
                                          Michele Tate
                                   Matthew Zumstein
                                             Heidi Butz
                                         Cindy Welton
                                           Ray Mueller
                                        Peter I. Ohtaki
                                      Katherine Strehl
                                      Vincent Bressler
                        CITY COMMISSIONS
                                  Bicycle Commission
                  Environmental Quality Commission
                                Housing Commission
                                  Library Commission
                   Parks and Recreation Commission
                         Transportation Commission
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS                                       (Continued)
                                                  KEY CITY STAFF
                                     Alex D. McIntyre, City Manager
                                Chip Taylor, Assistant City Manager
                                            Bill McClure, City Attorney
                            Leigh F. Prince, Assistant City Attorney
             Arlinda Heineck, Community Development Director
    Ron J. LaFrance, Assistant Community Development Director
                              Justin Murphy, Public Works Director
                                    Deanna Chow, Principal Planner
                           Nikki Nagaya, Transportation Manager
      Jim Cogan, Housing and Economic Development Manager
                         Heather Abrams, Sustainability Manager
                                 Azalea Mitch, Senior Civil Engineer
                                         Ori Paz, Planning Technician
                Vanh Malathong, Technical Services Coordinator
                                          CONSULTANT TEAM
                                                               PlaceWorks
                                                   BAE Economics, Inc.
                           Nelson\Nygaard Consulting Associates
                                  TJKM Transportation Consultants
                     Peninsula Resolution Conflict Center (PCRC)
                                                       Alejandro Vilchez
                    * Recused from voting on approval due to conflict of interest.
INTRODUCTION
    ADOPTED NOVEMBER 29, 2016

GENERAL PLAN
INTRODUCTION
WHAT IS A GENERAL PLAN?
A general plan is a road map for the city’s future. It embodies a
community’s proud heritage as well as its aspirations for the future. It
recognizes change over time and the opportunities and challenges that
can come with change. It includes specific and actionable programs to
make the most of those opportunities and address challenges.
Preparation of a general plan is an inclusive activity, based on extensive
public participation that highlights community hopes and concerns, but     “I wish Menlo Park had a 21st-
also provides a framework for coalescing often-competing objectives        Century vision for its industrial
into a common vision for the future. By focusing attention on both near-   employment center.”
and longer-term solutions, the general plan helps people see the
community as a complex system that continually changes in response to      Community Workshop
opportunities and challenges, and therefore it helps forge agreement on    Participant,
a course for action.                                                       September 2014
At its core, a General Plan embraces and carry’s out through its goals,
policies and programs, the community’s vision for the future physical
development of the city.
WHAT THE STATE REQUIRES
Sometimes described as a city’s “Constitution,” general plans are
required by California law to guide land use and development over an
extended period of time. Each general plan in California is required to
address specific provisions for seven mandated “elements” listed in
Government Code Section 65302 — land use, circulation, housing,
conservation, open space, noise, and safety.
                                                                                                             I-1

C I T Y  O F  M E N L O P A R K G E N E R A L P L A N
I N T R O D U C T I O N
                                                   Each element must include goals, policies, and programs that explain
                                                   how the City will address local issues relating to preservation, growth,
                                                   change, and environmental quality. A goal expresses a desired outcome
                                                   or end-state; a policy sets a direction for the City to follow in order to
                                                   meet one or more goals; and a program is an action carried out pursuant
                                                   to a policy to achieve a specific goal.
                                                   Beyond the goals, policies and programs, each element embraces a
                                                   specific function. At its core, the Land Use Element outlines land uses
                                                   and standards for physical development through “land use designations”
                                                   applied throughout the city. The Circulation Element establishes a
                                                   complete street classification system including a full range of different
                                                   travel modes. The Housing Element includes quantified housing
                                                   production objectives and explanations of how those may be achieved,
                                                   and the Open Space/Conservation, Noise, and Safety Elements contain
                                                   programs to ensure the protection of persons and property from a
                                                   variety of environmental risks.
                                                   WHY HAVE A GENERAL PLAN?
                                                   In addition to being required by state law, the central purpose of the
  “Enabling the M-2 Area to                        Menlo Park General Plan is to maintain the community's special
  flourish into a more diverse area                character that includes a range of residential, business, and employment
  would make it a better place to                  opportunities, and to accommodate change that will help maintain a vital
  live and one that’s more self-                   community. All of the General Plan elements in combination seek to
  sustaining.”                                     create a vibrant city, with neighborhoods, shopping, entertainment, and
                                                   employment destinations that together comprise a sustainable, healthy
  Land Use Survey Response,                        environment for all community members both now and in the future.
  January 2015
                                                   Many issues addressed in the Menlo Park General Plan center on the
                                                   connection between land use and transportation, as exemplified by the
                                                   impacts of regional commuting, which at peak-travel times can account
                                                   for most traffic in the city. Issues related to the potential effects of
                                                   climate change also influence planning in Menlo Park, especially along its
                                                   border with San Francisco Bay, where expected sea level rise and coastal
                                                   flooding require innovative means to protect property and occupants.
                                                   In addition, the General Plan reflects ever-increasing awareness of the
                                                   importance of energy and water conservation, as well as the need to
                                                   reduce greenhouse gas emissions to meet City and statewide goals.
I-2

                                                                        C I T Y O F  M E N L O P A R K  G E N E R A L  P L A N
                                                                                                       I N T R O D U C T I O N
Efforts to increase community resiliency and to adapt sustainably to
environmental change touch all General Plan elements.
The General Plan is used by the City Council and Planning Commission to
evaluate land use changes and to make funding and budget decisions. It
is used by City staff to regulate building and development and to make
recommendations on projects. It is used by the community to
understand the City’s long-range plans and proposals for different
geographic areas. The Plan provides the basis for the City’s development
regulations and the foundation for its Capital Improvement Programs.
HOW MENLO PARK CAME TO BE
                                                                                  “I love Menlo Park’s community
It is important to think about the history of Menlo Park as we plan for its       – I see people I know around
future. The city developed over time due to a number of critical factors.         town – and convenience: I can
These factors have shaped the city into what it is today and influence the        live and work here.”
vision for its future.
                                                                                  Community Workshop
The arrival of the railroad in 1863 and its connection to San Jose in 1864        Participant,
dramatically cut the time it took to travel the Peninsula and cemented            September 2014
Menlo Park’s role as an easily accessible rural getaway from San
Francisco. Ten years later, Menlo Park incorporated in 1874. The opening
of Stanford University in 1891 changed the course of history for Menlo
Park and the San Francisco Peninsula. The growth of the University itself
and the research and business it generated would become integral to the
economy and character of Menlo Park. Perhaps just as transformative
was the opening of Camp Fremont, a training ground for US Soldiers to
be sent off to World War I, which temporarily increased Menlo Park’s
population, previously less than 2,000 people, by as much as 40,000
according to some estimates. After the end of World War I, Camp
Fremont closed and later became the Veterans Medical Center. The
closure of the camp returned the town to more incremental growth, but
left behind a number of new businesses and city improvements.
The modern era brought considerable change and growth to Menlo Park,
taking it from a small town to a major player in an increasingly urbanized
region. Menlo Park’s population marched steadily upward, increasing
from 2,414 in 1930 to 26,826 in 1970. In 1923, the citizens of Atherton
voted to effectively secede from Menlo Park, formally incorporating as
Atherton. Efforts to bring Atherton into a broader reincorporation of
                                                                                                                            I-3

C I T Y  O F  M E N L O   P A R K G E N E R A L P L A N
I N T R O D U C T I O N
                                                     Menlo Park were unsuccessful, and in 1927, Menlo Park voted to
                                                     incorporate as a municipality independent of Atherton. 1,2
                                                     THE MODERN ERA
                                                     The 1920s and 1930s saw the expansion of both Menlo Park’s
                                                     transportation infrastructure and its residential neighborhoods. In 1927,
                                                     the same year as Menlo Park’s official incorporation, the original
                                                     Dumbarton Bridge opened, creating a new link between the East Bay and
                                                     the Peninsula. Between 1929 and 1931, the Bayshore Highway (now US
                                                     101) was constructed and expanded to Menlo Park. Even then, the new
                                                     bridges and freeways were subject to traffic and agitated drivers,
                                                     especially when roads leading to the bridge proved inadequate and
                                                     football games brought traffic to a standstill. Other roadways underwent
                                                     similar expansions. In the late 1930s, El Camino Real was paved and
                                                     widened from two lanes to four. This change meant the closure,
                                                     demolition, or relocation of many Menlo Park businesses and structures.
El Camino Real in the late 1960s
                                                     This time period also saw the beginnings of the Belle Haven
                                                     neighborhood, with two-bedroom homes in the new development
                                                     selling for as low as $2,950 ($50,000 in 2014 dollars). 3 Belle Haven was
                                                     the only major housing development undertaken locally during the worst
                                                     of the Great Depression, and it was not fully built out until the 1950s. 4
                                                     The mid-twentieth century witnessed Menlo Park becoming a major
                                                     regional and global leader in technology and the broader economy. In
                                                     1946, the Stanford Research Institute was established, making Menlo
                                                     Park a center of research and innovation. Although the Stanford
                                                     Research Institute separated from Stanford University and changed its
                                                     name to SRI International in 1970, this institution is still headquartered in
                                                     Menlo Park and has contributed innovations ranging from the computer
Menlo Park in the 1960s
                                                            1  Svanevik, Michael and Shirley Burgett, 2000. Menlo Park California Beyond the
                                                     Gate, San Francisco: Custom & Limited Editions.
                                                            2 US Department of Commerce Economics and Statistics Administration Bureau of
                                                     the Census, 1990. CPH-2-1 1990 Census of Population and Housing Population and
                                                     Housing Unit Counts United States.
                                                            3 Bureau of Labor Statistics CPI Inflation Calculator. http://www.bls.gov/
                                                     data/inflation_calculator.htm, accessed October 13, 2014.
                                                            4 Svanevik, Michael and Shirley Burgett, 2000. Menlo Park California Beyond the
                                                     Gate, San Francisco: Custom & Limited Editions.
I-4

                                                                                    C I T Y  O F   M E N L O  P A R K    G E N E R A L  P L A N
                                                                                                                        I N T R O D U C T I O N
mouse to the 9-1-1 emergency call system. The 1950s brought increased
industrial development to Menlo Park near the San Francisco Bay. Job
opportunities in what is now the M-2 Area led to an increasingly diverse
population in Menlo Park, especially in the areas between US 101 and
the Bay. By 2000, the Belle Haven housing stock that had been valued at
$6,000 in the 1930s was now valued as high as $375,000. 5
THE INFLUENCE OF SILICON VALLEY
                                                                                            Office construction in the 1980s
The expansion of the Silicon Valley economy in the 1980s and 1990s
made Menlo Park and the entire San Francisco Peninsula increasingly
popular and an expensive place to live. The “Dot-Com Boom” in the late
1990s drove up demand for housing in Menlo Park and similar areas with
good schools, convenient access to job centers, and high quality of life.
Although the recessions that began in 2001 and more recently in 2008
slowed or even temporarily reversed regional job growth, Menlo Park
has remained a highly desired community. The latest and ongoing
economic expansion has brought new growth and real estate demand to
Menlo Park. The bayside campus that once hosted Sun Microsystems is
now the international headquarters of Facebook, one the world’s leading
tech firms, which continues to grow and build additional office facilities.
                                                                                            Development of tech firm offices continue today
EVOLUTION OF MENLO PARK’S PLANNING
Menlo Park first issued a citywide “Master Plan” in 1952, which was
updated as a General Plan in 1966 after a two-year process involving a
citizen committee of more than 100 members. A subsequent effort
began in 1972 when the City Council and members from City
commissions, boards, and advisory committees formed a task force to
examine pressing issues. The “Toward 2000” General Plan adopted in
1974 included an Open Space and Conservation Element for the first
time. New State mandates led to updates of the Safety (1976) and Noise
(1978) Elements. Review in 1984 by an ad hoc committee of Planning
       5
         Svanevik, Michael and Shirley Burgett, 2000. Menlo Park California Beyond the
Gate, San Francisco: Custom & Limited Editions.
                                                                                                                                             I-5

C I T Y  O F  M E N L O P A R K G E N E R A L P L A N
I N T R O D U C T I O N
                                                   Commission and City Council members concluded that while most of the
                                                   General Plan remained valid, the Land Use, Circulation, and Housing
                                                   Elements required updating. A series of community forums in 1984 led
                                                   to updates of those elements by 1986, and a subsequent update of the
                                                   Housing Element in 1992.
                                                   In 1988 the City initiated another General Plan update largely to
                                                   incorporate new standards for development that could be used to
                                                   conduct traffic analyses. This was a six year undertaking with updated
                                                   Land Use and Circulation Elements adopted in 1994. The Open
                                                   Space/Conservation, Noise, and Safety, Elements were consolidated and
                                                   updated in 2013. Updating of the Housing Element follows a separate
                                                   State-mandated cycle, and an update was adopted in 2014 for the 2015–
                                                   2023 planning period.
                                                   A variety of additional plans and studies have supplemented the General
                                                   Plan since the 1994 update, including:
                                                        Center City Design Plan (1996–1998)
                                                        Willow Road Land Use Plan (1997)
                                                        Smart Growth Initiative (1999)
                                                        Land Use and Circulation Study (2000)
                                                        Comprehensive Bicycle Development Plan (2004)
                                                        Commercial Streamlining and Zoning (2004–2006)
                                                        Imagine a Downtown (2005)
                                                        El Camino Real and Downtown Vision Plan (2008)
                                                        City Sidewalk Master Plan (2008)
 El Camino Real and Downtown Specific Plan              El Camino Real/Downtown Specific Plan (2012)
                                                        Belle Haven Vision Plan (2013)
                                                   In addition, the City first adopted a Climate Action Plan (CAP) in 2009
                                                   designed to help reduce local greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions. In 2011
                                                   the City Council adopted a GHG reduction target of 27 percent below
                                                   2005 levels by 2020. The CAP strategies, updated periodically (including
                                                   in 2015), focus on areas such as energy use, transportation, solid waste,
                                                   and recycling to help meet emission reduction goals.
                                                   In Menlo Park, the Land Use and Circulation Elements are part of this
                                                   document while the Housing and a combined Open Space/Conservation,
                                                   Noise and Safety Elements are maintained as stand-alone documents.
I-6

                                                                        C I T Y O F  M E N L O   P A R K   G E N E R A L  P L A N
                                                                                                          I N T R O D U C T I O N
CONNECTMENLO
The 2014-2016 update of the Land Use and Circulation Elements,
identified as ConnectMenlo, was initiated with a broad and
comprehensive public outreach program, and guided by a General Plan
Advisory Committee comprised of Council members, representatives of
various City Commissions, and community members.
FOCUS AREAS
The City Council identified the area generally between US 101 and the
Bay adjoining the Belle Haven Neighborhood, where the transition from           Transitioning industrial area
traditional industrial uses was well underway, as the primary location for       “Mas escuelas; mas parques
potential change in the city over the coming decades. This is an area with       ninos puedan jugar areas
a unique opportunity to foster a sustainable environment that balances           cerradas; menos
growth, creates a sense of place, enhances the quality of life, and              contaminacion; menos trafico.”
minimizes impacts
                                                                                 “More schools; more parks
COMMUNITY ENGAGEMENT                                                             where children can play in
                                                                                 closed areas; less pollution; less
A combination of in-person and survey-based public engagement and                traffic.”
community workshops led to a community vision in the form of Guiding
Principles (see following section) for maintaining and enhancing the             Land Use Survey Response,
quality of life in Menlo Park in the face of unprecedented growth and            January 2015
desirability of the city as a place to live and do business. Through
ConnectMenlo, it became clear that area property owners, major
companies, their employees, and nearby residents shared a strong vision
for creating “live/work/play” environments with a comfortable and
attractive mixture of employment, housing, and retail and service uses.
COMMUNITY BENEFITS                                                               “I wish Menlo Park had more
                                                                                 restaurants, cafes, and retail in
As embodied in the Guiding Principles, the Menlo Park community also             Belle Haven, as well as a full
concluded that any new significant development should be required to             service grocery store and better
provide tangible community amenities as part of the right to proceed. Of         elementary schools.”
course, these live/work/play environments must also be carefully
planned to complement and not detract from the highly-valued                     Community Workshop
residential character of Menlo Park’s many and diverse neighborhoods,            Participant,
nor the well-established live/work/play environment in the downtown.             September 2014
                                                                                                                               I-7

C I T Y  O F  M E N L O P A R K G E N E R A L P L A N
I N T R O D U C T I O N
                                                   Consistent with this preferred approach, as new development occurs,
                                                   the City may grant added development potential in exchange for
                                                   community benefits provided by individual projects and acquired
“Set clear requirements for                        through implementation of General Plan programs by way of the Zoning
public benefits and fees up front                  Ordinance. These amenities will support key resources of the
rather than requiring a long,                      community, including jobs, housing, schools, libraries, neighborhood
drawn-out negotiation with                         retail, childcare, public open space, telecommunications access, and
developers.”                                       transportation choices. Zoning provisions include specific formulas and
                                                   processes for providing amenities.
Land Use Survey Response,
January 2015
I-8

                                                                       C I T Y O F M E N L O P A R K  G E N E R A L  P L A N
                                                                                                     I N T R O D U C T I O N
GUIDING PRINCIPLES
Guiding Principles were established by the Menlo Park community. These
principles emanated from numerous community meetings and
workshops, the recommendations of the General Plan Advisory
Committee, review by the Planning Commission, and acceptance by the
City Council. Each policy statement in the Land Use and Circulation
Element supports at least one, and often many, of the Guiding Principles.
The goals, policies, and programs in the Housing Element and Open
Space/Conservation, Noise and Safety Elements were carefully analyzed
to ensure consistency between them and the Guiding Principles. The
goals, policies, and programs promote the values established in the
Guiding Principles.
The Guiding Principles describe the kind of place that community
members want Menlo Park to be. City representatives and community
members developed them collaboratively to guide growth and preserve
the city's unique features. Future change in Menlo Park will involve a
careful balance of benefits and impacts, as charted in the General Plan
goals, policies, and programs. While growth is planned to occur generally
between US 101 and the Bay, the nine inspirational Principles have
community-wide application, including protecting the character of
residential neighborhoods and expanding transportation options.
The Guiding Principles embody the notion that sustainability involves a
balanced array of land use including strong residential neighborhoods
and a diversified business base that can survive economic cycles, as well
as equity in the provision of education, and public services for all
community members.
The City’s nine Guiding Principles are as follows.
                                                                                                                          I-9

C I T Y  O F  M E N L O  P A R K  G E N E R A L P L A N
I N T R O D U C T I O N
                                           Menlo Park neighborhoods are protected from
                                           unreasonable development and unreasonable cut-through
                                           traffic, share the benefits and impacts of local growth, and
                       Citywide            enjoy equal access to quality services, education, public
                            Equity         open space, housing that complements local job
                                           opportunities with affordability that limits displacement of
                                           current residents, and convenient daily shopping such as
                                           grocery stores and pharmacies.
                                           Everyone in Menlo Park enjoys healthy living spaces, high
                                           quality of life, and can safely walk or bike to fresh food,
                                           medical services, employment, recreational facilities, and
                                           other daily destinations; land owners and occupants take
                        Healthy            pride in the appearance of property; Menlo Park achieves
                Community                  code compliance and prioritizes improvements that
                                           promote safety and healthy living; and the entire city is
                                           well-served by emergency services and community
                                           policing.
               Competitive                 Menlo Park embraces emerging technologies, local
                                 and       intelligence, and entrepreneurship, and welcomes
                                           reasonable development without excessive traffic
                    Innovative             congestion that will grow and attract successful companies
                        Business           and innovators that generate local economic activity and
                  Destination              tax revenue for the entire community.
                                           In exchange for added development potential,
                                           construction projects provide physical benefits in the
                    Corporate              adjacent neighborhood (such as Belle Haven for growth
               Contribution                north of US 101), including jobs, housing, schools, libraries,
                                           neighborhood retail, childcare, public open space, high
                                           speed internet access, and transportation choices.
I-10
                                                          C I T Y O F  M E N L O P A R K  G E N E R A L  P L A N
                                                                                         I N T R O D U C T I O N
Menlo Park children and young adults have equal access                Youth Support
to excellent childcare, education, meaningful employment
opportunities, and useful training, including internship              and Education
opportunities at local companies.                                     Excellence
Menlo Park provides thoroughly-connected, safe and
convenient transportation, adequate emergency vehicle                 Great
access, and multiple options for people traveling by foot,            Transportation
bicycle, shuttle, bus, car, and train, including daily service
along the Dumbarton Rail Corridor.                                    Options
Menlo Park neighborhoods are complete communities,                    Complete
featuring well integrated and designed development along
vibrant commercial corridors with a live-work-play mix of
                                                                      Neighborhoods
community-focused businesses that conveniently serve                  and
adjacent neighborhoods while respecting their residential             Commercial
character.
                                                                      Corridors
Menlo Park provides safe and convenient access to an
ample amount of local and regional parks and a range of               Accessible
public open space types, recreational facilities, trails, and         Open Space
enhancements to wetlands and the Bay.                                 and Recreation
Menlo Park is a leader in efforts to address climate change,
                                                                      Sustainable
adapt to sea-level rise, protect natural and built resources,
conserve energy, manage water, utilize renewable energy,              Environmental
and promote green building.                                           Planning
                                                                                                            I-11
C I T Y  O F  M E N L O P A R K G E N E R A L P L A N
I N T R O D U C T I O N
                                                   This page intentionally left blank
I-12
   LAND USE
             ELEMENT
ADOPTED NOVEMBER 29, 2016

LAND USE ELEMENT
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Overview........................................................................................ 1
Planning Boundaries..................................................................... 2
  Regional Plans ....................................................................................... 3
City Composition .......................................................................... 7
  Neighborhoods ...................................................................................... 7
  Commercial Centers .............................................................................. 7
  Employment Centers ............................................................................. 9
  Open Space ........................................................................................... 9
Land Use Designations ............................................................... 10
  Residential ........................................................................................... 14
  Commercial ......................................................................................... 15
  Bayfront Area ...................................................................................... 15
  Specific Plan Area ................................................................................ 17
  Parks and Recreation ........................................................................... 17
  Public /Quasi-Public ............................................................................. 17
  Baylands .............................................................................................. 18
Goals, Policies, and Programs .................................................. 18
  Orderly Development .......................................................................... 18
  Neighborhood Preservation ................................................................ 20
  Neighborhood-Serving Uses ................................................................ 22
  Business Development and Retention................................................. 23
                                                                                                             LU-i
  C I T Y O F   M E N L O   P A R K G E N E R A L P L A N
  L A N D  U S E  E L E M E N T
                                                        Downtown/El Camino Real.................................................................. 25
                                                        Open Space ......................................................................................... 25
                                                        Sustainable Services ............................................................................ 27
                                                     F IGURES
                                                     Figure 1        Regional Location ............................................................... 5
                                                     Figure 2        Planning Boundaries ........................................................... 6
                                                     Figure 3        Community Features .......................................................... 8
                                                     Figure 4        Comparison of Land Uses ................................................. 10
                                                     Figure 5        Major Land Use Designations ........................................... 12
                                                     TABLES
                                                     Table 1         Land Use Designations And Zoning Districts ..................... 13
LU-ii
LAND USE
OVERVIEW
Menlo Park is a unique and wonderful place, but of course not without
challenges related to land use, most prominent among them a lack of
housing options (at all income levels) and traffic that at times seems
unbelievable. Not surprisingly, these issues are inextricably linked: job
growth in Menlo Park and the surrounding region steadily increases
traffic, especially when not enough housing supply exists to
accommodate people working locally. The goals of this Land Use Element
are aspirational, as they essentially call for resolving the combined issue
of traffic and jobs/housing balance. The policies and programs to support
those goals offer a variety of feasible actions that in combination may
transform those aspirations into reality in the coming years.
Land use policy guides the physical development of a community. The
Land Use Element reflects the existing pattern of land use in Menlo Park,
which is highly valued by the community, and embodies the community’s
vision for change over the coming decades, as expressed over more than
two years and 65 public meetings during the ConnectMenlo general plan
update. The Land Use Element includes goals, policies, and programs
supporting the character and quality of life enjoyed in existing residential
and commercial neighborhoods, as well as embracing opportunities for
creating a new live/work/play environment in the area bounded by the
San Francisco Bay and Highway 101. The Land Use Element also seeks to
encourage commercial uses that serve existing neighborhoods, retain
and attract businesses citywide, and make Menlo Park a leader in
sustainable development through conservation of resources and
alternative energy use.
Menlo Park’s unique identity is expressed not only by its mosaic of
distinctive and diverse neighborhoods, but also by the community’s
central role in the dynamic culture and economy of the San Francisco
Bay Area. The city’s long-established residential neighborhoods create
                                                                             LU-1

  C I T Y O F    M E N L O   P A R K  G E N E R A L P L A N
  L A N D   U S E  E L E M E N T
                                                       the strong sense of community found in Menlo Park. Preserving and
                                                       building on this foundation while also creating new opportunities for a
                                                       range of housing types is an important focus of the City’s land use
                                                       policies.
                                                       Also of key importance is the health of the commercial and business
                                                       centers providing services to the residential neighborhoods and revenue
                                                       for a variety of City services. Situated in the heart of the “Mid-Peninsula,”
                                                       halfway between San Francisco and San Jose (see Figure 1), Menlo Park
                                                       is also a hub of investment and scientific innovation, economic engine of
                                                       Silicon Valley.
 Facebook Building 20 and East Campus
                                                       Menlo Park has also forged its own character through its contributions to
                                                       the economic and intellectual landscape, both regionally and globally by
                                                       hosting renowned institutions. SRI International has been a world leader
                                                       in science and technology for more than 50 years and Sand Hill Road,
                                                       hosting many influential investment firms, is known as the venture
                                                       capital corridor. The city is also home to an emerging life sciences district
                                                       as well as the expansion of major companies, drawing international
                                                       attention and even corporate tourism to the Bayfront Area. The new
                                                       live/work/play environment will place residential and commercial uses in
                                                       close proximity to one another, thereby fostering economic growth and
                                                       increased tangible benefits to nearby neighborhoods.
 Offices originally constructed for Intuit
                                                       PLANNING BOUNDARIES
                                                       Menlo Park shares the City’s borders with unincorporated San Mateo
                                                       County, the municipalities of Atherton, Palo Alto, East Palo Alto, and
                                                       Redwood City, and Stanford University. San Francisco Bay and adjacent
                                                       wetlands comprise about 12 square miles or two-thirds of Menlo Park’s
                                                       total area. In some places, the city limit coincides with important natural
                                                       features, such as the Atherton Channel and San Francisquito Creek, while
                                                       in others it follows street alignments where jurisdiction may not be clear
                                                       to most people, such as near Menlo-Atherton High School or Alameda de
                                                       las Pulgas, neither of which are within Menlo Park.
                                                       The Menlo Park city limit encompasses the physical area under the
                                                       jurisdiction of the City and to which its land use designations, zoning
                                                       restrictions, municipal code, and other regulations are applicable.
                                                       However, Menlo Park also has a variety of political, administrative, and
LU-2

                                                                         C I T Y O F M E N L O P A R K  G E N E R A L   P L A N
                                                                                                 L A N D  U S E   E L E M E N T
service area boundaries that go beyond the city limit and have
implications for land use planning (see Figure 2). Planning for orderly
development that benefits the community in all of these areas is
important to preserving quality of life in Menlo Park, and is therefore an
overarching objective of this Land Use Element.
The City’s “Planning Area” extends beyond the city boundary to include
areas that could impact or be impacted by land use activities either
within the city or neighboring jurisdictions. The Planning Area for Menlo
Park includes portions of Palo Alto, East Palo Alto, Atherton, and
unincorporated San Mateo County, as well as portions of the San
Francisquito Creek and Atherton Channel watersheds. Although City
General Plan policies and zoning regulations do not apply in these
locations, General Plan policies do take into account activity in these
areas and their relationship to the incorporated areas of Menlo Park.
The “Sphere of Influence” is an area outside the city limits and within the
Planning Area where potential annexations into the City are most likely
to occur. Established through the San Mateo County Local Agency
Formation Commission, the Sphere of Influence includes Menlo Oaks,
Alameda de las Pulgas, and SLAC National Accelerator Laboratory. The
primary purpose of the Sphere of Influence is to aid thoughtful and
comprehensive regional planning, in part by giving the City of Menlo Park
elevated status in discussions regarding future land uses in these areas
currently outside City jurisdiction.
In addition to the mapped areas relevant to the General Plan, Menlo
Park is subject to a number of boundaries relating to utilities and
community services. These boundaries are generally not aligned with
Menlo Park’s other administrative boundaries and include such entities
as the Menlo Park Fire Protection District, sanitary service providers, and
water service providers. Five separate school districts serve portions of
the city, including the Menlo Park City, Las Lomitas Elementary,
Ravenswood City, Redwood City, and Sequoia Union High School
Districts.
REGIONAL PLANS
Land use planning efforts in Menlo Park also are influenced by a number
of regional programs, perhaps foremost of which is Plan Bay Area,
overseen by the four primary regional planning agencies: the Association
                                                                                                                          LU-3

  C I T Y O F   M E N L O   P A R K G E N E R A L P L A N
  L A N D  U S E  E L E M E N T
                                                     of Bay Area Governments, the Metropolitan Transportation Commission,
                                                     the Bay Area Air Quality Management District, and the San Francisco Bay
                                                     Conservation and Development Commission. Plan Bay Area is the
                                                     “Sustainable Communities Strategy” required for the nine-county Bay
                                                     Area region pursuant to Senate Bill 375 (effective 2008), which directs
                                                     the California Air Resources Board to set targets for reducing greenhouse
                                                     gas emissions from cars and light trucks.
                                                     Plan Bay Area ties funding for local transportation projects to meeting
                                                     regional emission reduction targets. One way to reduce emissions is to
                                                     locate travel origins and destinations together, such as in live/work/play
                                                     environments, and another way is to protect open space areas. The
                                                     Menlo Park General Plan strives to achieve both of these objectives. The
                                                     El Camino Real/Downtown Specific Plan Area falls within a “Priority
                                                     Development Area” recognized under Plan Bay Area as appropriately
                                                     concentrating both trip origins and destinations.
                                                     Another regional plan that affects Menlo Park is the Water Quality
                                                     Control Plan for the San Francisco Bay Basin administered by the San
                                                     Francisco Bay Regional Water Quality Control Board. The Basin Plan
                                                     establishes watershed management programs to protect water quality
                                                     that include examining inputs into drainages and downstream water
                                                     bodies. Compliance with the Basin Plan involves adherence to
                                                     stormwater control requirements for land use activities in Menlo Park.
                                                     The San Mateo County General Plan governs land use in several areas
                                                     within the City’s Planning Area and Sphere of Influence (see Figure 2).
                                                     Land use activities in these unincorporated areas, especially around
                                                     Alameda de Las Pulgas, influence conditions in Menlo Park. The County
                                                     also oversees a Congestion Management Program applicable to all the
                                                     jurisdictions in the County and aimed at reducing traffic congestion and
                                                     improving air quality. The program promotes infill development along
                                                     major transit corridors, as well as alternative forms of transportation,
                                                     and encourages the integration of land use and transportation planning
                                                     efforts, all themes that are echoed and in this Land Use Element.
LU-4

Marin
                                     Contra Costa County
                         (
                         '
                         &
                         %
                         580
                                                            Walnut
                                                       24
                                                       |
                                                       þ
                                                       }
                                                       ·    Creek                        OAKLAND
                                    Berkeley
                             (
                             '
                             &
                             %80
                                        Oakland
              City and            Alameda
              County of                            (
                                                   '
                                                   &
                                                   %
                                                   580
          San Francisco
                                                   San
                                                                         (
                                                                         '
                                                                         &
                                                                         %680
                                                                          Dublin
                                                                                                        SAN LEANDRO                                              §
                                                                                                                                                                 ¦
                                                                                                                                                                 ¨
                                                                                                                                                                 580
                                                Leandro
          Daly City
                            San Fr an ci s co Ba y
                                                        (
                                                        '
                                                        &
                                                        %
                                                        880     Alameda
                                                                 County                                          SAN LORENZO
                                            92
                                            |
                                            ÿ
       |
       þ
       }
       ·
       1                                                  Union City
         San Mateo
             County
                       %San Mateo
                       (
                       '
                       &280
                                                                   Fremont
                                   101
                                   þ
                                   Æ
                                 Redwood City San Francisco Bay
                                                          84 Newark
                                                          |
                                                          ÿ
               Half                                                                                                                     HAYWARD
             Moon
                              Menlo Park P
               Bay
                                                 Palo
      Pa c i f i c                               Alto     Mtn.
      Oc e a n
                                                         View    Santa
                                                                         San Jose
                                                                 Clara                                    E
                                                                                                      RIDG
                                                                                                 EO B
                                                                                          SAN
                                                                                              MAT
                                                                                                                                             §
                                                                                                                                             ¦
                                                                                                                                             ¨
                                                                                                                                             880
                                                                              92
                                                                              !
                                                                              (                                                                    UNION CITY
         BURLINGAME
          HILLSOBOROUGH
                                                                FOSTER
                                              SAN                 CITY
                                            MATEO                                                                                                                  FREMONT
                                                                                                                                    GE
                                                                                                                                  ID
                                              BELMONT                                                                           BR
                                                                                                                          R TO
                                                                                                                              N                       NEWARK
                                                                                                                        BA
                                                                                                                       M
                                                                                                                     DU
                                                          SAN CARLOS                                              84
                                                                                                                  !
                                                                                                                  (
                                                                REDWOOD CITY                                      EAST
                                                                                  84
                                                                                  !               MENLO PALO ALTO
                                                     §
                                                     ¦
                                                     ¨280                         (
                                                                                   ATHERTON     82
                                                                                                    PARK
                                                                                                !
                                                                                                (
                                                                                                                PALO ALTO
                                                            WOODSIDE
                                                                                                                                     MOUNTAIN VIEW
                                                                                                                                                                          SANTA
                                                                            PORTOLA VALLEY                                                             SUNNYVALE          CLARA
                                                                                                                               LOS
                                                                                                            LOS ALTOS        ALTOS
                                                                                                               HILLS
                                                                                                                                                          Sphere of Influence
                                                                                                                                                          Planning Area
                  0               2                 4 Miles                                                                                               City Limits
                                                                                           FI G UR E 1 : M E N LO P A R K R E G I ON A L L OCA T I ON

                                                                                                                                                             San Francisco Bay
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  E
                                                                                                                                                                                                               IDG
                                                                                                                                                                                                             BR
                                                                                                                                                                                                         N
                                                                                                                                                                                                       TO
 SAN                                                                                                                                                                                              AR
                                                                                                                                                                                               MB
CARLOS                                                                                                                                                                                       DU
                         REDWOOD                                                                  HAVEN
                           CITY                                                                         AVE
                                                                                                                                                                               SITY AVE
                                                                                                    MA                                                                     IVER
                                                                                                                                                                         UN
                                                                                                      RSH                                CHILCO ST
                                                                                                          RD
                                                       NORTH FAIR OAKS                                                BAY
                                                                                                                          RD                     NEW
                                                                                                                                                    BRID
                                                                                                                                                         IVY DR
                                                        (Unincorporated)                                                                                GE
                                                                                                                                                           ST
                                                                                                                                   AVE
                                                                                                                           RIN
                                                                                                                              GW    COL                                            EAST PALO ALTO
                                                                                                          M                     OO     EMA
                                                                                                         CA ENLO                  D       NA
                                                                                                                                            VE
                                                                                                           LTR PA
                                                                                                              AIN RK                             WIL
                                                                                                                 STA            MI
                                                                                                                                  DD                LOW
                                                                                                                    TIO             LEF                 RD
                                                                                                                                                              VE
                                                                                                                       N                IEL
                                                                                                                                           DR                 D
                                                                                                                                                                  A
                                        ATHERTON                     e
                                                                                                       EL
                                                                                                          CA!      LAU
                                                                                                                       REL
                                                                                                                                             D
                                                                                                                                                     WOO D
                                                                                                                                                          LA N
                                                                   nn
                                                                    l
                                                                                                              MI           ST
                                                          a                                                     NO
                                                                                                                   RE
                                                     Atherton Ch
                                                                                                    UN               AL
                                                                                                      IVE
                                                                                              AV          RS
                                                                                 SA             E           ITY
                                                                         VA        NT                           DR
                                                                           LPA       AC
                                                                              RA       RU
                                                                                ISO      ZA         MI
                                                                                           VE
                                                                                                      DD
                                                                                                        LE
                                                                                                                                                                      PALO ALTO
                                                                                                           AV
                                                                                         OL                  E
                                                                                           IVE
                                                                                               ST
                                                 AL
WOODSIDE                                           AM
                                                     ED
                                                       AD
                                                         EL
                                                           AS
                                                              PU
                                                                LG
                                                                  AS
                                                       TE ROSA
                                                   MO          DR
                                                     N
                                                                                        PI E RD
                                                      SHAR
                                                           O N P ARK DR
                                                                                      AL N
                                                                 ILL RD                                               STANFORD
                                                         SANDH
                                                                                                                        LANDS
                                 Sa
                                    n
                                    Fr a
                                        nc
                                             isquit o C r eek
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Planning Area
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Sphere of Influence
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      City Limits
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Parks
               PORTOLA VALLEY                                                                                                                                                                                         Public Schools and Facilities
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ECR/Downtown Specific Plan Area
           0   0.5     1 Miles
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Bayfront Area
                                                                                                                                                                      FI G U R E 2 : P LA N N I N G B O U N DA R I E S
                                                                        C I T Y O F M E N L O P A R K   G E N E R A L   P L A N
                                                                                                 L A N D  U S E   E L E M E N T
CITY COMPOSITION
Menlo Park is known for its diverse urban, suburban, and natural
features, including high quality residential neighborhoods, attractive
downtown, beautiful parks and open spaces, established business
centers, and an emerging epicenter for innovation and technology (see
Figure 3). The General Plan land use designations, goals, policies, and
programs seek both to preserve the cherished qualities of the city and to
accommodate change benefitting the community through increased
revenue supporting services and amenities that enhance quality of life.         West Menlo
NEIGHBORHOODS
Menlo Park’s many residential neighborhoods are distinguished by a
wide array of characteristics expressed through architectural styles,
streetscapes, topography, street trees, lot sizes, building forms,
landscaping, public art, and open spaces. In fact, as Figure 3 shows, more
than half of the developable land in Menlo Park is in residential use.
Preserving the unique qualities of the city’s neighborhoods is an
important objective of this Land Use Element.                                   The Willows
COMMERCIAL CENTERS
Menlo Park’s varied commercial centers include retail, service, and
business uses creating hubs of community activity. An important function
of commercial uses in Menlo Park is providing goods and services
supporting surrounding neighborhoods. Neighborhood-serving retail
areas include the intersection of Menalto and Gilbert Avenues, as well as
a number of small retail clusters along Willow Road, such as at
Middlefield Road, Ivy Drive, Newbridge Street, Hamilton Avenue, and             Suburban Park
between O’Keefe Street and US 101.
Downtown and the El Camino Real corridor represent a key
concentration of commercial uses in Menlo Park, serving both nearby
neighborhoods and regional customers. In addition to being an
important thoroughfare in downtown, Santa Cruz Avenue serves as
Menlo Park’s primary shopping and dining destination. El Camino Real
hosts a number of commercial uses and also serves as a major
thoroughfare connecting Menlo Park to Atherton, Redwood City, Palo
Alto, and other Peninsula and South Bay cities. Together, Santa Cruz
Avenue and El Camino Real feature a variety of uses, including
                                                                                Downtown’s Santa Cruz Avenue
                                                                                                                          LU-7

                                                                                                                                                          MENLO
                                                                                                                                                          PARK
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          E
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    BR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ID G
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  N
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               BA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 RT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   O
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        DU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          M
                                                                                                                     BAY                                                                                         TO
REDWOOD                                                                                                                     FRO
   CITY                                                                                                                           NT
                                                                                                                                          EXPR
                                                                                                                                                    ESS
                                                                                                                                                       WAY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 SITY
                                                                                                                                 BAYFRONT                                                                 UNIVER
                                                                                   MA
                                                                                      RSH
                                                                                          RD                                                    CHILCO ST
                                                                                                             SUBURBAN                                                                     RD
                                                                                                               PARK                                          BELLE                       LOW
                                                                        LORELEI                                      BA
                                                                                                                                                            HAVEN                       WIL
                                                                        MANOR                                          YR
                                                                                                                         D
                                          NORTH FAIR OAKS
                                                                                                          SOUTH OF                   FLOOD                                                          EAST PALO ALTO
                                                                                                         SEMINARY/                  TRIANGLE
                                                                                      FELTON
                                                                                                                             DA
                                                                                      GABLES              VINTAGE              VE
                                                                                                            OAKS            OO
                                                                                                                        GW
                                                                                                                                                                                               HI
                                                                                                                      RIN                                                                        GH
                                                                                                                                                                                                          W
                                                                                                                                                                            THE                            AY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        10
                                                                                               CENTRAL                       MI
                                                                                                                                 DD                            RD         WILLOWS                                         1
                                                                                                                                    LEF
                                                                                                MENLO                                  IEL
                                                                                                                                           D
                                                                                                                                                           LOW
                                                                                                                                               RD
                                                                                                                                                          WIL
                                          PARK FOREST/
                                            SPRUCE/                                                                     LINFIELD
           ATHERTON                       SAN ANTONIO                                                                     OAKS
                                                                                  DOWNTOWN
                                                     AV
                                                                                                     ALLIED ARTS/
                                                        E
                                                    O
                                                 AIS              AV E                                STANFORD
                                                                                                         PARK
                                              PA R               UZ
                                             VA L            CR
                                                            NT             WEST
                                                        SA
                                                              A
                                                                          MENLO                                                                                                                           PALO ALTO
                                                                                      AV E
                                                                                      LE                                                                  EL                 CA
                                                                                  IDD                                                                          CA                 LTR
                                                                                  M                                                                                 M                AI
                                                                                                                                                                     IN                  N
            AL                                                    DR                                                                                                     O
              AM                                                                                                RD
                                                                                                                                                                             RE
                 ED
                                                              ELL
                                                                                                          ILL
                                                                                                                                                                               AL
                   A                                         KD
                                                                                                         H
                       DE                                   OA                                       D
                            LA                                                                    N
                              SP
                                 UL                                                             SA
                                   GA
                                      S
          SHARON
          HEIGHTS
                                                                                                                        STANFORD
                                                                                                                          LANDS
                                          STANFORD
                                             HILLS                    ALPINE RD
                                                                                                                                                                        Transportation                    Commercial Center
                                                                                                                                                                        Corridor
                                                                                                                                                                        Bicycle Facility                  Employment Center
                                           HIG                                                                                                                                                            Parks
                                                                                                                                                                        Pedestrian Bridge
                                               HW
                                                 AY                                                                                                                                                       Schools/Public Facility
                                                    2       80                                                                                                          Gateway
                                                                                                                                                                        View Corridor/
                                                                                                                                                                        Scenic Vista
                                                                                                                                                                        Residential                   0                  0.3      0.6 Miles
                                                                                                                                                                        Neighborhood
                                                                                                                                    FI G U R E 3 : C O MMU N I T Y F E AT U RE S
                                                                        C I T Y  O F   M E N L O   P A R K  G E N E R A L   P L A N
                                                                                                     L A N D  U S E   E L E M E N T
restaurants, shops, offices, hotels, residences, places of worship, and
mixed-use sites, making the area a bustling and diverse focal point of the
City.
Although considerably smaller and less heavily trafficked than
downtown, the Sharon Heights Shopping Center is the only major
shopping center in Menlo Park outside of downtown and off of El
Camino Real. Located along Sand Hill Road, the Sharon Heights Shopping
Center contains primarily neighborhood-serving retail, including a
grocery store, gas station, pharmacy, and restaurants.
                                                                                A mix of businesses on El Camino Real
Although the commercial and mixed uses along Alameda de Las Pulgas
are not within Menlo Park, the area is bounded on three sides by city
neighborhoods. The corridor features a variety of restaurants, shops, and
other services. Stanford Shopping Center is another center outside of
Menlo Park that provides important retail and other services for the
Menlo Park community. Located at El Camino Real and Sand Hill Road,
Stanford Shopping Center is a large, open-air mall with a wide variety of
restaurants and retail stores serving as a regional draw.
EMPLOYMENT CENTERS
                                                                                Employment center on El Camino Real
Businesses are an essential component of the local economy. They have
the potential to employ local residents and generate a significant portion
of the revenue the City of Menlo Park depends on to provide quality
services. Menlo Park is home to a number of large employers, which are
generally concentrated in several clusters: the area fronting the Bay, the
Veterans Administration Medical Center, central/downtown Menlo Park,
and the venture capital corridor along Sand Hill Road. Major employers
can generate demand for services and housing, but also provide needed
community amenities through land use incentives.
OPEN SPACE                                                                      Sand Hill Road offices
Preservation of scenic, habitat, and recreational resources in Menlo Park
is key to retaining the city’s special sense of place. Among its many
natural features, Menlo Park is known for its high-quality active and
passive recreation areas, including Bedwell Bayfront Park, which is a
regional draw. Menlo Park highly values ongoing restoration and
conservation efforts in the Baylands, which provide habitat for a wide
variety of plants and animals in the Don Edwards National Wildlife
Refuge.
                                                                                Don Edwards National Wildlife Refuge
                                                                                                                              LU-9

  C I T Y O F   M E N L O   P A R K G E N E R A L P L A N
  L A N D  U S E  E L E M E N T
                                                     Menlo Park’s land use designation percentages are compared below in
                                                     Figure 4. Residential uses make up the majority of the city’s land area,
                                                     while the remaining 45 percent is split among the other allowed uses.
                                                                        Figure 4      Comparison of Land Uses
                                                                                              Source: City of Menlo Park
                                                     LAND USE DESIGNATIONS
                                                     The physical components of the city can be grouped into broad land use
                                                     categories, such as residential and commercial. Distinct types of land
                                                     uses are grouped into categories called “designations” under the General
                                                     Plan. Each designation establishes the general types of uses and a range
                                                     of development intensities. Residential development is usually described
                                                     in terms of “density,” measured in dwelling units per acre, while
                                                     nonresidential uses are typically characterized by “intensity” expressed
                                                     in floor area ratio (FAR), which determines the amount of building square
                                                     footage relative to lot area.
LU-10

                                                                        C I T Y O F M E N L O P A R K  G E N E R A L   P L A N
                                                                                                L A N D  U S E   E L E M E N T
In Menlo Park, zoning districts and General Plan land use designations
are closely aligned. The City’s General Plan Land Use Diagram is
integrated with the City’s Zoning Map, which shows the parcel-specific
delineation of the zoning districts throughout the city and depicts the
land use pattern for future development in Menlo Park. Table 1 shows
the correspondence between General Plan land use designations and
zoning districts.
Zoning is a means to implement the General Plan by refining the specific
uses and development standards within a designation. Zoning districts
specify regulatory standards such as allowed uses, FAR, minimum
setbacks, parking requirements, height restrictions, and other aspects of
development. For example, a one-story building that covers half a parcel
would have an FAR of 50 percent, while a three-story building that
covers 25 percent of a lot would have an FAR of 75 percent. A
development can take different shapes and forms, even with the same
FAR, given other development regulations that also must be considered.
At the time of the ConnectMenlo update of the General Plan Land Use
and Circulation Elements in 2016, there were approximately 13,000
housing units and 14.5 million square feet of non-residential
development in Menlo Park. The following land use designations, as
updated through ConnectMenlo, carry forward the added development
potential from the prior general plan of approximately 1,000 additional
dwelling units and 1.8 million nonresidential square feet citywide, along         Bayfront Additional
with a new, additional potential capped at 4,500 more housing units, 400          Development Cap:
hotel rooms, and 2.3 million nonresidential square feet – all in the               4,500 housing units
Bayfront area between Highway 101 and the Bay. Any future proposals                400 hotel rooms
that would exceed those levels would require additional review under
                                                                                   2,300,000 nonresidential
the California Environmental Quality Act.
                                                                                    sq. ft.
The General Plan land use designations and standards of density and
                                                                                  Any future proposal to exceed
building intensity are described below. Figure 5 shows the general
                                                                                  the cap would require
locations of land use designations but is not intended to portray zoning
                                                                                  additional environmental
districts on a parcel-by-parcel basis. Land uses in the El Camino Real and
                                                                                  review,
downtown area are governed by the El Camino Real/Downtown Specific
Plan.
                                                                                                                        LU-11

REDWOOD                                                                      HAVE
                                                                                 N AV
  CITY                                                                               E
                                                                                                                                                                                SITY AVE
                                                                                                                                                                            IVER
                                                                                                                                                                          UN
                                                                                 MA
                                                                                   RSH                                  CHILCO ST
                                                                                       RD
                                                                                                        BAY                      NEW     IVY DR
                                NORTH FAIR OAKS                                                             RD
                                                                                                                                    BRID
                                                                                                                                        GE
                                 (Unincorporated)                                                                                          ST
                                                                                                                                                          EAST
                                                                                                                  AVE                                   PALO ALTO
                                                                                                            RIN
                                                                                                               GW   CO
                                                                                                                 OO   LEM
                                                                                                                         AN
                                                                                                                   D        AVE
                                                                                                                 MI         WIL
                                                                                                                               LOW
                                                                                           M
                                                                                          CA ENLO
                                                                                            LTR PA                 DD
                                                                                               AIN RK
                                                                                                                     LEF           RD
                                                                                                                        IEL                        A
                                                                                                  STA                                        VE
                                                                                                                           DR                  D
                                                                                                                                        LA N
                                                                                                     TIO
                                                                                    EL !       LA                            D
                                                                                                                                   WOO D
                                                                                                        N
     ATHERTON                                                                          CA         UR
                                                                                          MI        EL
                                                                                            NO         ST
                                                                                               RE
                                                                                 UN              AL
                                                                                   IVE
                                                                                 AV   RS
                                                                 SA
                                                                   NT              E    ITY
                                                                                            DR
                                     e rto n Cha nnel
                                                        VA             AC
                                                                          RU                                                                       PALO ALTO
                                 Ath
                                                          LPA               ZA
                                                             RA               VE
                                                               ISO
                                                              MIDD
                                                                    LE AV
                                                                      OL E
                                                                        IVE
                                                                            ST
                     AL
                       AM
                         ED
                           AD
                             EL
                               AS                                                                                                                      Sphere of Influence
                                  PU
                                    LG
                                      AS                                                                                                               Planning Area
                                     TE ROSA
                                                                                                                                                       City Limits
                      MO              DR                                                                                                     Generalized Land Uses
                        N
                               SHAR
                                   O N P ARK DR
                                                                   PI E RD
                                                                 AL N
                                                                                                                                                       Residential
                                        ILL RD                                                          STANFORD
                                  SANDH
                                                                                                                                                       Commercial
                                                                                                                                                       Specific Plan Area
                                                                                                          LANDS                                        Parks and Recreation
                                                                                                                                                       Public/Quasi-Public
                                                                                                                                             Bayfront Area
                                                                                                                                                       Baylands
                                                                                                                                                       Life Sciences
                                                                                                                                                       Office
          San Franc isquito Cr
                                                                                                                                                       Mixed-Use Residential
                               eek
                                                                                                                                                       Light Industrial
0     0.5                            1 Miles
                                                                                                                                                       Commercial Business Park
                                                                     FI G UR E 5 : G E N E R A L P LA N LA N D U SE D E SI G N A T I ON S
                                                                                                         C I T Y   O F    M E N L O    P A R K    G E N E R A L   P L A N
                                                                                                                                          L A N D    U S E  E L E M E N T
TABLE 1              LAND USE DESIGNATIONS AND ZONING DISTRICTS
General Plan                                                                                                                         Percentage of
Land Use Designation               Applicable Zoning Districts                                                     Acreage        Non-Baylands Area
Residential                                                                                                          1,930               54.9%
                                   Residential Estate (R-E)
Very Low Density Residential                                                                                          168                4.8%
                                   Residential Estate Suburban (R-E-S)
                                   Single Family Suburban Residential (R-1-S)
                                   Single Family Suburban Residential (Felton Gables) (R-1-S (FG))
Low Density Residential                                                                                              1,372              39.0%
                                   Single Family Urban Residential (R-1-U)
                                   Single Family Urban Residential (Lorelei Manor) (R-1-U (LM))
                                   Low Density Apartment (R-2)
                                   Apartment (R-3)
Medium Density Residential                                                                                            355               10.1%
                                   Garden Apartment Residential (R-3-A)
                                   Historic Site (H)
                                   High-Density Residential (R-4)
                                   High-Density Residential, Special (R-4-S)
High Density Residential           High-Density Residential, Special, Affordable Housing Overlay (R-4-S                35                1.0%
                                   (AHO))
                                   Retirement Living Units (R-L-U)
Commercial                                                                                                            254                7.2%
                                   Neighborhood Shopping (C-2)
                                   Neighborhood Shopping, Restrictive (C-2-A)
                                   Neighborhood Mixed Use, Restrictive (C-2-B)
Retail/ Commercial                                                                                                     42                1.2%
                                   Neighborhood Commercial, Special (C-2-S)
                                   General Commercial (C-4)
                                   Parking (P)
                                   Administrative and Professional, Restrictive (C-1)
Professional and Administrative    Administrative and Professional (C-1-A)
                                                                                                                      212                 6%
Offices                            Administrative, Professional and Research, Restrictive (C-1-C)
                                   Apartment Office (R-3-C)**
Bayfront Area                                                                                                         511                14.5%
Office                             Office (O) – Base/Bonus/Commercial/Hotel/Corp. Housing
Life Sciences                      Life Sciences (LS) – Base/Bonus/Commercial
Mixed Use Residential              Residential – Mixed Use (R-MU) – Base/Bonus/Nonres.
Light Industrial                   General Industry (M-2)
Commercial Business Park           Commercial Business Park (M-3)
Specific Plan Area                 El Camino Real/Downtown Specific Plan (SP-ECR/D)                                   122                3.5%
                                   Open Space and Conservation (OSC)
Parks and Recreation*                                                                                                 349                9.9%
                                   Flood Plain (FP)
                                   Public Facilities (P-F)
Public / Quasi-Public                                                                                                 231                6.6%
                                   Allied Arts Guild Preservation (AAGP)
No Designation                     Unclassified Utilities and Rail Rights-of-Way (U)                                  121                3.4%
                                   Total Non-Baylands Area                                                           3,517
Baylands                           Flood Plain (FP)                                                                  2,194
                                   Area within SF Bay                                                                4,965
                                   Total                                                                            10,676
*Includes Bedwell Bayfront Park and the Stanford Golf Course area between Junipero Serra Boulevard and Sand Hill Road.
**The R-3-C Zoning District may have residential uses, but at densities covered by the Professional and Administrative Offices Land Use Designation.
                                                                                                                                                                   LU-13

  C I T Y O F   M E N L O   P A R K G E N E R A L P L A N
  L A N D  U S E  E L E M E N T
                                                     RESIDENTIAL
                                                     Residential land uses are those where people live, such as single-family
                                                     homes, duplexes, or apartment/condominium buildings. Single-family
                                                     neighborhoods comprise more than two-thirds of residential land in
                                                     Menlo Park. Residential land use designations in the city are discussed
                                                     below. Maximum residential densities may be increased with application
                                                     of the City’s Below Market Rate Program or Affordable Housing Overlay
                                                     or the State Density Bonus law, if applicable.
                                                     Very Low Density Residential. This designation provides for single family
                                                     detached homes, secondary dwelling units, public and quasi-public uses,
 Low Density Residential                             and similar and compatible uses. Density shall be a maximum of 2.9 units
                                                     per acre and floor areas shall be limited to those identified in the
                                                     applicable zoning district, which is typically 2,800 square feet plus 25
                                                     percent of the lot area over 7,000 square feet for lots 5,000 square feet
                                                     or greater in area.
                                                     Low Density Residential. This designation provides for single family
                                                     detached homes, secondary dwelling units, public and quasi-public uses,
                                                     and similar and compatible uses. Density shall be a maximum of 8.9 units
                                                     per acre and floor areas shall be limited to those identified in the
                                                     applicable zoning district, which is typically 2,800 square feet plus 25
                                                     percent of the lot area over 7,000 square feet for lots 5,000 square feet
                                                     or greater in area.
                                                     Medium Density Residential. This designation provides for single family
                                                     detached and attached homes, duplexes, multi-family apartments
                                                     condominiums, public and quasi-public uses, and similar and compatible
                                                     uses. Density shall be a maximum of 18.5 units per acre as identified in
                                                     the applicable zoning district, and up to 30 units per acre in designated
                                                     areas around the El Camino Real/Downtown Specific Plan boundary. FAR
  Medium Density Residential
                                                     shall be in the range of 40 to 75 percent, as identified in the applicable
                                                     zoning district.
                                                     High Density Residential. This designation provides for multi-family
                                                     apartments, condominiums, senior rental housing, public and quasi-
                                                     public uses, and similar and compatible uses. Density shall be a
                                                     maximum of 40 units per acre as identified in the applicable zoning
                                                     district, and may be up to 97 units per net acre for senior rental housing.
                                                     The maximum FAR shall be 150 percent.
LU-14

                                                                          C I T Y  O F   M E N L O P A R K  G E N E R A L   P L A N
                                                                                                     L A N D  U S E   E L E M E N T
COMMERCIAL
Commercial designations accommodate a range of business types, from
neighborhood-serving retail and services, to shopping centers, to a
variety of office uses. Commercial uses may occur independently or in
mixed-use configurations, including alongside or in the same buildings as
residential dwellings. Commercial designations in Menlo Park are:
Retail/Commercial. This designation provides for retail services, personal
services, professional offices, banks, savings and loans, restaurants,
cafes, theaters, residences, public and quasi-public uses, and similar and
compatible uses. Residential density shall not exceed 30 units per acre,
as identified in the applicable zoning district. The maximum FAR for non-
residential uses shall be 50 percent, 90 percent for residential uses, and
100 percent for mixed uses, as identified in the applicable zoning district.
                                                                                  Retail
Professional and Administrative Office. This designation provides for
professional, executive, general, and administrative offices, banks,
savings and loans, R&D facilities, convalescent homes, residential uses,
public and quasi-public uses, and similar and compatible uses.
Residential density shall not exceed 18.5 units per acre. The maximum
FAR for non-residential uses shall be a maximum of 40 percent, as
identified in the applicable zoning district.
BAYFRONT AREA
The purpose of the Bayfront Area designation is to create live/work/play
environments. This designation encourages office, research and
development, residential, commercial uses, and hotels, all in close
proximity or integrated with one another. These designations are
intended to foster innovation and emerging technologies; promote the
creation of an employment district with travel patterns that are oriented
toward pedestrian, transit, and bicycle use; and provide amenities to
surrounding neighborhoods and fiscal support to the City leveraged
through development intensity bonuses. The Office and Life Sciences
designations allow increased development intensities with the provision
of community amenities. Master planned projects on parcels that are in
the same designation that are in close proximity or large contiguous
parcels with different zoning designations and that are owned by the
same entity may calculate residential density, FAR and open space based           Research & Development (R&D)
on aggregate lot area provided that the underlying development
                                                                                                                             LU-15
  C I T Y O F   M E N L O   P A R K G E N E R A L P L A N
  L A N D  U S E  E L E M E N T
                                                     regulations are satisfied and the vision for the Bayfront Area identified in
                                                     the General Plan is maintained and the maximum overall residential
                                                     density and/or FAR of the combined parcels is not exceeded.
                                                     Office. This designation provides for office and R&D uses, business-
                                                     oriented community education and training facilities, supportive sales
                                                     and personal services, corporate housing, and hotel uses. The
                                                     designation also accommodates existing and new light-industrial uses
                                                     that are not in conflict with existing or planned commercial or residential
                                                     uses in the vicinity. Hotels are allowed as options in several locations.
                                                     Corporate housing density shall not exceed 30 units per acre. The
                                                     maximum base FAR shall be 45 percent and the maximum bonus FAR
                                                     with community amenities shall be 100 percent. Maximum FAR for
                                                     corporate housing shall be 60 percent, for retail and service uses shall be
                                                     25 percent, and for hotels shall be 175 percent.
                                                     Life Sciences. This designation provides for new life sciences and R&D
                                                     uses, along with high-tech office and supportive sales and personal
                                                     services. The designation also accommodates existing light-industrial
                                                     uses and new light-industrial uses that are not in conflict with existing or
                                                     planned commercial or residential uses in the vicinity. The maximum
                                                     base FAR shall be 55 percent and the maximum bonus FAR with
                                                     community amenities shall be 125 percent. Maximum FAR for retail and
                                                     service uses shall be 10 percent.
                                                     Mixed Use Residential. This designation provides for higher density
                                                     housing to meet the needs of all income levels. It also allows mixed use
                                                     developments with integrated or stand-alone supportive sales and
                                                     service uses, and uses that are consistent with the Office Designation.
                                                     Sales uses can range from small-scale businesses that serve nearby
                                                     employment to a large-format grocery to serve adjacent neighborhoods.
                                                     This designation is intended to promote live/work/play environments
                                                     oriented toward pedestrians, transit, and bicycle use, especially for
                                                     commuting to nearby jobs. The maximum base residential density shall
                                                     not exceed 30 units per acre, and the maximum bonus FAR is 100 units
                                                     per acre. Maximum base FAR for residential uses shall be 90 percent, and
                                                     a maximum of 225 percent for bonus FAR. Non-residential uses shall
                                                     have a maximum base FAR of 15 percent and bonus FAR of 25 percent.
Mixed Use Residential
                                                     Light Industrial. This designation provides for light manufacturing and
                                                     assembly, distribution of manufactured products, R&D facilities,
LU-16
                                                                         C I T Y O F   M E N L O P A R K  G E N E R A L   P L A N
                                                                                                   L A N D  U S E   E L E M E N T
industrial supply, incidental warehousing, offices, supportive sales and
personal services, public and quasi-public uses, and similar and
compatible uses. The maximum FAR shall be in the range of 45 percent
to 55 percent.
Commercial Business Park. This designation provides for light
manufacturing and assembly, distribution of manufactured products,
R&D facilities, industrial supply, incidental warehousing, offices,
supportive sales and personal services, hotels, public and quasi-public
uses, and similar and compatible uses. The maximum FAR shall be 45
percent, except through a negotiated Development Agreement, which
could allow a maximum FAR of 137.5 percent, with office uses limited to
100 percent.
SPECIFIC PLAN AREA
El Camino Real/Downtown Specific Plan. This designation provides for a
variety of retail, office, residential, personal services, and public and
semipublic uses, as specified in the El Camino Real/Downtown Specific
Plan. Residential density shall be in the range of between 18.5 to 50 units
per acre (base-level maximum) or 25 to 60 units per acre (public benefit
bonus-level maximum). The maximum FAR shall be in the range of 85
percent to 200 percent (base-level maximum) or 100 percent to 225
percent (public benefit bonus-level maximum). Office (inclusive of
medical and dental offices) FAR is limited to one-half of the appropriate
total FAR, and medical and dental office FAR is limited to one-third of the
appropriate total FAR.
PARKS AND RECREATION
This designation provides for open space and conservation areas, public
and private golf courses, and passive and active recreation uses. The
maximum FAR shall be 2.5 percent.
PUBLIC /QUASI -PUBLIC
This category accommodates facilities such as schools, libraries,
government offices, and community facilities as follows:
                                                                                 Kelly Park
Public Facilities. This designation provides for public and quasi-public
uses such as government offices, fire stations, schools, churches,
                                                                                                                           LU-17
  C I T Y O F   M E N L O   P A R K G E N E R A L P L A N
  L A N D  U S E  E L E M E N T
                                                     hospitals, public utility facilities, sewage treatment facilities, reservoirs,
                                                     and similar and compatible uses. The maximum FAR shall not exceed 30
                                                     percent. The City recognizes that it does not have the authority to
                                                     regulate development by federal, State, or other certain governmental
                                                     agencies, but the City will work cooperatively with these agencies in an
                                                     effort to ensure their development is consistent with City goals and
                                                     plans.
                                                     Allied Arts Guild. This designation applies to the Guild for artisans and
                                                     craftsmen comprised of retail shops, workshops, restaurant, gardens and
                                                     public grounds at 75 Arbor Road. The Guild was constructed in 1929 and
                                                     has historic significance for both its relationship to the American Arts and
                                                     Crafts Movement and the architecturally important buildings and
                                                     gardens. Allowed uses shall be as established in the Allied Arts Guild
                                                     Preservation Permit. The maximum FAR for the property shall be 15
                                                     percent.
                                                     BAYLANDS
                                                     This designation provides for the preservation and protection of wildlife
                                                     habitat and ecological values associated with the marshlands and former
                                                     salt ponds bordering San Francisco Bay and similar and compatible uses.
                                                     The maximum amount of development allowed under this designation
                                                     shall be 5,000 square feet of building floor area per parcel.
                                                     GOALS, POLICIES, AND PROGRAMS
                                                     ORDERLY DEVELOPMENT
                                                     GOAL LU-1           Promote the orderly development of Menlo Park and its
                                                                         surrounding area.
                                                     POLICIES
                                                     Policy LU-1.1       Land Use Patterns. Cooperate with the appropriate agencies
                                                                         to help assure a coordinated land use pattern in Menlo Park
                                                                         and the surrounding area.
                                                     Policy LU-1.2       Transportation Network Expansion. Integrate regional land
                                                                         use planning efforts with development of an expanded
LU-18
                                                                            C I T Y O F M E N L O P A R K  G E N E R A L   P L A N
                                                                                                    L A N D  U S E   E L E M E N T
               transportation network focusing on mass transit rather than
               freeways, and encourage development that supports
               multimodal transportation.
Policy LU-1.3  Land Annexation. Work with interested neighborhood
               groups to establish steps and conditions under which
               unincorporated lands within the City's sphere of influence
               may be annexed.
Policy LU-1.4  Unincorporated Land Development. Request that San Mateo
               County consider Menlo Park's General Plan policies and land
               use regulations in reviewing and approving new
               developments in unincorporated areas in Menlo Park's
               sphere of influence.
Policy LU-1.5  Adjacent Jurisdictions. Work with adjacent jurisdictions to
               ensure that decisions regarding potential land use activities
               near Menlo Park include consideration of City and Menlo
               Park community objectives.
Policy LU-1.6  Infill Development Environmental Review. Streamline the
               environmental review process for eligible infill projects by
               focusing the topics subject to review where the effects of
               infill development have not been addressed in a planning
               level decision or by “uniformly applicable development
               policies or standards,” in accordance with CEQA Guidelines
               Section 15183.3.
Policy LU-1.7  School Facilities. Encourage excellence in public education
               citywide, as well as use of school facilities for recreation by
               youth to promote healthy living.
PROGRAMS
Program LU-1.A Zoning Ordinance Consistency. Update the Zoning Ordinance
               as needed to maintain consistency with the General Plan.
Program LU-1.B Capital Improvement Program. Annually review progress
               implementing General Plan policies, and update the Capital
               Improvement Program to reflect the latest City and
               community priorities embodied in the General Plan,
               including for physical projects related to transportation,
               water supply, drainage, and other community-serving
               facilities and infrastructure.
                                                                                                                            LU-19

  C I T Y O F   M E N L O   P A R K G E N E R A L P L A N
  L A N D  U S E  E L E M E N T
                                                     Program LU-1.C Land Use Element Review. Conduct an in-depth review of
                                                                    the General Plan Land Use Element two (2) years after its
                                                                    adoption and thereafter as directed by the City Council.
                                                     Program LU-1.D Infill Development Streamlined Review. Establish Zoning
                                                                    Ordinance provisions to streamline review of infill
                                                                    development through “uniformly applicable development
                                                                    policies or standards” (per CEQA Guidelines Section
                                                                    15183.3) that reduce potential adverse environmental
                                                                    effects, such as: regulations governing grading, construction
                                                                    activities, storm water runoff treatment and containment,
                                                                    hazardous materials, and greenhouse gas emissions; and
                                                                    impact fees for public improvements, including safety and
                                                                    law enforcement services, parks and open space, and
                                                                    transit, bicycle, and pedestrian infrastructure.
                                                     Program LU-1.E School District Partnership. Meet regularly with the school
                                                                    districts to aid in identifying opportunities for partnership
                                                                    with the City in promoting excellence in education and
                                                                    recreation at all schools serving Menlo Park residents.
                                                     Program LU-1.F Assessment Districts and Impact Fees. Pursue the creation of
                                                                    assessment districts and/or the adoption of development
                                                                    impact fees to address infrastructure and service needs in
                                                                    the community.
                                                     NEIGHBORHOOD PRESERVATION
                                                     GOAL LU-2      Maintain and enhance the character, variety and
                                                                    stability of Menlo Park’s residential neighborhoods.
                                                     POLICIES
                                                     Policy LU-2.1  Neighborhood Compatibility. Ensure that new residential
                                                                    development possesses high-quality design that is
                                                                    compatible with the scale, look, and feel of the surrounding
                                                                    neighborhood and that respects the city’s residential
                                                                    character.
                                                     Policy LU-2.2  Open Space. Require accessible, attractive open space that is
                                                                    well maintained and uses sustainable practices and materials
                                                                    in all new multiple dwelling and mixed-use development.
LU-20

                                                                               C I T Y O F M E N L O P A R K  G E N E R A L   P L A N
                                                                                                       L A N D  U S E   E L E M E N T
Policy LU-2.3  Mixed Use Design. Allow mixed-use projects with residential
               units if project design addresses potential compatibility
               issues such as traffic, parking, light spillover, dust, odors, and
               transport and use of potentially hazardous materials.
Policy LU-2.4  Second Units. Encourage development of second residential
               units on single family lots consistent with adopted City
               standards.
Policy LU-2.5  Below-Market       Rate     Housing.       Require      residential
               developments of five or more units to comply with the
               provisions of the City's Below-Market Rate (BMR) Housing
               Program, including eligibility for increased density above the
               number of market rate dwellings otherwise permitted by the
               applicable zoning and other exceptions and incentives.
Policy LU-2.6  Underground Utilities. Require all electric and
               communications lines serving new development to be
               placed underground.
Policy LU-2.7  Conversion of Residential Units. Limit the loss in the number
               of residential units or conversion of existing residential units
               to nonresidential uses, unless there is a clear public benefit
               or equivalent housing can be provided to ensure the
               protection and conservation of the City’s housing stock to
               the extent permitted by law.
Policy LU-2.8  Property Maintenance. Require property owners to maintain
               buildings, yards, and parking lots in a clean and attractive
               condition.
Policy LU-2.9  Compatible Uses. Promote residential uses in mixed-use
               arrangements and the clustering of compatible uses such as
               employment centers, shopping areas, open space and parks,
               within easy walking and bicycling distance of each other and
               transit stops.
PROGRAMS
Program LU-2.A Property Maintenance Compliance. Work with property
               owners to understand City codes and to ensure that
               buildings, yards, landscaping, and trees are well maintained,
               and that property is free of litter, in prompt compliance with
               City codes.
                                                                                                                               LU-21

  C I T Y O F   M E N L O   P A R K G E N E R A L P L A N
  L A N D  U S E  E L E M E N T
                                                     Program LU-2.B Single-Family Residential Development. Update the Zoning
                                                                    Ordinance requirements for single-family residential
                                                                    developments to create a more predictable and expeditious
                                                                    process while providing a method for encouraging high-
                                                                    quality design in new and expanded residences.
                                                     Program LU-2.C Address Residential Displacement. Identify, understand and
                                                                    implement best practices, including but not limited to
                                                                    funding mechanisms, affordable housing policies and
                                                                    strategies, anti-displacement policies, and local housing
                                                                    implementation strategies within a regional setting, to
                                                                    address residential displacement from non-residential
                                                                    development.
                                                     NEIGHBORHOOD-SERVING USES
                                                     GOAL LU-3      Retain and enhance existing and encourage new
                                                                    neighborhood-serving commercial uses, particularly
                                                                    retail services, to create vibrant commercial corridors.
                                                     POLICIES
                                                     Policy LU-3.1  Underutilized Properties. Encourage underutilized properties
                                                                    in and near existing shopping districts to redevelop with
                                                                    attractively designed commercial, residential, or mixed-use
                                                                    development that complements existing uses and supports
                                                                    pedestrian and bicycle access.
                                                     Policy LU-3.2  Neighborhood Shopping Impacts. Limit the impacts from
                                                                    neighborhood shopping areas, including traffic, parking,
                                                                    noise, light spillover, and odors, on adjacent uses.
                                                     Policy LU-3.3  Neighborhood Retail. Preserve existing neighborhood-
                                                                    serving retail, especially small businesses, and encourage the
                                                                    formation of new neighborhood retail clusters in
                                                                    appropriate areas while enhancing and preserving the
                                                                    character of the neighborhood.
                                                     PROGRAMS
                                                     Program LU-3.A Commercial Zoning Provisions. Review, and update as
                                                                    necessary, Zoning Ordinance provisions related to
                                                                    neighborhood-serving commercial uses, in part to ensure
LU-22
                                                                           C I T Y O F M E N L O P A R K  G E N E R A L   P L A N
                                                                                                   L A N D  U S E   E L E M E N T
              that an appropriate and attractive mix of uses can be
              provided.
BUSINESS DEVELOPMENT AND RETENTION
GOAL LU-4     Promote and encourage existing and new business to be
              successful and attract entrepreneurship and emerging
              technologies for providing goods, services amenities,
              local job opportunities and tax revenue for the
              community while avoiding or minimizing potential
              environmental and traffic impacts.
POLICIES
Policy LU-4.1 Priority Commercial Development. Encourage emerging
              technology and entrepreneurship, and prioritize commercial
              development that provides fiscal benefit to the City, local job
              opportunities, and/or goods or services needed by the
              community.
Policy LU-4.2 Hotel Location. Allow hotel uses at suitable locations in
              mixed-use and nonresidential zoning districts.
Policy LU-4.3 Mixed Use and Nonresidential Development. Limit parking,
              traffic, and other impacts of mixed-use and nonresidential
              development on adjacent uses, and promote high-quality
              architectural design and effective transportation options.
Policy LU-4.4 Community Amenities. Require mixed-use and nonresidential
              development of a certain minimum scale to support and
              contribute to programs that benefit the community and the
              City, including education, transit, transportation infra-
              structure, sustainability, neighborhood-serving amenities,
              child care, housing, job training, and meaningful
              employment for Menlo Park youth and adults.
Policy LU-4.5 Business Uses and Environmental Impacts. Allow
              modifications to business operations and structures that
              promote revenue generating uses for which potential
              environmental impacts can be mitigated.
Policy LU-4.6 Employment Center Walkability. Promote local-serving retail
              and personal service uses in employment centers and transit
              areas that support walkability and reduce auto trips.
                                                                                                                           LU-23
  C I T Y O F   M E N L O   P A R K G E N E R A L P L A N
  L A N D  U S E  E L E M E N T
                                                     Policy LU-4.7  Fiscal Impacts. Evaluate proposed mixed-use and
                                                                    nonresidential development of a certain minimum scale for
                                                                    its potential fiscal impacts on the City and community.
                                                     PROGRAMS
                                                     Program LU-4.A Fiscal    Impact Analysis. Establish Zoning Ordinance
                                                                    requirements for mixed-use, commercial, and industrial
                                                                    development proposals of a certain minimum scale to
                                                                    include analysis of potential fiscal impact on the City, school
                                                                    districts, and special districts, and establish guidelines for
                                                                    preparation of fiscal analyses.
                                                     Program LU-4.B Economic Development Plan. Update the strategic policies in
                                                                    the City’s Economic Development plan periodically as
                                                                    needed to reflect changing economic conditions or
                                                                    objectives in Menlo Park and/or to promote land use
                                                                    activities desired by the community, including small
                                                                    businesses and neighborhood-serving retail.
                                                     Program LU-4.C Community        Amenity Requirements. Establish Zoning
                                                                    Ordinance requirements for new mixed-use, commercial,
                                                                    and industrial development to support and contribute to
                                                                    programs that benefit the community and City, including
                                                                    public or private education, transit, transportation
                                                                    infrastructure, public safety facilities, sustainability,
                                                                    neighborhood-serving amenities, child care, housing for all
                                                                    income levels, job training, parks and meaningful
                                                                    employment for Menlo Park youth and adults (e.g., first
                                                                    source hiring). The list of specific benefits may be modified
                                                                    over time to reflect changes in community priorities and
                                                                    desired amenities.
                                                     Program LU-4.D Sign     Requirements. Update the Municipal Code
                                                                    requirements and design guidelines for off-site and on-site
                                                                    signage in compliance with Federal and State laws while
                                                                    providing a method for encouraging high-quality design in
                                                                    advertising for Menlo Park businesses.
LU-24

                                                                       C I T Y O F M E N L O P A R K  G E N E R A L   P L A N
                                                                                               L A N D  U S E   E L E M E N T
DOWNTOWN/EL CAMINO REAL
GOAL LU-5     Strengthen Downtown and the El Camino Real Corridor
              as a vital, competitive shopping area and center for
              community gathering, while encouraging preservation
              and enhancement of Downtown's atmosphere and
              character as well as creativity in development along El
              Camino Real.
POLICIES
Policy LU-5.1 El Camino Real/Downtown Specific Plan. Implement the El
              Camino Real/Downtown Specific Plan to ensure a
              complementary mix of uses with appropriate siting, design,
              parking, and circulation access for all travel modes.
Policy LU-5.2 El Camino Real/Downtown Housing. Encourage development
              of a range of housing types in the El Camino Real/Downtown
              Specific Plan area, consistent with the Specific Plan’s
              standards and guidelines, and the areas near/around the
              Specific Plan area.
OPEN SPACE
GOAL LU-6     Preserve open-space lands for recreation; protect
              natural resources and air and water quality; and protect
              and enhance scenic qualities.
POLICIES
Policy LU-6.1 Parks and Recreation System. Develop and maintain a parks
              and recreation system that provides areas, play fields, and
              facilities conveniently located and properly designed to
              serve the recreation needs of all Menlo Park residents.
Policy LU-6.2 Open Space in New Development. Require new
              nonresidential, mixed use, and multiple dwelling
              development of a certain minimum scale to provide ample
              open space in the form of plazas, greens, community
              gardens, and parks whose frequent use is encouraged
              through thoughtful placement and design.
                                                                                                                       LU-25

  C I T Y O F   M E N L O   P A R K G E N E R A L P L A N
  L A N D  U S E  E L E M E N T
                                                     Policy LU-6.3  Public Open Space Design. Promote public open space design
                                                                    that encourages active and passive uses, and use during
                                                                    daytime and appropriate nighttime hours to improve quality
                                                                    of life.
                                                     Policy LU-6.4  Park and Recreational Land Dedication. Require new
                                                                    residential development to dedicate land, or pay fees in lieu
                                                                    thereof, for park and recreation purposes.
                                                     Policy LU-6.5  Open Space Retention. Maximize the retention of open
                                                                    space on larger tracts (e.g., portions of the St. Patrick’s
                                                                    Seminary site) through means such as rezoning consistent
                                                                    with existing uses, clustered development, acquisition of a
                                                                    permanent open space easement, and/or transfer of
                                                                    development rights.
                                                     Policy LU-6.6  Public Bay Access. Protect and support public access to the
                                                                    Bay for the scenic enjoyment of open water, sloughs, and
                                                                    marshes, including restoration efforts, and completion of
                                                                    the Bay Trail.
                                                     Policy LU-6.7  Habitat Preservation. Collaborate with neighboring
                                                                    jurisdictions to preserve and enhance the Bay, shoreline, San
                                                                    Francisquito Creek, and other wildlife habitat and
                                                                    ecologically fragile areas to the maximum extent possible.
                                                     Policy LU-6.8  Landscaping in Development. Encourage extensive and
                                                                    appropriate landscaping in public and private development
                                                                    to maintain the City’s tree canopy and to promote
                                                                    sustainability and healthy living, particularly through
                                                                    increased trees and water-efficient landscaping in large
                                                                    parking areas and in the public right-of-way.
                                                     Policy LU-6.9  Pedestrian and Bicycle Facilities. Provide well-designed
                                                                    pedestrian and bicycle facilities for safe and convenient
                                                                    multi-modal activity through the use of access easements
                                                                    along linear parks or paseos.
                                                     Policy LU-6.10 Stanford Open Space Maintenance. Encourage the
                                                                    maintenance of open space on Stanford lands within Menlo
                                                                    Park’s unincorporated sphere of influence.
                                                     Policy LU-6.11 Baylands Preservation. Allow development near the Bay only
                                                                    in already developed areas.
LU-26

                                                                          C I T Y O F M E N L O P A R K  G E N E R A L   P L A N
                                                                                                  L A N D  U S E   E L E M E N T
PROGRAMS
Program LU-6.A San Francisquito Creek Setbacks. Establish Municipal Code
               requirements for minimum setbacks for new structures or
               impervious surfaces within a specified distance of the top of
               the San Francisquito Creek bank.
Program LU-6.B Open Space Requirements and Standards. Review, and
               update as necessary, Zoning Ordinance requirements for
               provision of open space in all multiple dwelling, mixed-use
               and nonresidential development of a certain minimum scale
               that encourages active and passive uses and human
               presence during daytime and appropriate nighttime hours.
Program LU-6.C Space for Food Production. Establish Zoning Ordinance
               requirements for new residential developments over a
               certain minimum scale to include space that can be used to
               grow food, and to establish a process through which a
               neighborhood can propose a site as a community garden.
Program LU-6.D Design for Birds. Require new buildings to employ façade,
               window, and lighting design features that make them visible
               to birds as physical barriers and eliminate conditions that
               create confusing reflections to birds.
Program LU-6.E Don Edwards National Wildlife Refuge. Consider the most
               appropriate zoning designation for the Don Edwards San
               Francisco National Wildlife Refuge to achieve the
               preservation and protection of wildlife habitat and ecological
               values associated with the marshlands and former salt
               ponds bordering the San Francisco Bay.
SUSTAINABLE SERVICES
GOAL LU-7      Promote the implementation and maintenance of
               sustainable development, facilities and services to meet
               the needs of Menlo Park's residents, businesses,
               workers, and visitors.
POLICIES
Policy LU-7.1  Sustainability. Promote sustainable site planning,
               development, landscaping, and operational practices that
               conserve resources and minimize waste.
                                                                                                                          LU-27

  C I T Y O F   M E N L O   P A R K G E N E R A L P L A N
  L A N D  U S E  E L E M E N T
                                                     Policy LU-7.2 Water Supply. Support the efforts of the Bay Area Water
                                                                   Supply and Conservation Agency or other appropriate
                                                                   agencies to secure adequate water supplies for the
                                                                   Peninsula, to the extent that these efforts are in
                                                                   conformance with other City policies.
                                                     Policy LU-7.3 Supplemental Water Supply. Explore and evaluate
                                                                   development of supplemental water sources and storage
                                                                   systems, such as wells and cisterns, for use during both
                                                                   normal and dry years, in collaboration with water providers
                                                                   and users.
                                                     Policy LU-7.4 Water Protection. Work with regional and local jurisdictions
                                                                   and agencies responsible for ground water extraction to
                                                                   develop a comprehensive underground water protection
                                                                   program in accordance with the San Francisquito Creek
                                                                   Watershed Policy, which includes preservation of existing
                                                                   sources and monitoring of all wells in the basin to evaluate
                                                                   the long term effects of water extraction.
                                                     Policy LU-7.5 Reclaimed Water Use. Implement use of adequately treated
                                                                   “reclaimed” water (recycled/nonpotable water sources such
                                                                   as, graywater, blackwater, rainwater, stormwater,
                                                                   foundation drainage, etc.) through dual plumbing systems
                                                                   for outdoor and indoor uses, as feasible.
                                                     Policy LU-7.6 Sewage Treatment Facilities. Support expansion and
                                                                   improvement of sewage treatment facilities to meet Menlo
                                                                   Park’s needs, as well as regional water quality standards, to
                                                                   the extent that such expansion and improvement are in
                                                                   conformance with other City policies.
                                                     Policy LU-7.7 Hazards. Avoid development in areas with seismic, flood, fire
                                                                   and other hazards to life or property when potential impacts
                                                                   cannot be mitigated.
                                                     Policy LU-7.8 Cultural Resource Preservation. Promote preservation of
                                                                   buildings, objects, and sites with historic and/or cultural
                                                                   significance.
                                                     Policy LU-7.9 Green Building. Support sustainability and green building
                                                                   best practices through the orientation, design, and
                                                                   placement of buildings and facilities to optimize their energy
                                                                   efficiency in preparation of State zero-net energy
LU-28

                                                                           C I T Y O F M E N L O P A R K  G E N E R A L   P L A N
                                                                                                   L A N D  U S E   E L E M E N T
               requirements for residential construction in 2020 and
               commercial construction in 2030.
PROGRAMS
Program LU-7.A Green Building Operation and Maintenance. Employ green
               building and operation and maintenance best practices,
               including increased energy efficiency, use of renewable
               energy and reclaimed water, and install drought-tolerant
               landscaping for all projects.
Program LU-7.B Groundwater Wells. Monitor pumping from existing and new
               wells to identify and prevent potential ground subsidence,
               salinity intrusion into shallow aquifers (particularly in the
               Bayfront Area), and contamination of deeper aquifers.
Program LU-7.C Sustainability Criteria. Establish sustainability criteria and
               metrics for resource use and conservation and monitor
               performance of projects of a certain minimum size.
Program LU-7.D Performance Standards. Establish performance standards in
               the Zoning Ordinance that requires new development to
               employ environmentally friendly technology and design to
               conserve energy and water, and minimize the generation of
               indoor and outdoor pollutants.
Program LU-7.E Greenhouse Gas Emissions. Develop a Greenhouse Gas
               (GHG) standard for development projects that would help
               reduce communitywide GHG emissions to meet City and
               Statewide reduction goals.
Program LU-7.F Adaptation Plan. Work with emergency service providers to
               develop an adaptation plan, including funding mechanisms,
               to help prepare the community for potential adverse
               impacts related to climate change, such as sea level rise,
               extreme weather events, wildfire, and threats to ecosystem
               and species health.
Program LU-7.G SAFER Bay Process. Coordinate with the SAFER Bay process
               to ensure that the Menlo Park community’s objectives for
               sea level rise/flood protection, ecosystem enhancement,
               and recreational trails are adequately taken into
               consideration.
                                                                                                                           LU-29

  C I T Y O F   M E N L O   P A R K G E N E R A L P L A N
  L A N D  U S E  E L E M E N T
                                                     Program LU-7.H Sea Level Rise. Establish requirements based on State Sea
                                                                    Level Rise Policy Guidance for development projects of a
                                                                    certain minimum scale potentially affected by sea level rise
                                                                    to ensure protection of occupants and property from
                                                                    flooding and other potential effects.
                                                     Program LU-7.I Green Infrastructure Plan. Develop a Green Infrastructure
                                                                    Plan that focuses on implementing City-wide projects that
                                                                    mitigate flooding and improve storm water quality.
LU-30

                   Acknowledgments
                             City Council
                            Catherine Carlton
                              Richard Cline
                              Kirsten Keith
                    Ray Mueller, Mayor Pro Tem
                          Peter Ohtaki, Mayor
                     Planning Commission
                            Vincent Bressler
                                Ben Eiref
                           Katie Ferrick, Chair
                      John Kadvany, Vice Chair
                             John O’Malley
                              John Onken
                              Henry Riggs
                               City Staff
Justin Murphy, Project Manager and Development Services Manager
                   Deanna Chow, Senior Planner
                      Momoko Ishijima, Planner
         Arlinda Heineck, Community Development Director
          Vanh Malathong, Technical Services Coordinator
                   Ron LaFrance, Building Official
         Rebecca Fotu, Environmental Programs Manager
           Cherise Brandell, Community Services Director
                   Alex D. McIntyre, City Manager
          Starla Jerome-Robinson, Assistant City Manager
                      Bill McClure, City Attorney
               Leigh F. Prince, Assistant City Attorney
                    Consultant Assistance
         Jeffery Baird, Baird + Driskell Community Planning
                    The Planning Center / DC&E

Table of Contents
Introduction
Section I — Overview
A Purposes and Requirements of the Open Space/Conservation,
    Noise and Safety Elements                                  5
B Definitions of Key Terms                                     9
Goals, Policies and Implementing Programs
Section II — Open Space/Conservation Goals,
Policies and Implementing Programs
A The Need for Open Space and Conservation                    15
B Open Space/Conservation Goals                               16
C Open Space/Conservation Policies and
    Implementing Programs                                     18
    Goal OSC1
Section III — Noise Goals, Policies and Implementing Programs
A The Importance of Noise Attenuation                         26
B Noise Goal                                                  27
C Noise Policies and Implementing Programs                    27
Section IV — Safety Goals, Policies and Implementing Programs
A Overview of Community Safety Considerations                 32
B Safety Goal                                                 32
C Safety Policies and Implementing Programs                   33
Background
Section V — Open Space/Conservation Background
A Natural Resources                                           41
B Parks and Recreation Facilities                             50
C Historic Resources                                          53
D Air Quality and Greenhouse Gas Emissions                    56
E Water Quality                                               59
Section VI — Noise Background
A Background on Sound and Sound Measurement                   63
B Noise Regulation                                            68
C Existing and Future Noise Environment                       70

                           Section VII — Safety Background
                           A Geologic Hazards                                                  75
                           B Hydrology (Flooding and Rise in Sea Level)                        79
                           C Hazardous Materials                                               84
                           D Fire Hazards                                                      88
                           E Emergency Preparedness                                            88
                           Technical Appendices
                           Contained in a separate document available at the City of Menlo Park —
                           City of Menlo Park Housing Element Update, General Plan Consistency
                           Update and Zoning Ordinance Amendments Environmental Assessment
                           prepared April 4, 2013 *
                           * NOTE: The Environmental Assessment contains background technical
                           analysis prepared for the Open Space/Conservation, Noise and Safety
                           Elements of the Menlo Park General Plan. The background sections in
                           this document provide a summary of the information and technical
                           analysis contained in the Environmental Assessment.
City of Menlo Park Open Space, Conservation, Noise and Safety Elements
Adopted May 21, 2013                                                                              4

                                      Introduction
Section I
Overview
 A        Purposes and Requirements of the Open
Space/Conservation, Noise and Safety Elements
                                              The Open Space/ Conservation, Noise and Safety
                                              Elements reflect current conditions, important
                                              community issues and relevant State laws related
                                              to environmental conditions in Menlo Park. The
                                              elements focus on providing direction as to how to
                                              protect community safety and to maintain a clean,
                                              safe and healthy environment including air and
                                              water quality, noise, greenhouse gas, conservation
of energy and minimizing impacts of development in hazardous or environmentally
sensitive habitat areas.
A general plan is required to address the specified provisions of each of the seven
mandated elements listed in §65302 — land use, circulation, housing, conservation,
open space, noise and safety — to the extent that the provisions are locally relevant.
The Governor’s Office of Planning and Research (OPR) has prepared General Plan
Guidelines to provide a broad overview of what a general plan might contain.
Jurisdictions may combine elements of their general plan, as appropriate, but all
elements of a general plan have equal weight under the law. In this document, the Open
Space and Conservation Elements have been combined because of the many
overlapping issues addressed.
Open Space/Conservation Element Requirements
The Open Space/Conservation Element of the Menlo Park General Plan combines two
of the seven elements required by State law (California Government Code, Section
65300 et. seq.) — Open Space and Conservation. Open Space issues include policies
and programs to maintain, expand and improve Menlo Park’s open space and recreation
areas, while Conservation institutes policies and programs to conserve natural
resources. Under State law, parks are encompassed within the mandate of the Open
Space Element.
City of Menlo Park Open Space, Conservation, Noise and Safety Elements
Adopted May 21, 2013                                                                             5

                                                  Both Open Space and Conservation Elements
                                                  have been required as part of local General
                                                  Plans since 1970. In enacting these
                                                  requirements, it was the intent of the State
                                                  Legislature to assure that cities recognize that
                                                  open space land is a limited and valuable
                                                  resource and to assure that every city and
                                                  county will prepare and carry out an open
                                                  space plan.
Section 65560 and 65561 of the Government Code specifies the contents of an Open
Space Element. State policy with regard to open space is described in Section 65561 as
follows:
     "(1)   That the preservation of open-space land . . . is necessary not only for the
            maintenance of the economy of the state, but also for the assurance of the
            continued availability of land for the production of food and fiber, for the
            enjoyment of scenic beauty, for recreation, and for the use of natural
            resources.
     (2)    That discouraging premature and unnecessary conversion of open-space land
            to urban uses is a matter of public interest and will be of benefit to urban
            dwellers because it will discourage non-contiguous development patterns
            which unnecessarily increase the costs of community services to community
            residents.
     (3)    That the anticipated increase in the population of the state demands that cities,
            counties, and the state at the earliest possible date make definite plans for the
            preservation of valuable open-space land and take positive action to carry out
            such plans by the adoption and strict administration of laws, ordinances, rules
            and regulations as authorized by this chapter or by other appropriate methods.
     (4)    That in order to assure that the interests of all its people are met in the orderly
            growth and development of the state and the preservation and conservation of
            its resources, it is necessary to provide for the development by the state,
            regional agencies, counties and cities, including charter cities, of statewide
            coordinated plans for the conservation and preservation of open-space lands.
     (5)    That for these reasons this article is necessary for the promotion of the general
            welfare and for the protection of the public interest in open-space land."
Below is an excerpt from Section 65302(d) of the California Government Code covering
City of Menlo Park Open Space, Conservation, Noise and Safety Elements
Adopted May 21, 2013                                                                               6
Conservation Elements.
      “A conservation element for the conservation, development, and utilization of natural
     resources including water and its hydraulic force, forests, soils, rivers and other
     waters, harbors, fisheries, wildlife, minerals, and other natural resources. The
     conservation element shall consider the effect of development within the jurisdiction,
     as described in the land use element, on natural resources located on public lands,
     including military installations. That portion of the conservation element including
     waters shall be developed in coordination with any countywide water agency and
     with all district and city agencies, including flood management, water conservation, or
     groundwater agencies that have developed, served, controlled, managed, or
     conserved water of any type for any purpose in the county or city for which the plan is
     prepared. Coordination shall include the discussion and evaluation of any water
     supply and demand information described in Section 65352.5, if that information has
     been submitted by the water agency to the city or county.
     The conservation element may also cover all of the following:
     (A) The reclamation of land and waters.
     (B) Prevention and control of the pollution of streams and other waters.
     (C) Regulation of the use of land in stream channels and other areas required for
            the accomplishment of the conservation plan.
     (D) Prevention, control, and correction of the erosion of soils, beaches, and shores.
     (E) Protection of watersheds.
     (F) The location, quantity and quality of the rock, sand and gravel resources.
     Upon the next revision of the housing element on or after January 1, 2009, the
     conservation element shall identify rivers, creeks, streams, flood corridors, riparian
     habitats, and land that may accommodate floodwater for purposes of groundwater
     recharge and storm-water management.”
Noise Element Requirements
A Noise Element has been required as part of local General Plans since 1971. The State
Legislature adopted the California Noise Control Act of 1973, which defined the following
findings and policy:
(1)       Excessive noise is a serious hazard to the public health and welfare.
(2)       Exposure to certain levels of noise can result in physiological, psychological, and
          economic damage.
(3)       There is a continuous and increasing bombardment of noise in urban, suburban,
          and rural areas.
City of Menlo Park Open Space, Conservation, Noise and Safety Elements
Adopted May 21, 2013                                                                         7

(4)       Government has by and large not taken the steps necessary to provide for the
          control, abatement, and prevention of unwanted and hazardous noise.
(5)       It is the policy of the State to provide an environment for all Californians free from
          noise that jeopardizes their health or welfare.
To implement this policy, Section 65302(f) of the California Government Code requires
each city to have a Noise Element as part of its General Plan. The Government Code
states that the Noise Element should be prepared according to guidelines established by
the State Department of Health Services, Office of Noise Control. The excerpt below is
from Section 65302(f) of the Government Code.
     “(f)    A noise element which shall identify and appraise noise problems in the
             community. The noise element shall recognize the guidelines established by
             the Office of Noise Control in the State Department of Health Services and
             shall analyze and quantify, to the extent practicable, as determined by the
             legislative body, current and projected noise levels for all of the following
             sources:
             (1)    Highway and freeways.
             (2)    Primary arterials and major local streets.
             (3)    Passenger and freight on-line railroad operations and ground rapid
                    transit systems.
             (4)    Commercial, general aviation, heliport, helistop, and military airport
                    operations, aircraft overflights, jet engine test stands, and all other
                    ground facilities and maintenance functions related to airport operation.
             (5)    Local industrial plants, including, but not limited to, railroad classification
                    yards.
             (6)    Other ground stationary noise sources identified by local agencies as
                    contributing to the community noise environment.
     Noise contours shall be shown for all of these sources and stated in terms of
     community noise equivalent level (CNEL) or day-night average level (Ldn). The noise
     contours shall be prepared on the basis of noise monitoring or following generally
     accepted noise modeling techniques for the various sources identified in paragraphs
     (1) to (6), inclusive.
City of Menlo Park Open Space, Conservation, Noise and Safety Elements
Adopted May 21, 2013                                                                                8

     The noise contours shall be used as a guide for establishing a pattern of land uses in
     the land use element that minimizes the exposure of community residents to
     excessive noise.
     The noise element shall include implementation measures and possible solutions
     that address existing and foreseeable noise problems, if any. The adopted noise
     element shall serve as a guideline for compliance with the state’s noise insulation
     standards.”
Safety Element Requirements
Safety issues have been required to
be addressed as part of local general
plans since 1971. The San Fernando
earthquake of February, 1971, which
claimed 64 lives and resulted in over
$500 million in property damage, and
the devastating wildland fires in
September and October of 1970, were
largely responsible for prompting the Legislature to pass this requirement. The following
citation is from Government Code Section 65302(f):
      “A safety element for the protection of the community from any unreasonable risks
     associated with the effects of seismically induced surface rupture, ground shaking,
     ground failure, tsunami, seiche, and dam failure; slope instability leading to
     mudslides and landslides, subsidence and other geologic hazards known to the
     legislative body; flooding; and wildland and urban fires. The safety element shall
     include mapping of known seismic and other geologic hazards. It shall also address
     evacuation routes, peak load water supply requirements, and minimum road widths
     and clearances around structures, as those items relate to identified fire and geologic
     hazards.”
City of Menlo Park Open Space, Conservation, Noise and Safety Elements
Adopted May 21, 2013                                                                         9

 B        Definitions of Key Terms
Definitions
Open Space/Conservation
o     Baylands. Areas along a bay that are permanently wet or periodically covered with shallow
      water, such as saltwater and freshwater marshes, open or closed brackish marshes,
      swamps, mudflats, and fans.
o     Biotic Community. A group of living organisms characterized by a distinctive combination
      of both animal and plant species in a particular habitat.
o     Conservation. Conservation is the wise management of renewable and non-renewable
      resources to prevent the unnecessary waste, destruction or neglect of resources for the
      enjoyment of future generations, such as water, air and energy systems. The preservation of
      these resources is concerned with the quality and quantity of the resource. Conservation
      areas may sustain a rare species and/or natural resource that cannot be restored or
      replaced. The purpose of conservation areas is to provide a protected location where the
      properties of a natural resource may be observed and enjoyed without risk of endangering
      the resource.
o     Endangered Species. A species of animal or plant that is considered endangered when its
      prospects for survival and reproduction are in immediate jeopardy from one or more causes.
o     Habitat. The physical location or type of environment in which an organism or biological
      population lives or occurs.
o     Historic Preservation. The preservation of historically significant structures and
      neighborhoods until such time as, and in order to facilitate, restoration and rehabilitation of
      the building(s) to a former condition.
o     Joint Powers Authority (JPA). A legal arrangement that enables two or more units of
      government to share authority in order to plan and carry out a specific program or set of
      programs that serves both units.
o     Open Space. An open area that is primarily maintained in its natural condition and is
      essentially unimproved and devoted to an open space use for the purposes of (1) the
      preservation of natural resources, (2) the managed production of resources, (3) outdoor
      recreation, or (4) public health and safety. In some cases this definition includes pathways,
      landscaping and other improvements that are maintained. The provision of open space is
      intended to offer residents and visitors opportunities for quiet introspection in a location that
      provides visual relief from buildings, concrete and noise associated with more urban life.
City of Menlo Park Open Space, Conservation, Noise and Safety Elements
Adopted May 21, 2013                                                                                  10
o     Park. A park is an improved, primarily unobstructed area, with landscaping and recreational
      equipment such as play apparatuses and/or basketball courts. In some cases this definition
      includes property with recreation buildings or structures. The purpose of parks is to provide
      opportunities for outdoor recreation and physical exercise near to residential and
      employment areas.
o     Plan Bay Area. Plan Bay Area is an integrated long-range transportation and land-
      use/housing plan for the San Francisco Bay Area. Legislation calls upon the Metropolitan
      Transportation Commission (MTC) and the Association of Bay Area Governments (ABAG) to
      adopt a Sustainable Communities Strategy (SCS), which will coordinate land use and
      transportation in the regional transportation plan.
o     Rare or Endangered Species. A species of animal or plant listed in: Sections 670.2 or
      670.5, Title 14, California Administrative Code; or Title 50, Code of Federal Regulations,
      Section 17.11 or Section 17.2, pursuant to the Federal Endangered Species Act designating
      species as rare, threatened, or endangered.
o     Regional Park. A park typically 150-500 acres in size focusing on activities and natural
      features not included in most other types of parks and often based on a specific scenic or
      recreational opportunity.
o     Riparian Lands. Riparian lands are comprised of the vegetative and wildlife areas adjacent
      to perennial and intermittent streams. Riparian areas are delineated by the existence of plant
      species normally found near freshwater.
o     Sustainability. Community use of natural resources in a way that does not jeopardize the
      ability of future generations to live and prosper.
o     Wetlands. Transitional area between terrestrial and aquatic systems where the water table
      is usually at or near the surface, or the land is covered by shallow water. Under a "unified"
      methodology now used by all Federal agencies, wetlands are defined as "those areas
      meeting certain criteria for hydrology, vegetation, and soils."
Noise
o     A-Weighted Decibel (dBA). An overall frequency-weighted sound level in decibels that
      approximates the frequency response of the human ear.
o     Community Noise Equivalent Level (CNEL). The energy-average of the A-weighted
      sound levels occurring during a 24-hour period, with 5 dB added to the levels occurring
      during the period from 7:00 p.m. to 10:00 p.m. and 10 dB added to the sound levels
      occurring during the period from 10:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m.
City of Menlo Park Open Space, Conservation, Noise and Safety Elements
Adopted May 21, 2013                                                                                11
o     dBA. The "A-weighted" scale for measuring sound in decibels; weighs or reduces the effects
      of low and high frequencies in order to simulate human hearing. Every increase of 10 dBA
      doubles the perceived loudness though the noise is actually ten times more intense.
o     Day-Night Sound Level (Ldn). The energy-average of the A-weighted sound levels
      occurring during a 24-hour period, with 10 dB added to the sound levels occurring during the
      period from 10:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m.
o     Decibel (dB). A unit measure of sound on a logarithmic scale.
o     Equivalent Continuous Noise Level (Leq). The mean of the noise level, energy averaged
      over the measurement period, such as the 24-hour CNEL used by the State of California.
o     Noise. Sound that is loud, unpleasant, unexpected, or otherwise undesirable.
o     Noise Attenuation. Reduction of the level of a noise source using a substance, material, or
      surface, such as earth berms and/or solid concrete walls.
o     Noise Contour. A line connecting points of equal noise level as measured on the same
      scale. Noise levels greater than the 60 Ldn contour (measured in dBA) require noise
      attenuation in residential development.
o     Sound. A disturbance created by a vibrating object, which, when transmitted by pressure
      waves through a medium such as air, is capable of being detected by a receiving
      mechanism, such as the human ear or a microphone.
o     Statistical Sound Level (Ln). The sound level that is exceeded “n” percent of time during a
      given sample period. For example, the L50 level is the statistical indicator of the time-
      varying noise signal that is exceeded 50 percent of the time (during each sampling period);
      that is, half of the sampling time, the changing noise levels are above this value and half of
      the time they are below it. This is called the “median sound level.” The L10 level, likewise,
      is the value that is exceeded 10 percent of the time (i.e. near the maximum) and this is often
      known as the “intrusive sound level.” The L90 is the sound level exceeded 90 percent of the
      time and is often considered the “effective background level” or “residual noise level.”
Safety
o     Acceptable Risk. A hazard deemed to be a tolerable exposure to danger given the
      expected benefits to be obtained. Different levels of acceptable risk may be assigned
      according to the potential danger and the criticalness of the threatened structure. The levels
      may range from "near zero" for nuclear plants and natural gas transmission lines to
      "moderate" for open space, ranches and low-intensity warehouse uses.
City of Menlo Park Open Space, Conservation, Noise and Safety Elements
Adopted May 21, 2013                                                                                 12

o     Critical Use Structures. Critical use structures include those required for effective disaster
      response (emergency operating centers, police and fire stations, medical facilities), lifelines
      (gas, water, sewage, and electrical systems), and structures whose failure would be
      catastrophic (dams).
o     Fault. A fracture in the earth's crust forming a boundary between shifting rock masses.
o     Fire Hazard Zone. An area where, due to slope, fuel, weather, or other fire-related
      conditions, the potential loss of life and property from a fire necessitates special fire
      protection measures and planning before development occurs.
o     Flood, 100-Year and 500-Year. The magnitude of a flood expected to occur on the average
      every 100 or 500 years, based on historical data. The 100-year flood has a 1/100, or one
      percent, chance of occurring in any given year. The 500-year flood has a 1/500, or two-
      tenths of one percent, chance of occurring in any given year.
o     Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM). For each community, the official map on which the
      Federal Insurance Administration has delineated areas of special flood hazard and the risk
      premium zones applicable to that community.
o     Hazardous Material. Any substance that, because of its quantity, concentration, or physical
      or chemical characteristics, poses a significant present or potential hazard to human health
      and safety or to the environment if released into the workplace or the environment. The term
      includes, but is not limited to, hazardous substances and hazardous wastes.
o     High-Occupancy Structure. All pre-1935 buildings with over 25 occupants, and all pre-
      1976 buildings with more than 100 occupants.
o     Landslide. A general term for a falling mass of soil or rocks.
o     Liquefaction. The transformation of loose water-saturated granular materials (such as sand
      or silt) from a solid into a liquid state that can occur during an earthquake.
o     Mercalli Intensity Scale. A subjective measure of the observed effects (human reactions,
      structural damage, geologic effects) of an earthquake. Expressed in Roman numerals from I
      to XII.
o     Richter Scale. A measure of the size or energy release of an earthquake at its source. The
      scale is logarithmic; the wave amplitude of each number on the scale is 10 times greater
      than that of the previous whole number.
o     Seiche. An earthquake-generated wave in an enclosed body of water such as a lake,
      reservoir, or bay.
City of Menlo Park Open Space, Conservation, Noise and Safety Elements
Adopted May 21, 2013                                                                                 13
o     Sensitive Populations. Sensitive populations include those persons or groups of persons
      particularly vulnerable and in need of special attention in an emergency or disaster situation.
      Examples of sensitive populations include seniors, childbearing women, newborns, children,
      people w/ mobility impairments, autism, hearing impaired, visually impaired, cognitive
      disabilities, multiple chemical sensitivities, mentally ill, with service animals, etc.
o     State Responsibility Areas. As used in the Safety Element of the general plan, areas of the
      state in which the financial responsibility for preventing and suppressing fires has been
      determined by the State Board of Forestry (pursuant to Public Resources Code Section
      4125) to be primarily the responsibility of the State of California.
o     Tsunami. A large ocean wave generated by an earthquake in or near the ocean.
Acronyms
AAQS                Ambient air quality standards
ABAG                Association of Bay Area Governments
BAAQMD              Bay Area Air Quality Management District
BCDC                San Francisco Bay Area Conservation and Development Commission
CAP                 City of Menlo Park Climate Change Action Plan
CARB                California Air Resources Board
CBC                 California Building Code
CEQA                California Environmental Quality Act
CGS                 California Geological Society
CNEL                Community Noise Equivalent Level
CDMG                California Division of Mines and Geology (State Resources Agency)
CDFW                California Department of Fish and Wildlife
CNDDB               California Natural Diversity Database
CNPS                California Native Plant Society
dB/ dBA             Decibel/"A-weighted" decibel
DTSC                California Department of Toxic Substances Control
ECR/DSP             El Camino Real/Downtown Specific Plan
EPA                 U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
FEMA                Federal Emergency Management Agency
FIRM                Flood Insurance Rate Map
Ldn                 Day and Night Average Sound Level
Leq                 Sound Energy Equivalent Level
M                   Magnitude (Richer Scale)
OPR                 Governor’s Office of Planning and Research
SFBAAB              San Francisco Bay Area Air Basin
STOPPP              San Mateo Countywide Stormwater Pollution Prevention Program
TACs                Toxic Air Contaminants
USFWS               U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service
USGS                United States Geological Survey
City of Menlo Park Open Space, Conservation, Noise and Safety Elements
Adopted May 21, 2013                                                                               14

          Goals, Policies and Implementing Programs
Section II
Open Space/Conservation Goals,
Policies and Programs
 A        The Need for Open Space and Conservation
                                                   The Open Space/Conservation Element
                                                   addresses issues related to the use,
                                                   preservation, management and sustainability
                                                   of land-based resources in Menlo Park,
                                                   whether that land is dedicated to active
                                                   recreation use, passive use or the protection of
                                                   natural resources and environmental quality.
                                                   A central concern of the Open
                                                   Space/Conservation Element, in considering
the location, design, intensity and type of land uses in the City, is to continue to protect
important natural resources and areas. Open Space and Conservation helps prevent the
wasteful destruction and neglect of Menlo Park’s natural resources, particularly scarce
resources. The City recognizes that natural resources must be maintained for their
economic and recreational use as well as for their ecological and scenic value.
The approach to natural resource conservation includes:
      Preserve the natural state, unique appeal and visual amenities of Menlo Park’s
          bay lands and shoreline.
      Protect the wildlife habitat, scenic value and natural character of the San
          Francisquito Creek and Atherton Creek riparian corridors.
      Protect sensitive species and natural communities.
      Preserve open areas needed for protection from natural hazards.
      Maintain, preserve and enhance contiguous open space on Stanford lands within
          Menlo Park's unincorporated sphere of influence.
City of Menlo Park Open Space, Conservation, Noise and Safety Elements
Adopted May 21, 2013                                                                             15

      Protect lands that have inherent qualities to provide visual amenity, including
          topographic features, views or vistas, street landscape areas, scenic water
          areas, creeks and the San Francisco Bay.
      Provide landscaped areas that visually and environmentally enhance the
          community.
 B        Open Space/Conservation Goals
                                      Goal OSC1 — MAINTAIN, PROTECT AND
                                      ENHANCE OPEN SPACE AND NATURAL
                                      RESOURCES
                                      Protect, conserve and enhance valuable natural
                                      resources, open areas and designated open space
                                      lands rich in scenic value, wildlife or of a fragile
                                      ecological nature through conservation and
                                      restoration efforts.
                                      Natural features and resources have shaped both
                                      the growth and form of Menlo Park and provide
                                      many of the attractive characteristics of the area.
                                      The City has a responsibility to maintain and
protect these assets for future generations, and to anticipate future needs.
Goal OSC2 — PROVIDE PARKS AND RECREATION FACILITIES
Develop and maintain a parks and recreation system to provide areas and
facilities conveniently located, sustainable, properly designed and well-
maintained to serve the recreation needs and promote healthy living of residents,
workers and visitors to Menlo Park.
Park and recreation facilities play a critical role in determining the quality of life in Menlo
Park. The City is committed to ongoing improvements to address the recreational needs
of its residents. Numerous parks, public spaces and playing fields are integral to the life
of the City. Recreational facilities and playing fields are well maintained.
City of Menlo Park Open Space, Conservation, Noise and Safety Elements
Adopted May 21, 2013                                                                           16

Goal OSC3 — PROTECT AND ENHANCE HISTORIC RESOURCES
Protect and enhance cultural and historical resources for their aesthetic,
scientific, educational, and cultural values.
It is the goal of Menlo Park to have protected and maintained historic buildings and
archaeological resources as part of Menlo Park’s cultural heritage. City policy has been
to protect and build upon the historic character that exists in the City. City policy also
protects known archeological resources to the maximum extent feasible.
Goal OSC4 — PROMOTE SUSTAINABILITY AND CLIMATE ACTION
PLANNING
Promote a sustainable energy supply and implement the City’s Climate Action
Plan to reduce greenhouse gas emissions and improve the sustainability of
actions by City government, residents, and businesses in Menlo Park. This
includes promoting land use patterns that reduce the number and length of motor
vehicle trips, and encouraging recycling, reduction and reuse programs.
Menlo Park’s Climate Action Plan addresses greenhouse gas emissions through
planned emission reduction strategies covering the City’s operations and life in the
community at large. But, it is important to recognize that a major determinant in the City
of Menlo Park’s success in reducing its greenhouse gas emissions will be the actions
taken by regional, State and national bodies across all sectors. The City’s efforts to
reduce greenhouse gas emissions through such actions as land use and transportation
initiatives and reducing, reusing and recycling resources, also consider the broader
sustainability benefits that accompany local climate protection efforts, such as cleaner
air and water, healthier people and local economic development.
Goal OSC5 — ENSURE HEALTHY AIR QUALITY AND WATER QUALITY
Enhance and preserve air quality in accord with State and regional standards, and
encourage the coordination of total water quality management including both
supply and wastewater treatment.
The Open Space/Conservation Element is intended to ensure that high quality air and
water are available to all who reside, work and play in the City. The City seeks to
mitigate the effects of vehicular pollution by supporting policies that promote more
environmentally friendly forms of transport as well as promote land use design practices
that are more efficient. Maintaining and improving water quality is essential to protect
public health, wildlife, and watersheds, and to ensure opportunities for public recreation
and economic development in Menlo Park.
City of Menlo Park Open Space, Conservation, Noise and Safety Elements
Adopted May 21, 2013                                                                       17

 C        Open Space/Conservation Policies and
Implementing Programs
Goal OSC1
MAINTAIN, PROTECT AND ENHANCE OPEN SPACE AND
NATURAL RESOURCES
Policies
OSC1.1         Natural Resources Integration with Other Uses. Protect Menlo Park’s
               natural environment and integrate creeks, utility corridors, and other
               significant natural and scenic features into development plans.
OSC1.2         Habitat for Open Space and Conservation Purposes. Preserve, protect,
               maintain and enhance water, water-related areas, plant and wildlife habitat
               for open space and conservation purposes.
OSC1.3         Sensitive Habitats. Require new development on or near sensitive habitats
               to provide baseline assessments prepared by qualified biologists, and specify
               requirements relative to the baseline assessments.
OSC1.4         Habitat Enhancement. Require new development to minimize the
               disturbance of natural habitats and vegetation, and requires revegetation of
               disturbed natural habitat areas with native or non-invasive naturalized
               species.
OSC1.5         Invasive, Non-Native Plant Species. Avoid the use of invasive, non-native
               species, as identified on the lists of invasive plants maintained at the
               California Invasive Plant Inventory and United States Department of
               Agriculture invasive and noxious weeds database, or other authoritative
               sources, in landscaping on public property.
\OSC1.6        South Bay Salt Pond Restoration Project and Flood Management
               Project. Continue to support and participate in Federal and State efforts
               related to the South Bay Salt Pond Restoration Project and flood
               management project. Provide public access to the Bay for scenic enjoyment
               and recreation opportunities as well as conservation education opportunities
               related to the open Bay, the sloughs, and the marshes.
City of Menlo Park Open Space, Conservation, Noise and Safety Elements
Adopted May 21, 2013                                                                        18

OSC1.7         San Francisquito Creek Joint Powers Authority. Continue efforts through
               San Francisquito Creek Joint Powers Authority to enhance the value of the
               creek as a community amenity for trails and open space, conservation and
               educational opportunities.
OSC1.8         Regional Open Space Preservation Efforts. Support regional and sub-
               regional efforts to acquire, develop and maintain open space conservation
               lands.
OSC1.9         Federal, State and County Open Space and Conservation Programs.
               Make maximum use of Federal, State and county programs wherever
               possible in all matters concerned with open space and conservation.
OSC1.10 Public Education and Stewardship. Promote public education,
               environmental programs, and stewardship of open space and natural
               resources conservation.
OSC1.11 Sustainable Landscape Practices. Encourage the enhancement of
               boulevards, plazas and other urban open spaces in high-density and mixed-
               use residential developments, commercial and industrial areas with
               landscaping practices that minimize water usage.
OSC1.12 Landscaping and Plazas. Include landscaping and plazas on public and
               private lands, and well-designed pedestrian and bicycle facilities in areas of
               intensive non-vehicular activity. Require landscaping for shade, surface
               runoff, or to obscure parked cars in extensive parking areas.
OSC1.13 Yard and Open Space Requirements in New Development. Ensure that
               required yard and open spaces are provided for as part of new multi-family
               residential, mixed-use, commercial and industrial development.
OSC1.14 Protection of Conservation and Scenic Areas. Protect conservation and
               scenic areas from deterioration or destruction by vandalism, private actions or
               public actions.
OSC1.15 Heritage Trees. Protect Heritage Trees, including during construction
               activities through enforcement of the Heritage Tree Ordinance (Chapter
               13.24of the Municipal Code).
City of Menlo Park Open Space, Conservation, Noise and Safety Elements
Adopted May 21, 2013                                                                          19
OSC1.16 Visual Amenities in Public Improvements. Require that all public
               improvements to facilities, such as streets, civic structures and major
               municipal projects, recognize the need for visual amenities such as
               landscaping, public plazas, public art, and pedestrian and bicycle access.
Implementing Programs
OSC1.A         Provide Incentives for Maintaining Private Lands in Open Space. Establish
               programs to provide incentives for maintaining private lands in open space and for
               insuring open areas within future developments through programs including but not
               limited, to cluster development, acquisition of a permanent open space easement,
               and/or transfer of development rights.
OSC1.B         Continue Subdivision Assessments. Continue subdivision assessments for parks
               and open space purposes consistent with the Subdivision Ordinance.
OSC1.C         Promote Environmental Stewardship. Promote public education, environmental
               programs and stewardship of natural resources and open space preservation within
               the City.
Goal OSC2
PROVIDE PARKS AND RECREATION FACILITIES
Policies
OSC2.1         Open Space for Recreation Use. Provide open space lands for a variety of
               recreation opportunities, make improvements, construct facilities and
               maintain programs that incorporate sustainable practices that promote
               healthy living and quality of life.
City of Menlo Park Open Space, Conservation, Noise and Safety Elements
Adopted May 21, 2013                                                                              20
OSC2.2         Planning for Residential Recreational Needs. Work with residential
               developers to ensure that parks and recreational facilities planned to serve
               new development will be available concurrently with need.
OSC2.3         Recreation Requirements for New Development. Require dedication of
               improved land, or payment of fee in lieu of, for park and recreation land for all
               residential uses.
OSC2.4         Parkland Standards. Strive to maintain the standard of 5 acres of parkland
               per 1,000 residents.
OSC2.5         Schools for Recreational Use. Coordinate with the local school districts to
               continue to operate school sites for local recreation purposes.
OSC2.6         Pedestrian and Bicycle Paths. Develop pedestrian and bicycle paths
               consistent with the recommendations of local and regional trail and bicycle
               route projects, including the Bay Trail.
OSC2.7         Conservation of Resources at City Facilities. Reduce consumption of
               water, energy, landfilled waste, and fossil fuels in the construction, operations
               and maintenance of City owned and/or operated facilities.
Implementing Programs
OSC2.A         Support Regional Open Space, Conservation and Recreational Efforts.
               Coordinate with Mid-Peninsula Regional Park District, San Mateo County and other
               regional open space and conservation measures to ensure recreational opportunities
               at existing and future parks and trails.
OSC2.B         Evaluate Recreational Needs. Evaluate park facilities on a regular basis for their
               overall function and ability to meet recreational needs. Provide new amenities as
               needed and based on financial resources to support changing needs of the
               population and recreational trends.
City of Menlo Park Open Space, Conservation, Noise and Safety Elements
Adopted May 21, 2013                                                                              21
Goal OSC3
PROTECT AND ENHANCE HISTORIC RESOURCES
Policies
OSC3.1         Prehistoric or Historic Cultural Resources Investigation and
               Preservation. Preserve historical and cultural resources to the maximum
               extent practical.
OSC3.2         Prehistoric or Historic Cultural Resources Protection. Require significant
               historic or prehistoric artifacts be examined by a qualified consulting
               archaeologist or historian for appropriate protection and preservation, and to
               ensure compliance with local, State and Federal regulations.
OSC3.3         Archaeological or Paleontological Resources Protection. Protect
               prehistoric or historic cultural resources either on site or through appropriate
               documentation as a condition of removal. Require that when a development
               project has sufficient flexibility, avoidance and preservation of the resource
               shall be the primary mitigation measure, unless the City identifies superior
               mitigation. If resources are documented, undertake coordination with
               descendants and/or stakeholder groups, as warranted.
OSC3.4         Prehistoric or Historic Cultural Resources Found During Construction.
               Require that if cultural resources, including archaeological or paleontological
               resources, are uncovered during grading or other on-site excavation
               activities, construction shall stop until appropriate mitigation is implemented.
OSC3.5         Consultation with Native American Tribes. Consult with those Native
               American tribes with ancestral ties to the Menlo Park city limits regarding
               General Plan Amendments and land use policy changes.
OSC3.6         Identification of Potential Historic Resources. Identify historic resources
               for the historic district in the Zoning Ordinance and require design review of
               proposals affecting historic buildings.
City of Menlo Park Open Space, Conservation, Noise and Safety Elements
Adopted May 21, 2013                                                                           22
Implementing Programs
OSC3.A         Evaluate Historic Resources Around the Downtown Specific Plan Area. Hire a
               cultural resources professional to conduct a Historic Resources Survey of potential
               infill sites around the Downtown Specific Plan to determine whether the designated
               infill housing sites, or adjacent lots, contain buildings eligible to the California
               Register and/or the historic zoning designation.
OSC3.B         Support a Study of Cultural Resources on the Veterans Affairs’ Clinic Site.
               Work with the Department of Veterans Affairs to ensure study and protection of
               cultural resources through oversight by a cultural resource professional of any
               proposed development on the vacant portion of the Veterans Affairs’ Clinic site.
Goal OSC4
PROMOTE SUSTAINABILITY AND CLIMATE ACTION PLANNING
Policies
OSC4.1         Sustainable Approach to Land Use Planning to Reduce Resource
               Consumption. Encourage, to the extent feasible, (1) a balance and match
               between jobs and housing, (2) higher density residential and mixed-use
               development to be located adjacent to commercial centers and transit
               corridors, and (3) retail and office areas to be located within walking and
               biking distance of transit or existing and proposed residential developments.
OSC4.2         Sustainable Building. Promote and/or establish environmentally sustainable
               building practices or standards in new development that would conserve
               water and energy, prevent stormwater pollution, reduce landfilled waste, and
               reduce fossil fuel consumption from transportation and energy activities.
OSC4.3         Renewable Energy. Promote the installation of renewable energy
               technology, such as, on residences and businesses through education, social
               marketing methods, establishing standards and/or providing incentives.
OSC4.4         Vehicles Using Alternative Fuel. Explore the potential for installing
               infrastructure for vehicles that use alternative fuel, such as electric plug in
               recharging stations.
City of Menlo Park Open Space, Conservation, Noise and Safety Elements
Adopted May 21, 2013                                                                                23

OSC4.5         Energy Standards in Residential and Commercial Construction.
               Encourage projects to achieve a high level of energy conservation exceeding
               standards set forth in the California Energy Code for Residential and
               Commercial development.
OSC4.6         Waste Reduction Target. Strive to meet the California State Integrated
               Waste Management Board per person target of waste generation per person
               per day through their source reduction, reuse, and recycling programs.
OSC4.7         Waste Management Collaboration. Continue to support and participate in
               efforts such as the South Bayside Waste Management Authority, which
               provides waste reduction, recycling, and solid waste programs and solutions.
OSC4.8         Waste Diversion. Develop and implement a zero waste policy, or implement
               standards, incentives, or other programs that would lead the community
               towards a zero waste goal.
OSC4.9         Climate Action Planning. Undertake annual review and updates, as
               needed, to the City’s Climate Action Plan (CAP).
OSC4.10 Energy Upgrade California. Consider actively marketing and providing
               additional incentives for residents and businesses to participate in local,
               State, and/or Federal renewable or energy conservation programs.
Implementing Programs
OSC4.A         Develop a Residential Energy Efficiency Program. Develop an energy
               efficiency/renewable energy program or policy for the residential and commercial
               sectors through education, social marketing methods, standards and/or incentive
               programs to the degree feasible.
OSC4.B         Monitor the City’s Climate Action Plan. Establish a Climate Action Plan monitoring
               and progress reporting program.
OSC4.C         Expand the Green Business Program. Expand Green Business Certification
               Program/Include Green Business education to new business permit applicants.
OSC4.D         Promote Local Food Production. Develop a promotion and education program to
               encourage local and/or organic food production, including community gardens.
City of Menlo Park Open Space, Conservation, Noise and Safety Elements
Adopted May 21, 2013                                                                            24

Goal OSC5
ENSURE HEALTHY AIR AND WATER QUALITY
Policies
OSC5.1         Air and Water Quality Standards. Continue to apply standards and policies
               established by the Bay Area Air Quality Management District (BAAQMD),
               San Mateo Countywide Water Pollution Prevention Program (SMCWPPP),
               and City of Menlo Park Climate Action Plan through the California
               Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) process and other means as applicable.
OSC5.2         Development in Industrial Areas. Evaluate development projects in
               industrial areas for impacts to air and water resources in relation to truck
               traffic, hazardous materials use and production-level manufacturing per the
               California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) and require measures to
               mitigate potential impacts to less than significant levels.
OSC5.3         Water Conservation. Encourage water-conserving practices in businesses,
               homes and institutions.
Implementing Programs
OSC5.A         Expand Water Conservation Programs. Expand the Menlo Park Municipal Water
               District’s conservation programs through education, social marketing methods,
               establishing standards, and providing incentives.
City of Menlo Park Open Space, Conservation, Noise and Safety Elements
Adopted May 21, 2013                                                                         25

Section III
Noise Goals, Policies and Programs
  A        The Importance of Noise Attenuation
                                         The purpose of the Noise Element is to appraise
                                         existing noise problems in the community and to
                                         provide guidance to the community and developers for
                                         avoiding problems in the future. It also can provide the
                                         basis for code enforcement and other regulations,
                                         including implementation of the City’s Noise Ordinance
                                         to control nuisance noise.
                                         Noise is part of everyday life in a community and is
                                         generally defined as unwanted sound. Whether a
sound is unwanted depends on when and where it occurs, what the listener is doing
when it occurs, characteristics of the sound (loudness, pitch and duration, speech or
music content, irregularity), and how intrusive it is above background sound levels.
Acceptable levels of noise vary from land use to land use. Also, in any one location, the
noise level will vary over time, from the lowest background or ambient levels to that of
passing airplanes or construction equipment. Various techniques have been developed
that measure the effects of noise levels over a period of time.
It is difficult to specify noise levels that are generally acceptable to everyone. What is
annoying to one person may be unnoticed by another. Standards may be based on
documented complaint activity in response to noise levels, or based on studies on the
ability of people to sleep, talk, or work under various noise conditions. All such studies,
however, recognize that individual responses vary considerably. Standards usually
address the needs of most of the general population. With this caution in mind, noise
standards for planning purposes need to examine outdoor and indoor noise levels
acceptable for different uses. The standards must relate to existing conditions in the City
so that they are realistically enforceable and consistent with other General Plan policies.
City of Menlo Park Open Space, Conservation, Noise and Safety Elements
Adopted May 21, 2013                                                                            26

  B       Noise Goal
                                             Goal N1 — ACHIEVE ACCEPTABLE NOISE
                                             LEVELS
                                             It is the goal of Menlo Park to have acceptable
                                             noise levels.
                                             Excessive noise is a concern for many residents of
                                             Menlo Park. These concerns can be managed with
                                             proper mitigation or through the implementation of
the City’s noise ordinance. The City of Menlo Park recognizes the issue of noise and has
standards to protect the peace, health and safety of residents and the community from
unreasonable noise from any and all sources in the community and to strive to locate
uses compatible to the area to minimize escalation of noise from mobile and stationary
sources.
  C       Noise Policies and Implementing Programs
Goal N1
ACHIEVE ACCEPTABLE NOISE LEVELS
Policies
N1.1           Compliance with Noise Standards. Consider the compatibility of proposed
               land uses with the noise environment when preparing or revising community
               and/or specific plans. Require new projects to comply with the noise
               standards of local, regional, and building code regulations, including but not
               limited to the City's Municipal Code, Title 24 of the California Code of
               Regulations, and subdivision and zoning codes.
N1.2           Land Use Compatibility Noise Standards. Protect people in new
               development from excessive noise by applying the City’s Land Use
               Compatibility Noise Standards for New Development (see chart on the next
               page) to the siting and required mitigation for new uses in existing noise
               environments.
                  Land Use Compatibility Noise Standards for New Development
City of Menlo Park Open Space, Conservation, Noise and Safety Elements
Adopted May 21, 2013                                                                           27

N1.3           Exterior and Interior Noise Standards for Residential Use Areas. Strive to
               achieve acceptable interior noise levels and exterior noise levels for
               backyards and/or common usable outdoor areas in new residential
               development, and reduce outdoor noise levels in existing residential areas
               where economically and aesthetically feasible.
N1.4           Noise Sensitive Uses. Protect existing residential neighborhoods and noise
               sensitive uses from unacceptable noise levels and vibration impacts. Noise
               sensitive uses include, but are not limited to, hospitals, schools, religious
               facilities, convalescent homes and businesses with highly sensitive
               equipment. Discourage the siting of noise-sensitive uses in areas in excess of
               65 dBA CNEL without appropriate mitigation and locate noise sensitive uses
               away from noise sources unless mitigation measures are included in
               development plans.
City of Menlo Park Open Space, Conservation, Noise and Safety Elements
Adopted May 21, 2013                                                                         28
N1.5           Planning and Design of New Development to Reduce Noise Impacts.
               Design residential developments to minimize the transportation-related noise
               impacts to adjacent residential areas and encourage new development to be
               site planned and architecturally designed to minimize noise impacts on noise-
               sensitive spaces. Proper site planning can be effective in reducing noise
               impacts.
N1.6           Noise Reduction Measures. Encourage the use of construction methods,
               state-of-the-art noise abating materials and technology and creative site
               design including, but not limited to, open space, earthen berms, parking,
               accessory buildings, and landscaping to buffer new and existing development
               from noise and to reduce potential conflicts between ambient noise levels and
               noise-sensitive land uses. Use sound walls only when other methods are not
               practical or when recommended by an acoustical expert.
N1.7           Noise and Vibration from New Non-Residential Development. Design
               non-residential development to minimize noise impacts on nearby uses.
               Where vibration impacts may occur, reduce impacts on residences and
               businesses through the use of setbacks and/or structural design features that
               reduce vibration to levels at or below the guidelines of the Federal Transit
               Administration near rail lines and industrial uses.
N1.8           Potential Annoying or Harmful Noise. Preclude the generation of annoying
               or harmful noise on stationary noise sources, such as construction and
               property maintenance activity and mechanical equipment.
N1.9           Transportation Related Noise Attenuation. Strive to minimize traffic noise
               through land use policies, traffic-calming methods to reduce traffic speed, law
               enforcement and street improvements, and encourage other agencies to
               reduce noise levels generated by roadways, railways, rapid transit, and other
               facilities.
N1.10          Nuisance Noise. Minimize impacts from noise levels that exceed community
               sound levels through enforcement of the City’s Noise Ordinance. Control
               unnecessary, excessive and annoying noises within the City where not
               preempted by Federal and State control through implementation and
               updating of the Noise Ordinance.
City of Menlo Park Open Space, Conservation, Noise and Safety Elements
Adopted May 21, 2013                                                                         29

Implementing Programs
N1.A           Require Acoustical Studies. Require acoustical studies for all new multi-family
               residential projects within the projected Ldn 60 dB noise contours so that noise
               mitigation measures can be incorporated into project design and site planning.
N1.B           Reduce Existing Vehicular Noise Through Enforcement. Actively enforce the
               provisions of the California Motor Vehicle Code pertaining to vehicle speed and noise
               emission.
N1.C           Consider Noise Impacts in Street Design. Employ noise mitigation practices and
               materials, as necessary, when designing future streets and when improvements
               occur along existing road segments. Mitigation measures should consider quieter
               pavements and emphasize the establishment of natural buffers or setbacks between
               the arterial roadways and adjoining noise-sensitive areas. Strive to maintain smooth
               street surfaces adjacent to land uses that are sensitive to noise intrusion.
N1.D           Minimize Construction Activity Noise. Minimize the exposure of nearby properties
               to excessive noise levels from construction-related activity through CEQA review,
               conditions of approval and enforcement of the City’s Noise Ordinance.
N1.E           Consider Noise Levels in City Equipment Purchases. Include noise specifications
               in requests for equipment information and bids for new City equipment and consider
               this information as part of evaluation of the bids. The City of Menlo Park should
               consider noise emission when purchasing vehicles, construction equipment, etc.
               This consideration should be balanced with the required performance and cost.
N1.F           Work with Other Agencies to Reduce Transportation-Related Noise Levels.
               Work closely with Caltrans, San Mateo County Department of Public Works and other
               jurisdictions to reduce noise levels along State highways and county roadways
               through or near the City.
City of Menlo Park Open Space, Conservation, Noise and Safety Elements
Adopted May 21, 2013                                                                               30

N1.G           Monitor Airport Noise. Engage airport authorities and participate in regional
               planning efforts to ensure future activities and flight patterns at commercial airports
               do not negatively impact noise levels in the city.
N1.H           Work with Railroad Operators to Reduce Noise and Vibration Levels. Work with
               the railroad operators (e.g, Caltrain, Union Pacific, etc.) to reduce, to the extent
               possible, the contribution of railroad train noise and vibration to Menlo Park's noise
               environment.
N1.I           Work with Neighboring Communities When Implementing Noise Policies and
               Programs. Work with neighboring communities to ensure compliance with the land
               use and noise compatibility policies contained in this Noise Element at Menlo Park's
               boundaries.
N1.J           Evaluate Noise Related Impacts of City Actions as Appropriate. Analyze in detail
               the potential noise impacts of any actions that the City may take or act upon which
               could significantly alter noise level in the community.
City of Menlo Park Open Space, Conservation, Noise and Safety Elements
Adopted May 21, 2013                                                                                   31
Section IV
Safety Goals, Policies and Programs
  A       Overview of Safety Considerations
                                    The purpose of the Safety Element is to identify and
                                    appraise hazards in the community in order to assure
                                    community safety. The Safety Element focuses on
                                    protection of the community from risks associated with
                                    earthquakes, floods, fires, toxic waste, and other hazards.
                                    In addition, issues such as disaster preparedness and
                                    emergency evacuation routes are addressed in the Safety
                                    Element. Some level of risk associated with these factors
                                    is unavoidable; the Safety Element is the means by which
the City defines what measures will be undertaken to reduce these risks to levels
determined by the City to be reasonable.
The extent of a hazard depends on local conditions, since most hazards are confined to
a particular area or site. Various health and safety hazards should be considered in
planning the location, design, intensity, density and type of land uses in a given area.
Long-term costs to the City, such as maintenance, liability exposure and emergency
services, are potentially greater where high hazards exist.
  B       Safety Goal
GOAL S1 — ASSURE A SAFE COMMUNITY
Minimize risk to life and damage to the environment and property from natural and
human-caused hazards, and assure community emergency preparedness and a
high level of public safety services and facilities.
The Safety Element of the General Plan is aimed at reducing potential risk of death,
injuries, damage to property, and the economic and social dislocation resulting from fire,
flood, geologic and other hazards. The General Plan provides policies and standards for
the type, location, intensity and design of development in areas of potential hazards. The
intent is not to remove all risks associated with each specific type of hazard, but to
reduce risks to life and property and to make informed decisions about land use and
development near these hazards.
City of Menlo Park Open Space, Conservation, Noise and Safety Elements
Adopted May 21, 2013                                                                          32

 C        Safety Policies and Implementing Programs
Goal S1
ASSURE A SAFE COMMUNITY
Policies
General Safety Policies
S1.1           Location of Future Development. Permit development only in those areas
               where potential danger to the health, safety and welfare of the residents of
               the community can be adequately mitigated.
S1.2           Location of Public Improvements. Avoid locating public improvements and
               utilities in areas with identified flood, geologic and/or soil hazards to avoid any
               extraordinary maintenance and operating expenses. When the location of
               public improvements and utilities in such areas cannot be avoided, assure
               that effective mitigation measures will be implemented.
S1.3           Hazard Data and Standards. Integrate hazard data (geotechnical, flood, fire,
               etc.) and risk evaluations into the development review process and maintain,
               develop and adopt up-to-date standards to reduce the level of risk from
               natural and human-caused hazards for all land use.
S1.4           Inter-Jurisdictional Cooperation. Continue to improve inter-jurisdictional
               cooperation in regard to public safety concerns related to natural hazards,
               disaster response and mitigation.
S1.5           New Habitable Structures. Require that all new habitable structures
               incorporate adequate hazard mitigation measures to reduce identified risks
               from natural and human-caused hazards.
S1.6           Design and Location of Utilities. Monitor appropriate location, design,
               construction, maintenance and inspection standards for utility systems
               traversing hazard areas within the City limits. This would include evaluation
               and upgrading outdated systems and infrastructure, coordination with the
               State Public Utilities Commission and locating new utility systems away from
               potential hazard areas.
City of Menlo Park Open Space, Conservation, Noise and Safety Elements
Adopted May 21, 2013                                                                            33
S1.7           Hazard Reduction. Continue to require new development to reduce the
               seismic vulnerability of buildings and susceptibility to other hazards through
               enforcement of the California Building Standards Code and other programs.
S1.8           Safety Element Updates. Review and comprehensively revise the Safety
               Element whenever substantial new scientific data or evidence related to
               prevention of natural and human hazards becomes available, and coordinate
               with other General Plan elements and City emergency plans.
S1.9           Community Safety Services and Facilities. In coordination with other
               agencies, maintain adequate and cost-effective levels of safety services,
               facilities and programs to address safety concerns in Menlo Park.
S1.10          Safety Review of Development Projects. Continue to require hazard
               mitigation, crime prevention, fire prevention and adequate access for
               emergency vehicles in new development.
S1.11          Visibility and Access to Address Safety Concerns. Require that
               residential development be designed to permit maximum visibility and access
               to law enforcement and fire control vehicles consistent with privacy and other
               design considerations.
S1.12          Safe Access to Schools. Encourage school districts to provide direct, safe
               and convenient pedestrian and bicycle access between school sites and
               nearby residential neighborhoods to provide safe passage for students and
               teachers.
Geologic and Seismic Safety Policies
S1.13          Geotechnical Studies. Continue to requiresite-specific geologic and
               geotechnical studies for land development or construction in areas of
               potential land instability as shown on the State and/or local geologic hazard
               maps or identified through other means.
S1.14          Potential Land Instability. Prohibit development in areas of potential land
               instability identified on State and/or local geologic hazard maps, or identified
               through other means, unless a geologic investigation demonstrates hazards
               can be mitigated to an acceptable level as defined by the State of California.
City of Menlo Park Open Space, Conservation, Noise and Safety Elements
Adopted May 21, 2013                                                                           34
S1.15          Funding Earthquake Resistance Improvements. Support State and
               Federal financial assistance or tax incentive programs to encourage repair,
               demolition or abatement of earthquake hazardous structures.
Hazardous Materials Policies
S1.16          Hazardous Materials Regulations. Review and strengthen, if necessary,
               regulations for the structural design and/or uses involving hazardous
               materials to minimize risk to local populations. Enforce compliance with
               current State and local requirements for the manufacturing, use, storage,
               transportation and disposal of hazardous materials, and the designation of
               appropriate truck routes in Menlo Park.
S1.17          Potential Exposure of New Residential Development to Hazardous
               Materials. Minimize risk associated with hazardous materials by assessing
               exposure to hazardous materials of new residential development and
               sensitive populations near existing industrial and manufacturing areas.
               Minimize risk associated with hazardous materials.
S1.18          Potential Hazardous Materials Conditions Investigation. Continue to
               require developers to conduct an investigation of soils, groundwater and
               buildings affected by hazardous-material potentially released from prior land
               uses in areas historically used for commercial or industrial uses, and to
               identify and implement mitigation measures to avoid adversely affecting the
               environment or the health and safety of residents or new uses.
S1.19          Disposal of Existing Hazardous Materials on Sites Planned for Housing.
               Continue to require that sites planned for housing be cleared of hazardous
               materials (paint, solvents, chlorine, etc.) and the hazardous materials
               disposed in compliance with State and Federal laws.
S1.20          Pipeline Safety. Require, as much as possible, that new pipelines and other
               channels carrying hazardous materials be placed to avoid residential areas
               and, in particular, areas where the population is less mobile.
City of Menlo Park Open Space, Conservation, Noise and Safety Elements
Adopted May 21, 2013                                                                        35
Flood Control, Tsunami and Dam Safety Policies
S1.21          Flood and Tsunami Hazard Planning and Mapping. Consider the threat of
               flooding and tsunamis in planning and management practices to minimize risk
               to life, environment and property and maintain up-to-date tsunami hazard
               zones maps and flood maps as new information is provided by FEMA and
               other regional agencies. Modify land use plans in areas where tsunamis and
               flooding are hazards, and permit only uses that will sustain acceptable levels
               of damage and not endanger human lives in the event of inundation.
S1.22          Flood Damage Prevention. Continue to applystandards for any construction
               projects (new structures and existing structures proposed for substantial
               improvement) in areas of special flood hazard in accordance with FEMA and
               the Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance, including the use of flood-resistant
               construction materials and construction methods that minimize flood damage.
               Locate new essential public facilities outside of flood zones, such as City
               operations facilities, police and fire stations, and hospitals, to the extent
               feasible.
S1.23          Potential Dam Inundation. Consider potential risks from dam inundation in
               the development approval process.
S1.24          Dam Safety. Support programs by the California Division of Safety of Dams
               to retrofit or replace dams or to increase earthquake resistance of dams and
               mitigate impacts of dam failures. State efforts to inspect dams and evaluate
               dam safety requirements shall also be supported.
S1.25          Creeks and Drainage-ways. Seek to retain San Francisquito and Atherton
               creeks/channels in their natural state in order to prevent undue erosion of
               creek banks. Protect creek-side habitat and provide maintenance access
               along creeks where appropriate.
S1.26          Erosion and Sediment Control. Continue to requirethe use of best
               management practices for erosion and sediment control measures with
               proposed development in compliance with applicable regional regulations.
S1.27          Regional Water Quality Control Board (RWQCB) Requirements. Enforce
               stormwater pollution prevention practices and appropriate watershed
               management plans in the RWQCB general National Pollutant Discharge
               Elimination System requirements, the San Mateo County Water Pollution
City of Menlo Park Open Space, Conservation, Noise and Safety Elements
Adopted May 21, 2013                                                                         36
               Prevention Program and the City’s Stormwater Management Program.
               Revise, as necessary, City plans so they integrate water quality and
               watershed protection with water supply, flood control, habitat protection,
               groundwater recharge, and other sustainable development principles and
               policies.
S1.28          Sea Level Rise. Consider sea level rise in siting new facilities or residences
               within potentially affected areas.
Fire Safety Policies
S1.29          Fire Equipment and Personnel Access. Require adequate access and
               clearance, to the maximum extent practical, for fire equipment, fire
               suppression personnel and evacuation for high occupancy structures in
               coordination with the Menlo Park Fire Protection District.
S1.30          Coordination with the Menlo Park Fire District. Encourage City-Fire
               District coordination in the planning process and require all development
               applications to be reviewed and approved by the Menlo Park Fire Protection
               District prior to project approval.
S1.31          Fire Resistant Design. Require new homes to incorporate fire resistant
               design and strategies such as the use of fire resistant materials and
               landscaping, and creating defensible space (e.g. areas free of highly
               flammable vegetation).
Public Safety and Emergency Response Policies
S1.32          Location of Critical Facilities. Locate critical facilities, e.g., hospitals,
               schools, Emergency Operations Center (E.O.C.), etc., to minimize impacts
               from hazards.
S1.33          Continued Functioning of Utilities and Critical Use Facilities (Essesntial
               Service Buildings). Encourage local public utilities and service providers to
               locate and design facilities and systems to ensure continued service in
               emergency conditions.
S1.34          Disaster Preparedness Planning. Ensure disaster preparedness in
               cooperation with other public agencies and appropriate public-interest
               organizations. Expand abilities of residents to assist in local responses to
City of Menlo Park Open Space, Conservation, Noise and Safety Elements
Adopted May 21, 2013                                                                         37

               disasters. Ensure adequate resources, facilities, and other support for
               emergency response equitably throughout the City.
S1.35          Community Preparedness. Encourage improved safety programs for
               schools, institutions and industries to promote greater public awareness of all
               types of hazards and appropriate responses and support the San Mateo
               County Office of Emergency Services’ program on emergency preparedness.
S1.36          Emergency Notification System. Continue to support and improve on the
               Emergency Notification System for disaster information release in
               emergencies.
S1.37          Emergency Connectors and Evacuation Routes. Maintain a system of
               emergency connectors and evacuation routes as part of the City’s disaster
               planning.
S1.38          Emergency Vehicle Access. Require that all private roads be designed to
               allow access for emergency vehicles as a prerequisite to the granting of
               permits and approvals for construction.
S1.39          Emergency Preparedness for Sensitive Populations. Review and improve
               disaster response capabilities, recovery operations and evacuation planning
               for sensitive populations in the event of earthquake or other disasters.
Implementing Programs
General Safety Implementing Programs
S1.A           Link the City’s Housing and Safety Elements. Continue to review and revise the
               Safety Element, as necessary, concurrently with updates to the General Plan
               Housing Element whenever substantial new data or evidence related to prevention of
               natural and human hazards become available.
S1.B           Maintain Up-to-Date Hazard Maps and Databases. Maintain up-to-date databases
               and maps of geologic and other hazards to identify areas prone to hazards for
               planning purposes on an on-going basis concurrently with the Housing Element
               Updates.
City of Menlo Park Open Space, Conservation, Noise and Safety Elements
Adopted May 21, 2013                                                                           38

S1.C           Review Building Code Updates. Continue to review State Building Code updates
               and incorporate local amendments as appropriate to require that new construction be
               designed under the most current safety standards. The review of updates should also
               consider requirements for facilities housing sensitive populations, such as seniors
               and persons living with disabilities.
S1.D           Require Early Investigation of Potential Hazard Conditions. Require that potential
               geologic, seismic, soils, and/or hydrologic problems confronting public or private
               development be thoroughly investigated at the earliest stages of the design process,
               and that these topics be comprehensively evaluated in the environmental review
               process by persons of competent technical expertise.
S1.E           Modify the Zoning and Subdivision Ordinances as Needed to Address Hazard
               Mitigation. Modify the Zoning Ordinance as needed when new information on natural
               hazards becomes available and to provide for hazard reduction measures as a part
               of the design criteria for development review. Review the Subdivision Ordinance and
               modify as needed to include hazard reduction in the process of dividing land for
               development.
S1.F           Work with the Public Utilities Commission. Work with the California Public Utilities
               Commission to require public utilities to apply the policies in this element to the
               planning and operation of their facilities, and to coordinate their activities with local
               planning agencies.
S1.G           Share Hazard Data with Other Agencies. Participate in a cooperative County-wide
               program to pool natural hazard data developed through special studies or via the
               project review process and continue to update and implement the Local Hazard
               Mitigation Plan.
Geologic and Seismic Safety Implementing Programs
S1.H           Enforce Seismic Risk Analysis and Adequate Construction Standards. Enforce
               seismic risk analysis and adequate construction standards through the building
               permit and inspection process.
S1.I           Review Approach to Potentially Earthquake Hazardous Buildings. Consider
               establishing a program to identify earthquake hazardous buildings and incentives to
               encourage repair or demolition.
City of Menlo Park Open Space, Conservation, Noise and Safety Elements
Adopted May 21, 2013                                                                                     39
Hazardous Materials Implementing Programs
S1.J           Require Health and Safety Plan for Hazardous Materials. Require the preparation
               of health and safety plans to be used to protect the general public and all workers in
               construction areas from potentially hazardous materials. The plan shall describe the
               practices and procedures to protect worker health in the event of an accidental
               release of hazardous materials or if previously undiscovered hazardous materials are
               encountered during construction. The plan shall include items such as spill
               prevention, cleanup and evacuation procedures. The plan will help protect the public
               and workers by providing procedures and contingencies that will help reduce the
               exposure to hazardous materials.
S1.K           Track Remediation Needs for Existing Known Hazardous Soils and Other
               Hazardous Materials. Monitor remediation of existing known hazards, such as
               contaminated soils and clean-up of leaking or abandoned underground storage
               tanks.
Flood Control, Tsunami and Dam Safety Implementing Programs
S1.L           Evaluate New Community Facilities Proposed in Dam Inundation Zones.
               Require that new community facilities located within dam inundation zones evaluate
               the potential for flooding and the impact on evacuation during the development
               approval process.
Fire Safety Implementing Programs
S1.M           Fire Sprinkler Requirements. Work with the Fire District on sprinkler requirements
               that are beyond State minimum code.
Public Safety and Emergency Response Implementing Programs
S1.N           Investigate Potential Impact of Train Derailment on Emergency Services.
               Coordinate with CalTrain and Union Pacific. Expand to encompass emergency plans
               for all transit and paratransit operators.
S1.O           Encourage Disaster Drills in Schools. Coordinate with the school districts in
               conducting disaster drills in schools, augmented with a community awareness
               campaign on how when, and where children are to be reunited with their parents.
S1.P           Coordinate the General Plan with City Emergency Planning Efforts. Implement
               and coordinate the Safety Element with other General Plan elements and City
               emergency plans — Local Hazard Mitigation Plan (LHMP) and Emergency Operation
               Plan (EOP) — and make necessary revisions.
City of Menlo Park Open Space, Conservation, Noise and Safety Elements
Adopted May 21, 2013                                                                                 40

                                      Background
Section V
Open Space/Conservation Background
  A       Natural Resources
Menlo Park stretches from 326 feet above sea level in the foothills of Jasper Ridge
(located outside the City limits and part of the Santa Cruz Mountains) in the west,
through the flatlands in the center of the valley, to sea level at the marshes and mudflats
of San Francisco Bay in the west. The City’s center is relatively flat, with slopes of
approximately 0.5 to 0.8 percent. The higher, hilly portion of the City is west of the street
Alameda de las Pulgas. The lower, flatter portion of the City is east of Alameda de las
Pulgas. Topography helps to define several sub-areas of the City from a natural
resources standpoint, as follows:
(1)       Eastern. The eastern edge of the City, east of U.S. 101 to the Bay, consists of
          near-sea-level elevation flat land roughly 4 to 10 feet above sea level. This area
          is comprised of coastal salt marshes, mudflats, as well as urbanized land or
          baylands.
(2)       Central. Central Menlo Park, lying west of U.S. 101 and east of Alameda de las
          Pulgas, is gently sloping from roughly 20 feet above sea level to 130 feet above
          sea level, and consists mostly of flat, urbanized area. The southern border of
          central Menlo Park is flanked by the San Francisquito Creek riparian canopy and
          channel.
(3)       Western. The far western side of Menlo Park, located from the western edge of
          Alameda de las Pulgas to City limits, is roughly 130 to 300 feet above sea level
          and consists of the hilly grasslands below Jasper Ridge, which have been
          partially urbanized.
The natural community types in Menlo Park are defined by a combination of dominant
plant community characteristics, landform, land use and ecological function. They
include the Coastal Salt Marsh and Salt Ponds; Tidal Mudflats; San Francisquito Creek;
Oak Woodlands; and Grasslands. Existing vegetation in Menlo Park is shown on the
map on the next page.
City of Menlo Park Open Space, Conservation, Noise and Safety Elements
Adopted May 21, 2013                                                                        41

City of Menlo Park Open Space, Conservation, Noise and Safety Elements
Adopted May 21, 2013                                                   42
Description of Natural Resources Types
Coastal Salt Marsh and Salt Ponds
Salt ponds and marshes once covered the edges of
Bay, including the baylands in Menlo Park. In 1850,
the conversion of these marshes through diking
and filling began, and by 1969, just 75 square miles
remained throughout the San Francisco Bay Area.
Menlo Park has large, intact marshes within its
borders. Ravenswood Slough, Westpoint Slough,
and Flood Point Slough contribute to the
approximately 2,300 acres of tidal mudflats and 300 acres of salt marsh of the City.
These salt and brackish water marshes that border the Bay are a part of the Don
Edwards Bay National Wildlife Refuge, and are associated with the South Bay Salt Pond
Restoration Project. Most of the salt ponds and marshes in or near Menlo Park have
been (or will be) restored to or are retained in their natural state.
Coastal salt marshes are closely associated with tidal action and are characterized by
sloughs (marshy creeks). These habitats are dominated by native species such as
pickleweed and edged by cordgrass and salt grass. Coastal salt marshes are high
biodiversity wildlife habitats, and are associated with a wide variety of native shorebirds,
raptors, songbirds, waterfowl, fish, and crustaceans. Special status species are not
uncommon in San Francisco Bay Area salt marshes.
Tidal Mudflats
Tidal mudflats consist of unvegetated mud deposits along the shoreline that are regularly
inundated and exposed by the tides of the Bay waters. These mudflats provide a habitat
for a wide variety of crabs, snails, sea squirts, clams, mussels, and tubeworms. These
species offer a rich feeding ground of macro-invertebrates to tens of thousands of
migratory and resident shorebirds that travel from as far as Canada and Alaska. At
higher tides, large marine species such as leopard sharks, starry flounder, and bat rays
feed on these same macro-invertebrates. Migratory birds are an example of the special
status species found in this habitat.
San Francisquito Creek
In the urbanized portion of Menlo Park, San Francisquito Creek is the main creek. It
originates west of Menlo Park just below Searsville Lake in Jasper Ridge, defines the
southern border of Menlo Park for roughly three miles from the intersection of Alpine
Road and Junipero Serra Boulevard, until it reaches Euclid Avenue near U.S. 101, then
City of Menlo Park Open Space, Conservation, Noise and Safety Elements
Adopted May 21, 2013                                                                       43
turns eastward and empties into the bay from within the borders of East Palo Alto. San
Francisquito Creek flows through Menlo Park largely in its natural alignment where it
forms the southern boundary of the Menlo Park City limits.
Riparian vegetation around San Francisquito Creek spans a 25-75 meter-wide space,
depending on adjacent land use and topography, and its canopy consists primarily of
native trees—willow, bay laurels, redwoods, alders, cottonwoods, California buckeye,
valley oaks, and coast live oaks. San Francisquito Creek shrub vegetation commonly
consists of native species such as blackberry, and poison oak. In the urbanized lower
reaches of the creek, non-native exotics such as eucalyptus, black locust, acacia,
bamboo, pines, and redwoods are mixed in with the native plant species.
Riparian habitats, even in heavily urbanized areas, are very valuable to wildlife,
providing food, water, and shelter in one location. Riparian habitat is associated with a
wide variety of native resident and migratory songbirds, raptors, rodents, bats, and other
mammals, as well as fish and amphibians. Urban creeks, such as San Francisquito that
have preserved canopies and/or understories, are usually the most species rich, and
some of these species are under special protections.
Oak Woodlands
Mature oaks provide nesting and foraging opportunities for birds, including raptors. They
also provide essential food resources for animals that include acorns in their diet, such
as squirrels and woodpeckers. Other wildlife species that commonly nest or den in
woodland habitat include mammals such as woodrats and deer mice, and birds such as
owls, raptors, and songbirds. Native reptiles and amphibians associated with this habitat
include snakes, newts, and salamanders. Contiguous oak woodlands with mature trees
are relatively biodiverse and species rich, and some species found in these habitats are
under special protections.
Grasslands
The foothills of Menlo Park are located on the City’s western border and are dominated
by common non-native annual grasses. Portions of this area have been developed for
housing and related uses, while another portion of these foothills, owned by Stanford
University, have been preserved as open space. Plant species include wild oats, Italian
ryegrass, foxtail barley, yellow star thistle, field bindweed, prickly lettuce, prickly ox-
tongue, and field mustard. The grasslands are also dotted with taller trees and shrubs,
including native California species such as coyote bush, toyon, valley oak, and coast live
oak. Adult, large circumference non-native trees, such as black walnut, red gum, and
acacia, are also present.
City of Menlo Park Open Space, Conservation, Noise and Safety Elements
Adopted May 21, 2013                                                                        44

This open space area provides important foraging habitat for raptors, native prey and
predator mammals, and reptiles. Grasslands which are large and contiguous are usually
the most species-rich. Some grassland species, such as nesting raptors, are under
special protection.
Developed Baylands
Developed sites in eastern Menlo Park along the bayshore have been built on diked and
filled coastal marshes. These marshes were converted in the 1960s to create more land
for development. In the process, these marshes have been cut off from tidal influence
and filled with materials to raise their surface level and fill in their slough channels.
While in some cases such bayfill lands can start to revert to wetland conditions, Menlo
Park’s developed bayland areas are primarily paved, landscaped with non-native plants,
and disturbed with automobile activity. Developed salt marsh areas typically have
relatively low habitat values. Species found in the urbanized baylands are similar to
other urbanized areas.
Urbanized Area
The well-landscaped, suburban character of developed areas of Menlo Park includes
parks, backyards, and vacant lots that provide habitat for a variety of wildlife species that
have adapted to human disturbance. Native and ornamental trees and shrubs in the
urban area provide nesting sites for songbirds such as scrub jays, brewer’s black birds,
and American crows. Parks and quiet streets provide foraging grounds for opportunistic
predator and prey wildlife, including turkey vultures, coyotes, and raccoons. Few urban
species are under special protections, although a few, such as the red-tailed hawk, are
designated protected species.
Special-Status Plant and Wildlife Species
The locations of sightings of special-status plant and wildlife species are shown in the
map on the next page. Following the map is a table listing the special-status plant and
wildlife species that have the potential for occurring in Menlo Park. They include those
listed under the State and Federal Endangered Species Acts, plants listed by the
California Native Plant Society (CNPS) Inventory of Rare and Endangered Vascular
Plants of California and wildlife designated as Species of Special Concern by the
California Department of Fish and Wildlife.
City of Menlo Park Open Space, Conservation, Noise and Safety Elements
Adopted May 21, 2013                                                                       45

City of Menlo Park Open Space, Conservation, Noise and Safety Elements
Adopted May 21, 2013                                                   46
 California Natural Diversity Database Special Status Species in Menlo Park (2013)
City of Menlo Park Open Space, Conservation, Noise and Safety Elements
Adopted May 21, 2013                                                               47
California Natural Diversity Database Special Status Species in Menlo Park (2013) — Continued
      The California Natural Diversity Data Base (CNDDB) indicates 21 special status plant
      species, animal species or sensitive habitat types with recorded occurrences in the
      Menlo Park vicinity. Additionally, another five special status animals species are known
      to occur based on other reports done in Menlo Park.
      Special-Status Plant Species
      Six plant species with special-status have been recorded in Menlo Park. These species
      have varied status, but each is considered rare by the California Native Plant Society.
      Three of these special status plant species have been recorded in the Menlo Park
      vicinity, the Hoover's button-celery, Point Reyes bird's-beak, and slender-leaved
      pondweed, and are associated with wet or marshy conditions such as those found in
      riparian, wetlands, or marshes of the eastern Menlo Park baylands, and central Menlo
      Park’s San Francisquito Creek area. Two other plants, the western leatherwood and San
      City of Menlo Park Open Space, Conservation, Noise and Safety Elements
      Adopted May 21, 2013                                                                     48

Francisco collinsia, are associated with drier conditions, such as those of the grasslands
on the western edge of Menlo Park. The sixth species, the lost thistle, has been
assigned a category indicating likely extinction or extreme rarity within California.
Special-Status Animal Species
Thirteen bird, mammal, reptile, fish, and invertebrate species with special-status have
recorded occurrences in Menlo Park as reported by the California Natural Diversity
Database. Another four species were found in recent local studies, bringing the total to
17 special status animal species. Information on habitat association, or conditions under
which an animal is typically found, assists in predicting its likelihood of occurrence. The
habitat association and ranking of these species are described below.
Six of the special-status animal species with recorded occurrences in the Menlo Park
vicinity are associated with wetland habitat, specifically with the salt marsh at the
northeastern edge of the City. Of these, the California clapper rail, California least tern,
salt-marsh harvest mouse, and western snowy plover each are listed as protected on the
Federal Endangered Species List. The two other species, the Alameda song sparrow
and the salt marsh wandering shrew, are afforded protection through State listing as
species of special concern.
Four of the special-status animal species with CNDDB recorded occurrences in Menlo
Park are associated with the grasslands on the western boundary of the City, and the
oak woodlands in the center of the City. These four grassland or woodland associated
special status species are the American badger, pallid bat, hoary bat, and Santa Cruz
kangaroo rat. The American badger and pallid bat are State Species of Special Concern.
Two special-status animal species with CNDDB recorded occurrences in Menlo Park are
associated with (freshwater) wetlands and riparian habitats such as those of San
Francisquito Creek. These are the San Francisco garter snake and western pond turtle.
The San Francisco garter snake is on the Federal endangered species list. The western
pond turtle is a State of California species of special concern. A third species associated
with San Francisquito Creek, the steelhead (a member of the salmon fish family), is
Federally threatened.
Sensitive Habitats and Wildlife Dispersal Corridors
The CNDDB search identifies two types of sensitive habitat within the Menlo Park area
— coastal salt marsh and oak woodland. Coastal salt marsh occurs on the eastern edge
of Menlo Park where the baylands have not been converted. The oak woodland occurs
within the center of Menlo Park, and consists of a large patch of native habitat situated
within the otherwise urbanized City center. In addition to serving as valuable habitat,
City of Menlo Park Open Space, Conservation, Noise and Safety Elements
Adopted May 21, 2013                                                                        49

riparian areas serve as important travel corridors for wildlife. San Francisquito Creek’s
intact, multi-layered canopy of riparian habitat and large creek channel serves as an
important wildlife dispersal corridor.
  B       Parks and Recreation Facilities
                                                      The Menlo Park Community Services
                                                      Department owns and operates parks and
                                                      recreational facilities in the City of Menlo
                                                      Park. The City has adopted a goal of
                                                      maintaining a ratio of five acres of
                                                      developed parkland per 1,000 residents.
                                                      Currently, the City provides a net of 220.86
                                                      acres of parkland for the residents, with a
                                                      ratio of 6.79 acres per capita. A detailed list
                                                     of available parks and recreation facilities
                                                     located in Menlo Park is shown in the table
                                                     on the next page.
City of Menlo Park Open Space, Conservation, Noise and Safety Elements
Adopted May 21, 2013                                                                                50

                    Parks and Recreation Facilities in Menlo Park (2013)
City of Menlo Park Open Space, Conservation, Noise and Safety Elements
Adopted May 21, 2013                                                     51
             Parks and Recreation Facilities in Menlo Park (2013) — Continued
Regional Parks and Preserves
In addition to the City’s parks facilities, Menlo Park residents have access to a range of
regional parks and open space, including the Don Edwards San Francisco Bay National
Wildlife Refuge. Wunderlich County Park, Huddart County Park, and San Francisco Bay
Trail also provide recreational opportunities for Menlo Park residents. Flood Park, a 26-
acre facility owned by San Mateo County Parks Department, provides a place for
picnicking and strolling. The City and the County have discussed transferring it to the
City because of the County’s budget deficit. However, there are no plans to move
forward at this time. Furthermore, the residents of Menlo Park have access to the 373-
acre Ravenswood Preserve located largely within Menlo Park and owned and managed
by the Midpeninsula Regional Open Space District. The southern portion of the
preserve offers pedestrian and bicycle access along the shore and levees along the
marshland.
School Facilities
The City has joint use agreements with La Entrada, Oak Knoll, Belle Haven, Hillview,
and Willow Oaks Schools for use of fields after school hours, as follows:
(1)       La Entrada: soccer, basketball, baseball, and tennis courts; playground
(2)       Oak Knoll: soccer, basketball and baseball
(3)       Belle Haven: basketball and baseball
City of Menlo Park Open Space, Conservation, Noise and Safety Elements
Adopted May 21, 2013                                                                       52

(4)       Hillview: soccer, football, lacrosse, basketball court, track
(5)       Willow Oaks School: baseball and soccer
Private Facilities
The Sharon Heights Golf and Country Club is located in the Sharon Heights
neighborhood near Sand Hill Road and Interstate 280. A portion of the Stanford
University Golf Course is located within the City of Menlo Park and its Sphere of
Influence along Sand Hill Road and Alpine Road. In addition, a few private, fee-based
facilities are available in Menlo Park, such as small yoga and dance studios.
  C       Historic Resources
The City of Menlo Park was originally the home of Ohlone Indians. The Ohlone lived off
the land and due to the abundance of food they did not practice agriculture. Evidences
of their civilization are still being unearthed on the Filoli estate in Woodside, and along
San Francisquito Creek.
In 1769 Spanish rule was introduced to the area when the exploration party led by Don
Gaspar de Portola camped near "El Palo Alto" after their momentous discovery of San
Francisco Bay. The colonizing of the Peninsula began after the expedition of Juan
Bautista DeAnza passed through Menlo Park on its way to establishing Mission Dolores
and the Presidio of San Francisco in 1776. The mission padres, explorers, military
personnel, travelers and settlers occupied certain areas, developing and populating the
land.
In 1854 Dennis J. Oliver and Daniel McGlynn purchased 1,700 acres from the Don Jose
Dario Arguello family that had legally obtained the title to the land in 1853. Around this
time Menlo Park received its official name when Oliver and McGlynn erected an arch
with the words “Menlo Park” on it to honor their former home in Menlough, County
Galway, Ireland. In 1863, the Southern Pacific Railroad was extended to the community
of Menlo Park. During this same period, the downtown area of Menlo Park began to
develop along Oak Grove Avenue between the railroad station and El Camino Real. By
1870, twelve buildings situated between the railroad station and El Camino Real in the
vicinity of Oak Grove Avenue were constructed, consisting of two general stores, three
hotels, livery stables, saloons, and three blacksmith shops. The first store in Menlo Park
was on the corner of Oak Grove Avenue and El Camino Real.
On March 23, 1874, Menlo Park became the second incorporated city in San Mateo
County, although only for a short time. The purpose was to provide a quick way to raise
money for road repairs. This incorporation, including Fair Oaks (later Atherton) and
City of Menlo Park Open Space, Conservation, Noise and Safety Elements
Adopted May 21, 2013                                                                        53

Ravenswood (later East Palo Alto), lasted only until 1876. Churches were founded,
schools were opened and businesses were established. Menlo Park’s population
increased slowly until World War I. In 1917, 27,000 soldiers were stationed at Camp
Fremont in Menlo Park. Menlo Park’s first gas and water services, its first paved streets,
and an increase in businesses were a direct result of the transient military population.
The original Dumbarton Bridge opened in 1927, connecting the South Bay and East Bay.
In 1931, the Bayshore Highway (now Highway 101) linked Menlo Park and San
Francisco. In 1940, Menlo Park’s population was 3,258. World War II brought about
many changes in the small town. Between 1943 and 1946 another military installation,
Dibble General Hospital, was built on the old Timothy Hopkins estate to care for the
thousands of soldiers injured in the South Pacific in World War II. Following World War
II, in the 1950s, the hospital campus became the site of the Menlo Park Civic Center,
Stanford Research Institute (today’s SRI International), and the United States Geological
Survey. Today Menlo Park is a suburban residential community with a variety of
businesses, including high-tech industries.
The map on the next page identifies historic resources near the downtown. Additional
information on historic resources is available in the Environmental Assessment.
City of Menlo Park Open Space, Conservation, Noise and Safety Elements
Adopted May 21, 2013                                                                     54

City of Menlo Park Open Space, Conservation, Noise and Safety Elements
Adopted May 21, 2013                                                   55
  D       Air Quality and Greenhouse Gas Emissions
                                               Menlo Park experiences a coastal Mediterranean
                                               climate, which consists of long dry, relatively cool
                                               summers and wet, mild winters. The City
                                               receives approximately 15.5 inches of rain
                                               annually, primarily experienced from the five-
                                               month stretch between November and April.
                                               The climate is dominated by the strength and
                                               location of a semi-permanent, subtropical high-
                                               pressure cell. During the summer, the Pacific
                                               high-pressure cell is centered over the
                                               northeastern Pacific Ocean, resulting in stable
meteorological conditions and a steady northwesterly wind flow. Upwelling of cold
ocean water from below the surface because of the northwesterly flow produces a band
of cold water off the California coast. The cool and moisture-laden air approaching the
coast from the Pacific Ocean is further cooled by the presence of the cold-water band,
resulting in condensation and the presence of fog and stratus clouds along the Northern
California coast. In the winter, the Pacific high-pressure cell weakens and shifts
southward, resulting in wind flow offshore, the absence of upwelling, and the occurrence
of storms. Weak inversions coupled with moderate winds result in a low air pollution
potential.
Air Quality
The Bay Area Air Quality Management District (BAAQMD) is the regional air quality
agency for the San Francisco Bay Area Air Basin (SFBAAB), which comprises all of
Alameda, Contra Costa, Marin, Napa, San Francisco, San Mateo, and Santa Clara
counties; the southern portion of Sonoma County; and the southwestern portion of
Solano County. Air quality in this area is determined by such natural factors as
topography, meteorology, and climate, in addition to the presence of existing air pollution
sources and ambient conditions.
Ambient air quality standards (AAQS) have been adopted at State and Federal levels for
criteria air pollutants. In addition, both the State and Federal government regulate the
release of toxic air contaminants (TACs). Jurisdictions in the Bay Area are also subject
to the regulations imposed by the Bay Area Air Quality Management District (BAAQMD),
the California Air Resources Board (CARB) and the U.S. Environmental Protection
Agency (EPA).
City of Menlo Park Open Space, Conservation, Noise and Safety Elements
Adopted May 21, 2013                                                                              56
Existing levels of ambient air quality and historical trends and projections in the vicinity of
Menlo Park show occasional violations of both the State and Federal Ozone (O3)
standards and the Federal Fine Particulates (PM2.5) standard. The State and Federal
Course Particulates (PM10), Carbon Monoxide (CO), Sulfur Dioxide (SO2), and Nitrogen
Dioxide (NO2) standards have not been exceeded in the last five years in the vicinity of
Menlo Park.
Sensitive Receptors
Some land uses are considered more sensitive to air pollution than others due to the
types of population groups or activities involved. Sensitive population groups include
children, the elderly, the acutely ill, and the chronically ill, especially those with cardio-
respiratory diseases. Residential areas are also considered sensitive receptors to air
pollution because residents (including children and the elderly) tend to be at home for
extended periods of time, resulting in sustained exposure to any pollutants present.
Other sensitive receptors include retirement facilities, hospitals, and schools.
Recreational land uses are considered moderately sensitive to air pollution. Although
exposure periods are generally short, exercise places a high demand on respiratory
functions, which can be impaired by air pollution. In addition, noticeable air pollution can
detract from the enjoyment of recreation. Industrial, commercial, retail, and office areas
are considered the least sensitive to air pollution. Exposure periods are relatively short
and intermittent, as the majority of the workers tend to stay indoors most of the time. In
addition, the working population is generally the healthiest segment of the public.
Greenhouse Gas Emissions
Scientists have concluded that human activities are contributing to global climate change
by adding large amounts of heat-trapping gases, known as GHG, to the atmosphere.
The primary source of these GHG is fossil fuel use. The Intergovernmental Panel on
Climate Change (IPCC) has identified four major GHG—water vapor, carbon dioxide
(CO2), methane (CH4), and ozone (O3)—that are the likely cause of an increase in
global average temperatures observed within the 20th and 21st centuries. Other GHG
identified by the IPCC that contribute to global warming to a lesser extent include nitrous
oxide (N2O), sulfur hexafluoride (SF6), hydrofluorocarbons, perfluorocarbons, and
chlorofluorocarbons. The major GHG are briefly described below.
(1)       Carbon dioxide (CO2) enters the atmosphere through the burning of fossil fuels
          (oil, natural gas, and coal), solid waste, trees and wood products, and respiration,
          and also as a result of other chemical reactions (e.g. manufacture of cement).
          Carbon dioxide is removed from the atmosphere (sequestered) when it is
          absorbed by plants as part of the biological carbon cycle.
City of Menlo Park Open Space, Conservation, Noise and Safety Elements
Adopted May 21, 2013                                                                           57

(2)       Methane (CH4) is emitted during the production and transport of coal, natural
          gas, and oil. Methane emissions also result from livestock and other agricultural
          practices and from the decay of organic waste in municipal landfills and water
          treatment facilities.
(3)       Nitrous oxide (N2O) is emitted during agricultural and industrial activities as well
          as during combustion of fossil fuels and solid waste.
(4)       Fluorinated gases are synthetic, strong GHGs that are emitted from a variety of
          industrial processes. Fluorinated gases are sometimes used as substitutes for
          ozone-depleting substances. These gases are typically emitted in smaller
          quantities, but because they are potent GHGs, they are sometimes referred to as
          High global warming potential gases.
(5)       Chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs) are GHGs covered under the 1987 Montreal
          Protocol and used for refrigeration, air conditioning, packaging, insulation,
          solvents, or aerosol propellants. Since they are not destroyed in the lower
          atmosphere (troposphere, stratosphere), CFCs drift into the upper atmosphere
          where, given suitable conditions, they break down ozone. These gases are also
          ozone-depleting gases and are therefore being replaced by other compounds
          that are GHGs covered under the Kyoto Protocol.
(6)       Perfluorocarbons (PFCs) are a group of human-made chemicals composed of
          carbon and fluorine only. These chemicals (predominantly perfluoromethane
          [CF4] and perfluoroethane [C2F6]) were introduced as alternatives, along with
          HFCs, to the ozone-depleting substances. In addition, PFCs are emitted as by-
          products of industrial processes and are also used in manufacturing. PFCs do
          not harm the stratospheric ozone layer, but they have a high global warming
          potential.
City Actions to Promote Sustainability
The City maintains several environmental programs under the City’s Public Works
Department. The City’s environmental programs promote sustainable environmental
practices and policies Citywide and within City-owned facilities and open space areas.
The City has an approved Climate Action Plan (CAP) to reduce municipal and
community GHG emissions. The most recent CAP is the City’s 2011 CAP Assessment
Report, which is described in more detail below.
The City’s Public Works Department is also responsible for developing a more functional
and efficient roadway network for the effective movement of people and goods. The
division promotes the use of public transit, ride sharing, bicycles, and walking as
commuting alternatives to single-occupant automobiles. The City operates a trip
City of Menlo Park Open Space, Conservation, Noise and Safety Elements
Adopted May 21, 2013                                                                        58

reduction program and was the first City on the Peninsula to establish a shuttle program.
The City also manages two Caltrain shuttle bus routes, the Willow and Marsh shuttles,
which operate during the AM and PM peak hours taking passengers from Caltrain to
their workplaces, schools, shopping, or appointments. In addition, the City manages a
Midday shuttle service, a community service route open to the general public but
focusing on the senior community. For residents who do not live within an easy walking
distance of a SamTrans stop or the Midday shuttle service stop, Menlo Park offers a
twice weekly shopper’s shuttle service that picks up passengers at their homes and
provides rides to specific shopping areas.
City of Menlo Park Climate Change Action Plan (CAP)
The City of Menlo Park has prepared and updated its community-wide GHG emissions
inventory several times since the release of the City’s 2005 Greenhouse Gas Emissions
Analysis, which was prepared by the City with assistance from ICLEI in 2007. In 2009,
the City prepared and approved the City’s Climate Action Plan (CAP). The 2009 CAP
included GHG emissions inventories and strategies to reduce GHG emissions within the
City. The latest update to the City’s CAP was conducted in 2011, Climate Action Plan
Assessment Report. The 2011 CAP replaces the strategies identified within the 2009
Report. The 2011 Climate Action Plan Assessment Report recommends implementing
the community GHG reduction strategies under the categories of energy efficiency,
transportation, etc.
  E       Water Quality
The City is located within the 50-square mile San Francisquito Creek watershed, which
includes portions of both Santa Clara County and San Mateo County. The uppermost
elevations of the watershed are west of Highway 35 (locally known as Skyline
Boulevard), and its lowest points are in East Palo Alto where San Francisquito Creek
empties into the San Francisco Bay. The southernmost edge of the watershed is in the
Los Trancos Regional Preserve near Palo Alto, and its northern most edge is Sweeny
Ridge in the Golden Gate National Recreation Area.
Water flows west to east through natural creeks and streams and channelized
waterways. In the undeveloped marshes, water flows through Flood Slough and
Ravenswood Slough. In the urbanized portion of Menlo Park, the main creek system is
San Francisquito Creek. In general, the creek flows in a northeasterly direction, flows
through Menlo Park largely in its natural alignment, and it forms the southern boundary
of the City limits. Riparian vegetation around the creek spans a 25- to 75-meter-wide
City of Menlo Park Open Space, Conservation, Noise and Safety Elements
Adopted May 21, 2013                                                                    59

space, depending on adjacent land use and topography, consisting primarily of willow,
bay laurels, redwoods, alders, cottonwoods, dogwoods, valley oaks, and coast live oaks.
Groundwater Aquifers
The City is situated above the Santa Clara Valley groundwater basin and San Mateo
sub-basin. The San Mateo sub-basin is bounded by the Santa Cruz Mountains to the
west, the Bay to the east, San Francisquito Creek to the south, and the Westside basin
to the north. A relatively shallow water table aquifer overlies confined and semi-confined
aquifers near the margins of the Bay, with most wells constructed to draw from the
deeper portions. Recharge of the groundwater occurs through infiltration into
streambeds and through percolation of rain on the valley floor. Well data from the
California Department of Water Resources indicate that groundwater recharge in the
City increases from the hilly west to the flatter eastern portions of the City, and
decreases with increasing depth.
Water Quality
Menlo Park is within the San Francisquito Creek Watershed. More specifically, runoff
from development within Menlo Park will eventually discharge to San Francisquito
Creek, which ultimately discharges into South San Francisco Bay.
Beneficial Uses of Water Bodies in Menlo Park
The beneficial uses of the surface water bodies in Menlo Park have been designated in
the Water Quality Control Plan for the San Francisco Bay Region (Basin Plan). These
potential and beneficial uses include:
     Designated Beneficial Uses of Surface Water in Menlo Park
     South San Francisco Bay: Commercial and sport fishing; Estuarine habitat; Industrial
     service supply; Fish migration; Navigation; Preservation of rare and endangered species;
     Water contact recreation; Non-contact water recreation; Shellfish harvesting; Fish spawning;
     and Wildlife habitat.
     San Francisquito Creek: Cold freshwater habitat; Fish migration; Water contact recreation;
     Non-contact water recreation; Fish spawning; and Wildlife habitat.
     Designated Beneficial Uses of Groundwater in Menlo Park
     Santa Clara Valley (San Mateo Sub-Basin): Municipal and domestic water supply;
     Industrial process water supply; Industrial service water supply; and Agricultural water supply
     (potential).
City of Menlo Park Open Space, Conservation, Noise and Safety Elements
Adopted May 21, 2013                                                                               60
Impaired Water Bodies in Menlo Park
In accordance with Section 303(d) of the Clean Water Act, the State must present
USEPA with a list of impaired water bodies that do not meet water quality standards.
Listed impaired water bodies within Menlo Park are shown in the table below.
                         List of Impaired Water Bodies in Menlo Park
Once a water body has been placed on the 303(d) list of impaired waters, states are
required to develop a Total Maximum Daily Load (TMDL) to address each pollutant
causing impairment. A TMDL defines how much of a pollutant a water body can tolerate
and still meet water quality standards. TMDLs have been approved by the U.S.
City of Menlo Park Open Space, Conservation, Noise and Safety Elements
Adopted May 21, 2013                                                                 61
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) for diazinon in San Francisquito Creek and
mercury and PCBs in South San Francisco Bay.
The Basin Plan also contains water quality criteria for groundwater. Menlo Park is within
the San Mateo Plain Sub-basin of the Santa Clara Valley Groundwater Basin.
Groundwater in this sub-basin is generally characterized as calcium magnesium calcium
carbonate water and the mineral content is very “hard,” averaging 471 mg/l of calcium
carbonate. Some wells have reported concentrations of nitrate-nitrogen that exceed
USEPA maximum contaminant levels (MCLs).
Groundwater contamination can result from releases of hazardous materials from
underground storage tanks or historical industrial activities. There are about 20
Regional Water Quality Control Board (RWQCB) or Department of Toxic Substance
Control (DTSC) hazardous waste cleanup sites within Menlo Park. If groundwater de-
watering activities are required as part of the construction efforts, a more detailed
assessment of the potential for contaminated groundwater to be present is warranted.
City of Menlo Park Open Space, Conservation, Noise and Safety Elements
Adopted May 21, 2013                                                                    62

Section VI
Noise Background
  A       Background on Sound and Sound Measurement
                                                       The Noise Element is most closely
                                                       associated with the Land Use and
                                                       Circulation Elements of the Menlo Park
                                                       General Plan. Specific concerns are
                                                       addressed in this Element and in the Land
                                                       Use and Circulation Element. Issues are:
                                                       (1) establishment of noise compatible land
                                                       uses; (2) regulation of new development to
                                                       limit noise impacts on noise-sensitive uses;
                                                       (3) minimization of traffic noise; (4)
enforcement of noise standards to protect the existing quality of life; and (5) insulation of
residences exposed to excessive levels of noise.
Characteristics of Sound
Noise is most often defined as unwanted sound. Whether a sound is unwanted depends
on when and where it occurs, what the listener is doing when it occurs, characteristics of
the sound (loudness, pitch and duration, speech or music content, irregularity) and how
intrusive it is above background sound levels. Although sound can be easily measured,
the perception of noise and the physical response to sound complicate the analysis of its
impact on people. People judge the relative magnitude of sound sensation in subjective
terms such as “noisiness” or “loudness.”
Sound is the result of the vibration of an object, which is transmitted through the air in
waves that in turn vibrate the eardrum. Sound can be described in terms of amplitude
(loudness), frequency (pitch), or duration (time), and is measured in a logarithmic scale
using units called decibels (dB). Since the human ear is not equally sensitive to sound at
all frequencies, a special A-weighted filter decibel measurement (dBA) is used to
simulate human hearing.
Another measure of sound is called the Day-Night Weighted Average (Ldn), which is the
average dBA sound level during a 24-hour day. Sound levels during the night are
weighted over those during daylight hours, by adding 10 dB to actual sound levels during
City of Menlo Park Open Space, Conservation, Noise and Safety Elements
Adopted May 21, 2013                                                                             63

the period from 10 p.m. to 7 a.m. to recognize the increased annoyance factor related to
noise at night.
Noise Levels
The outdoor noise environment throughout the United States varies considerably.
Outdoor Day-Night Average (Ldn) sound levels can be as low as 30 to 40 dBA (Ldn) in
wilderness areas and as high as 85-90 dBA (Ldn) in noisy industrial urban areas. In
Menlo Park, Ldn levels in residential areas are as low as 45 dBA (Ldn) in areas shielded
from major roads and as high as 65-75 dBA (Ldn) along highways and major roads.
                                        Typical Noise Levels
City of Menlo Park Open Space, Conservation, Noise and Safety Elements
Adopted May 21, 2013                                                                   64
Construction operations generally include a wide range of activities that can generate
groundborne vibration. In general, blasting and demolition of structures generate the
highest vibrations. Vibratory compactors or rollers, pile drivers, and pavement breakers
can generate perceptible amounts of vibration at up to 200 feet. Heavy trucks can also
generate groundborne vibrations, which can vary, depending on vehicle type, weight,
and pavement conditions. Potholes, pavement joints, discontinuities, differential
settlement of pavement, etc., all increase the vibration levels from vehicles passing over
a road surface. Construction vibration is normally of greater concern than vibration from
normal traffic flows on streets and freeways with smooth pavement conditions. Trains
generate substantial quantities of vibration due to their engines, steel wheels, heavy
loads, and wheel-rail interactions. The table below shows various construction
equipment noise emission levels.
Construction Equipment Noise Emission Levels
Construction                Typical Noise Level         Construction              Typical Noise Level
Equipment                   (dBA) at 50 Feet            Equipment                 (dBA) at 50 Feet
Air Compressor              81                          Pile-Driver (Impact)      101
Backhoe                     80                          Pile-Driver (Sonic)       96
Ballast Equalizer           82                          Pneumatic Tool            85
Ballast Tamper              83                          Pump                      76
Compactor                   82                          Rail Saw                  90
Concrete Mixer              85                          Rock Drill                98
Concrete Pump               71                          Roller                    74
Concrete Vibrator           76                          Saw                       76
Crane, Derrick              88                          Scarifier                 83
Crane, Mobile               83                          Scraper                   89
Dozer                       85                          Shovel                    82
Generator                   81                          Spike Driver              77
Grader                      85                          Tie Cutter                84
Impact Wrench               85                          Tie Handler               80
Jack Hammer                 88                          Tie Inserter              85
Loader                      85                          Truck                     88
Paver                       89
Source: Federal Transit Administration, Transit Noise, and Vibration Impact Assessment, 2006.
City of Menlo Park Open Space, Conservation, Noise and Safety Elements
Adopted May 21, 2013                                                                                65
Acceptable Noise Levels and Attitude Surveys About Noise
Acceptable levels of noise vary from land use to land use. Also, in any one location, the
noise level will vary over time, from the lowest background or ambient levels to that of
passing airplanes or construction equipment. Various techniques have been developed
that measure the effects of noise levels over a period of time. It is difficult to specify
noise levels that are generally acceptable to everyone. What is annoying to one person
may be unnoticed by another. Standards may be based on documented complaint
activity in response to noise levels, or based on studies on the ability of people to sleep,
talk, or work under various noise conditions. All such studies, however, recognize that
individual responses vary considerably. Standards usually address the needs of most of
the general population.
Attitude surveys are used to measure annoyance felt in a community for noises intruding
into homes or affecting outdoor activity areas. In these surveys, it has been determined
that the causes for annoyance include interference with hearing, radio and television
reception, sleep and rest, and house vibrations. The Ldn as a measure of noise has
been found to provide a valid correlation of noise level and the percentage of people
annoyed.
When measuring the percentage of the population highly annoyed, the threshold for
ground vehicle noise is about 55 dBA Ldn. At an Ldn of about 60 dBA, approximately 2%
of the population is highly annoyed. When the Ldn increases to 70 dBA, the percentage
of the population highly annoyed increases to about 12% of the population. There is,
therefore, an increase of about 1% per dBA from an Ldn of 60 to 70 dBA. From an Ldn
of 70 to 80 dBA, each decibel increases by about 2% the percentage of people highly
annoyed.
Unlike linear units such as inches or pounds, decibels are measured on a logarithmic
scale. Because of the physical characteristics of noise transmission and perception, the
relative loudness of sound does not closely match the actual amounts of sound energy.
The table below presents the subjective effect of changes in sound pressure levels.
Change in Apparent Loudness
± 3 dB                   Threshold of human perceptibility
± 5 dB                   Clearly noticeable change in noise level
± 10 dB                  Half or twice as loud
± 20 dB                  Much quieter or louder
Source: Bies and Hansen 2009.
City of Menlo Park Open Space, Conservation, Noise and Safety Elements
Adopted May 21, 2013                                                                       66

Because community receptors are more sensitive to unwanted noise intrusion during the
evening and nighttime hours, State law requires that, for planning purposes and to
account for this increased receptiveness of noise, an artificial decibel increment is to be
added to quiet-time noise levels to calculate a 24-hour CNEL (Community Noise
Equivalent Level) noise metric. CNEL is the average sound level over a 24 hour period,
with a penalty of 5 dB added for the evening hours from 7 p.m. to 10 p.m., and a penalty
of 10 dB added for the nighttime hours of 10 p.m. to 7 a.m. CNEL It is very similar in
nature (and in results) to the Ldn, but with the added penalty for the evening period.
Psychological and Physiological Effects of Noise
Physical damage to human hearing begins at prolonged exposure to noise levels higher
than 85 dBA. Exposure to high noise levels affects the entire system; prolonged noise
exposure in excess of 75 dBA increases body tensions, thereby affecting blood pressure
and functions of the heart and nervous system. Extended periods of noise exposure
above 90 dBA results in permanent cell damage, which is the main driver for employee
hearing protection regulations in the workplace. For community environments, the
ambient or background noise problem is widespread and generally more concentrated in
urban areas than in outlying, less-developed areas. Elevated ambient noise levels can
result in noise interference (e.g. speech interruption/masking, sleep disturbance,
disturbance of concentration) and cause annoyance. Since most people do not routinely
work with decibels or A-weighted sound levels, it is often difficult to appreciate what a
given sound pressure level (SPL) number means.
Noise Sensitive Receptors
Certain land uses are particularly sensitive to noise and vibration, including residential,
school and open space/recreation areas where quiet environments are necessary for
City of Menlo Park Open Space, Conservation, Noise and Safety Elements
Adopted May 21, 2013                                                                        67
enjoyment, public health, and safety. Sensitive land uses within Menlo Park include
residences, schools, places of worship and recreational areas. These uses are
regarded as sensitive because they are where citizens most frequently engage in
activities that are likely to be disturbed by noise, such as reading, studying, sleeping,
resting, or otherwise engaging in quiet or passive recreation. Commercial and industrial
uses are not considered noise sensitive uses and often themselves generate more noise
than they receive from other uses.
  B       Noise Regulation
To limit population exposure to physically and/or psychologically damaging as well as
intrusive noise levels, the Federal government, the State of California, various county
governments, and most municipalities in the state have established standards and
ordinances to control noise.
State of California Building Code
The State of California’s noise insulation standards are codified in the California Code of
Regulations, Title 24, Building Standards Administrative Code, Part 2, California Building
Code. These noise standards are applied to new construction in California for the
purpose of interior noise compatibility from exterior noise sources. Acoustical studies
that accompany building plans must demonstrate that the structure has been designed
to limit interior noise in habitable rooms to acceptable noise levels. For new residential
buildings, schools, and hospitals, the acceptable interior noise limit is 45 dBA CNEL.
State of California Land Use Compatibility Criteria
The table below is a land use compatibility chart for community noise adopted by the
State of California as part of its General Plan Guidelines. It provides cities with a tool to
gauge the compatibility of new land uses relative to existing and future noise levels by
identifying normally acceptable, conditionally acceptable and clearly unacceptable noise
levels for various land uses. A conditionally acceptable designation implies new
development should be undertaken only after a detailed analysis of the noise reduction
requirements is made and needed noise insulation features are incorporated in the
design. By comparison, a normally acceptable designation indicates that standard
construction can occur with no special noise reduction requirements.
Menlo Park Municipal Code (Noise Ordinance)
Menlo Park addresses noise in various capacities under multiple chapters of its
municipal code. Noise is primarily addressed in Chapter 8.06 (Noise); additional
City of Menlo Park Open Space, Conservation, Noise and Safety Elements
Adopted May 21, 2013                                                                          68

chapters making brief mention of minor and/or incidental noise issues and regulations
include Chapters 8.07 (Leaf Blowers), 8.12 (Business Operations after Midnight), 8.28
(Parks and Recreation), 9.26 (Poultry and Rabbits), 11.64 (Transportation Systems
Management), and 13.18 (Use of Public Rights-of-Way).
Chapter 8.06 (Noise) contains the primary set of statutes through which Menlo Park
regulates noise. For all noise measurements pursuant to the noise ordinance, the
municipal code specifies standard procedures for conducting noise measurements, with
specifications for sound-meter settings and placement. Section 8.06.030 sets maximum
noise levels at any residential receiving property to a maximum of 60 dBA during the
daytime hours between 7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m., and to 50 dBA during the nighttime
hours between 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. The ordinance applies an additional 5 dBA
penalty to sounds of a particularly annoying nature, such as tones, screeches, whines,
and pulses, among others. The ordinance also includes a qualitative standard that
prohibits noises that can be reasonably determined to be disturbing to an entire
neighborhood or any considerable number of residents.
The Menlo Park noise ordinance also contains a number of qualified exceptions to the
limitations stipulated in the ordinance; these include construction, powered equipment,
and leaf blowers, deliveries, social gatherings, pavement sweeping, garbage collection,
and animals. Additionally, the ordinance contains general exemptions for emergencies
and emergency warning devices, sporting and City-permitted events, City and State
projects, and the normal operation of typical motor vehicles. Of these, the most notable
exceptions and exemptions for the purposes of this analysis include those for
construction, motor vehicles, and deliveries.
Construction activities are exempted from the noise ordinance between the hours of 8:00
a.m. and 6:00 p.m. Monday through Friday; construction activities are only allowed on
Saturday and Sunday between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. and only if they are
being personally undertaken by property owners performing maintenance or
improvements. Despite these allowances for weekend residential maintenance, the
ordinance still prohibits the use of any equipment that results in noise levels exceeding
85 dBA at a distance of 50 feet. Construction that is sufficiently quiet so as to be fully
compliant with the basic exterior noise limitations set out by the ordinance is generally
allowed at any time.
Notwithstanding specialized vehicle equipment or sound amplification systems, noise
from the normal operation of motor vehicles (including cars, trucks, busses, trains, and
airplanes) is exempted from the provisions of the noise ordinance. Noise from deliveries
to food retailers and restaurants are generally excepted from the ordinance, while noise
City of Menlo Park Open Space, Conservation, Noise and Safety Elements
Adopted May 21, 2013                                                                       69
from other commercial and industrial deliveries are generally excepted between 7:00
a.m. and 6:00 p.m. Monday through Friday and 9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. Saturday and
Sunday. Temporally and geographically specific exceptions for street sweeping and
garbage collection are also described in detail by the noise ordinance.
Other City Noise Standards
In addition to Chapter 8.06 (Noise), there are several other chapters in the Menlo Park
municipal code that mention noise. In Chapter 8.07 (Leaf Blowers), the municipal code
mentions that leaf blowers are a source of loud noise and stipulates that operators of
these devices must wear ear protection. In Chapter 8.12 (Business Operations after
Midnight), Section 8.12.040 indicates that a permit for late-night business operations
may be revoked if noise from the establishment exceeds that foreseen by the permit.
Chapter 8.28 (Parks and Recreation) prohibits the creation of obtrusive noise in parks.
Section 9.26.080 of Chapter 9.26 (Poultry and Rabbits) prohibits the keeping of animals
or fowl that cause unreasonable and disturbing noise for residents. In the goals of
Chapter 11.64 (Transportation Systems Management), it is stated that noise reduction
through decreased traffic is a goal of the chapter. Finally, in Chapter 13.18 (Use of
Public Rights-of-Way), Section 13.18.110 (Regulations) stipulates that all regulations,
including those related to noise, apply to the construction, operation, maintenance, and
repair of facilities in the public rights-of-way.
  C       Existing and Future Noise Environment
Roadways
Freeways that run along the City’s northeastern and southwestern boundaries are U.S.
Highway 101 and Interstate 280, respectively; Highway 84, which becomes the
Dumbarton bridge, also runs east to west across the northern end of the City. In
addition to the previously mentioned highways, major roadways running northwest to
southeast through Menlo Park include El Camino Real and Middlefield Road. Major
northeast to southwest roadways include Willow Road, Ravenswood Avenue, Santa
Cruz Avenue, and Sand Hill Road. Together, these highways and streets comprise the
major roads in the City of Menlo Park. The table below shows existing and future
roadway noise levels. Following the table is a map showing noise contours for the year
2035.
City of Menlo Park Open Space, Conservation, Noise and Safety Elements
Adopted May 21, 2013                                                                     70

               Existing and Future Noise Levels Along Major Streets in Menlo Park
                                         CNEL at 100 Feet (dBA)
City of Menlo Park Open Space, Conservation, Noise and Safety Elements
Adopted May 21, 2013                                                              71
City of Menlo Park Open Space, Conservation, Noise and Safety Elements
Adopted May 21, 2013                                                   72
Train Noise
One major and one minor rail line traverse Menlo Park. One rail line, which crosses the
northern-most portion of the City from east to west, is a little-used segment of a former
Union Pacific line, which once crossed San Francisco Bay. This railway currently
consists of a single track and the rail bridge that served as the connection for this line
that is no longer functional; however, this bridge is planned for reconstruction and future
use as part of the Dumbarton Rail Project.
The second and more major rail line which crosses Menlo Park is the Caltrain right-of-
way, which bisects a portion of Menlo Park along the City’s short northwest-southeast
axis. The Caltrain tracks run in the area between Camino Real and Alma Road, entering
the City at Watkins Avenue and exiting to Palo Alto at San Francisquito Creek. Caltrain
runs on a double track throughout its entire length through Menlo Park, and its right-of-
way is owned and administered by the Peninsula Corridor Joint Powers Board. Menlo
Park is served by one Caltrain station along this line, and though there are currently only
65 weekday daily stops at this station (either northbound or southbound), more than 90
trains pass either north or south through Menlo Park on a daily basis during the work
week. The sheer number of passings by these diesel-powered commuter trains ensures
that the activity along the Caltrain railway contributes significantly to the ambient noise
environment of nearby areas of Menlo Park.
Heliports
There are no heliports within Menlo Park; however, Stanford University Hospital does
operate one heliport, which is located approximately 0.4-mile to the southeast of the
nearest border with Menlo Park.
Aircraft Noise
Menlo Park is located approximately 6 miles to the northwest of Moffet Federal Airfield,
14 miles to the northwest of the San Jose International Airport, 15 miles to the southeast
of San Francisco International Airport, and 18 miles to the south of Oakland International
Airport. Menlo Park is also located in close proximity to two smaller airports; with
portions of Menlo Park as near as 2 miles from the Palo Alto Airport and other areas of
Menlo Park as near as approximately 4 miles from the San Carlos Airport. Additional
small airports in the vicinity include the Hayward Executive Airport, at 11 miles away,
and the Half Moon Bay airport, at 16 miles away. Although Menlo Park does receive
some noise from aircraft using these facilities, Menlo Park does not fall within the airport
land use planning areas, runway protection zones, or the 55 dBA CNEL noise contours
of any of these airports.
City of Menlo Park Open Space, Conservation, Noise and Safety Elements
Adopted May 21, 2013                                                                        73

Stationary Source Noise
Stationary sources of noise may occur from all types of land uses. Menlo Park is mostly
developed with residential, commercial and some light industrial uses. Commercial uses
can generate noise from heating, ventilation, air conditioning (HVAC) systems, loading
docks, trash compactors, and other sources. Industrial uses may generate noise from
HVAC systems, loading docks, and machinery required for manufacturing processes.
Noise generated by commercial uses is generally short and intermittent. Industrial uses
may generate noise on a more continual basis, or intermittently, depending on the
processes and types of machinery involved.
In addition to on-site mechanical equipment, which generates stationary noise,
warehousing and industrial land uses generate substantial truck traffic that results in
additional sources of noise on local roadways in the vicinity of industrial operations.
The vast majority of Menlo Park’s limited industrial operations are located in the far
northern reaches of the city, and are usually separated from sensitive uses, such as
residences, by either rail lines or by major roads. In both cases, this added distance
serves to decrease the noise perceived by these receptors and, in the case of major
roads, the noise from the roads was generally observed to exceed that from the
industrial uses. Residential areas with the greatest potential to be impacted by noise
from industrial operations include those along the previously mentioned Union Pacific rail
right-of-way (Dumbarton Rail Corridor) and those along the northern end of Willow Road
between Ivy Drive and the Bayfront Expressway.
Outdoor activities that occur on school campuses throughout Menlo Park also generate
noticeable levels of noise in the vicinity of the campus. While it is preferable to have
schools located within a residential setting to support the neighborhood, noise generated
on both the weekdays (from physical education classes and sports programs) and
weekends (from use of the fields and stadiums by youth organizations) can elevate
community noise levels.
City of Menlo Park Open Space, Conservation, Noise and Safety Elements
Adopted May 21, 2013                                                                     74

Section VII
Safety Background
  A       Geologic Hazards
                                                   Seismicity
                                                   Menlo Park, like much of the San Francisco
                                                   Bay area, is vulnerable to seismic activity due
                                                   to the presence of several active faults in the
                                                   region. The closest and most prominent active
                                                   fault near the City is the San Andreas Fault
                                                   System, which is located about 2.5 miles west
                                                   of Interstate 280 and the western boundary of
                                                   the City. Other active earthquake faults in the
                                                   region include the Monte Vista Fault, which
lies roughly 3 miles to the south, the Hayward Fault, which lies roughly 13 miles to the
east, and the Calaveras Fault, which is approximately 19 miles east of Menlo Park.
There are no Alquist-Priolo Earthquake Fault Zones that have been mapped within
Menlo Park and the potential for ground rupture is therefore considered low.
The April 1906 earthquake on the San Andreas Fault, estimated between magnitude (M)
7.7 and M 8.3, was the largest seismic event in recent history that affected Menlo Park.
More recently, the M 6.9 Loma Prieta earthquake of October 1989 on the San Andreas
Fault caused significant damage throughout the Bay Area, but no deaths were reported
in San Mateo County.
The severity of ground shaking depends on several variables such as earthquake
magnitude, hypocenter proximity, local geology including the properties of
unconsolidated sediments, groundwater conditions, and topographic setting. In general,
ground shaking hazards are most pronounced in areas that are underlain by loosely
consolidated soil/sediment.
When earthquake faults within the Bay Area’s nine-county area were considered, the
USGS estimated that the probability of a magnitude 6.7 or greater earthquake prior to
year 2032 is 62 percent, or roughly a two-thirds probability over this timeframe.
Individually, the forecasted probability for each individual fault to produce an M 6.7 or
greater seismic event by the year 2032 is as follows: 27 percent for the Hayward Fault,
City of Menlo Park Open Space, Conservation, Noise and Safety Elements
Adopted May 21, 2013                                                                               75

21 percent for the San Andreas Fault, 11 percent for the Calaveras Fault, and ten
percent for the San Gregorio Fault. Earthquakes of this magnitude can create ground
accelerations severe enough to cause major damage to structures and foundations not
designed to resist the forces generated by earthquakes. Underground utility lines are
also susceptible where they lack sufficient flexibility to accommodate the seismic ground
motion.
In the event of an earthquake of this magnitude, the seismic forecasts presented on the
Association of Bay Area Governments’ website (developed by a cooperative working
group that included the USGS and the California Geological Society (CGS) suggest that
most parts of Menlo Park southwest of Highway 101 are expected to experience “strong”
shaking, and most areas east of Highway 101 are expected to experience “very strong”
shaking, with areas located within 1 mile of the Dumbarton Bridge expected to
experience “violent” shaking. Eastern parts of Menlo Park, particularly those areas
underlain by Bay Muds, are judged to have a very high potential for seismically-induced
liquefaction.
A tsunami is a large tidal wave generated by an earthquake, landslide, or volcanic
eruption. Seiches are waves that oscillate in enclosed water bodies, such as reservoirs,
lakes, ponds, or semi-enclosed bodies of water such as San Francisco Bay. Seiches
may be triggered by moderate or large submarine earthquakes, or sometimes by large
onshore earthquakes. The map on the next page shows that a very small portion of the
Menlo Park planning area would be impacted by a seismically-induced sea wave
(tsunami).
The performance of man-made structures during a major seismic event varies
considerably due to a number of factors — location with respect to active fault traces or
areas prone to liquefaction or seismically-induced landslides; the type of building
construction (i.e. wood frame, unreinforced masonry, non-ductile concrete frame); the
proximity, magnitude, and intensity of the seismic event itself; and many other factors.
In general, evidence from past earthquakes shows that wood frame structures tend to
perform well especially when their foundations are properly designed and anchored.
Older, unreinforced masonry structures, on the other hand, do not perform as well,
especially if they have not undergone appropriate seismic retrofitting. Applicable
building code requirements, such as those found in the California Building Code (CBC),
include seismic requirements that are designed to ensure the satisfactory performance
of building materials under prescribed seismic conditions.
City of Menlo Park Open Space, Conservation, Noise and Safety Elements
Adopted May 21, 2013                                                                     76

                            Tsunami Inundation, Menlo Park & Vicinity
                                                                                                                      N
                                                                 Tsunami Inundation Line                     CityLimits
                                                                 Tusnami Inundation Area
                                                     Prepared: March 19, 2013
                                                     Source: http://www.conservation.ca.gov/cgs/geologic_hazards/
                                                     Tsunami/Inundation_Maps/SanMateo/Documents/
                                                     Source: Esri, DigitalGlobe, GeoEye, i-cubed, USDA, USGS, AEX, Getmapping,
0   0.5      1      1.5    2                         Tsunami_Inundation_RedwoodPointPaloAlto_-Quads_SanMateo.pdf
                            Miles                    Aerogrid, IGN, IGP, and the GIS User Community
  City of Menlo Park Open Space, Conservation, Noise and Safety Elements
  Adopted May 21, 2013                                                                                                         77
Landslides, Erosion and Subsidence
Landslides are gravity-driven movements of earth materials that may include rock, soil,
unconsolidated sediment, or combinations of such materials. The rate of landslide
movement can vary considerably. Some move rapidly as in a soil or rock avalanche,
while other landslides creep or move slowly for extended periods of time. The
susceptibility of a given area to landslides depends on many variables, although the
general characteristics that influence landslide hazards are well understood. The factors
that influence the probability of a landslide and its relative level of risk include the
following:
(1)       Slope Material: Loose, unconsolidated soils and soft, weak rocks are more
          hazardous than are firm, consolidated soils or hard bedrock.
(2)       Slope Steepness: Most landslides occur on moderate to steep slopes.
(3)       Structure and Physical Properties of Materials: This includes the orientation
          of layering and zones of weakness relative to slope direction.
(4)       Water Content: Increased water content increases landslide hazard by
          decreasing friction and adding weight to the materials on a slope.
(5)       Vegetation Coverage: Abundant vegetation with deep roots promote slope
          stability.
(6)       Proximity to Areas of Erosion or Man-made Cuts: Undercutting slopes can
          greatly increase landslide potential.
(7)       Earthquake Ground Motions: Strong seismic ground motions can trigger
          landslides in marginally stable slopes or loosen slope materials, and also
          increase the risk of future landslides.
Landslides have the potential to occur within Menlo Park, most notably on some of the
hilly slopes that lie west of the street Alameda de las Pulgas. In general, landslides are
commonly associated with bedrock outcrops of the Franciscan Formation, which
frequently form steeper slopes. Shale is the most unstable of the rock types within the
Franciscan Formation, whereas sandstone and conglomerate tend to be more stable
with a lower landslide risk. Much of the upland areas in Menlo Park are typified by
shallow soil that overlies Franciscan bedrock very close to the surface. Landslides are
not an issue in parts of the City where the topography is flat.
Subsidence hazards are known to be present in the diked baylands due to the highly
compressible nature of the underlying fill as well as historical groundwater overdraft.
Areas susceptible to earthquake-induced subsidence include those areas underlain by
thick layers of colluvial material or poorly engineered fill. This fill was reported to have
City of Menlo Park Open Space, Conservation, Noise and Safety Elements
Adopted May 21, 2013                                                                         78
settled historically with hydro-compaction being an element of the settlement as well.
Land subsidence occurred within the low-lying areas, mainly along the Bay margins.
Expansive soils can change dramatically in volume depending on moisture content.
When wet, these soils can expand; conversely, when dry, they can contract or shrink.
Sources of moisture that can trigger this shrink-swell phenomenon can include seasonal
rainfall, landscape irrigation, utility leakage, and/or perched groundwater. Expansive soil
can exhibit wide cracks in the dry season, and changes in soil volume have the potential
to damage concrete slabs, foundations, and pavement. Special building/structure
design or soil treatment are often needed in areas with expansive soils. Shrink-swell
potential ranges from high along the marshlands of San Francisco Bay, to moderate in
the center of the City, and to low in the western foothills.
  B       Hydrology (Flooding and Rise in Sea Level)
The Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) prepares maps of the 100-year
flood hazard area of U.S. communities. Areas within the 100-year flood hazard area are
subject to 100-year flood, which means that in any given year, the risk of flooding in the
designated area is 1 percent. Maps are also available for 500-year floods, which mean
that in any given year, the risk of flooding in the designated area is 0.2 percent.
In some locations, FEMA also provides a measurement of base flood elevation for the
100-year flood, which is the minimum height of the flood waters during a 100-year event;
base flood elevation is reported in feet above sea level. Depth of flooding is determined
by subtracting the land’s height above sea level from the base flood elevation. Areas
within the 100-year flood hazard area that are financed by Federally backed mortgages
are subject to mandatory Federal insurance requirements and building standards to
reduce flood damage.
The northernmost portion of Menlo Park, including much of the area between State
Route 84 and Highway 101, is within the 100-year floodplain subject to tidal flooding
from San Francisco Bay. In addition, portions of Menlo Park between Middlefield Road
and Highway 101 are within the 100-year floodplain due to overflow from San
Francisquito Creek. Several reservoirs in the area present the remote risk of
downstream inundation in the event of a dam failure as the result of an earthquake or
other catastrophic event. According to the ABAG online dam failure inundation maps,
portions of Menlo Park are within the Searsville and Searsville/Felt dam inundation
zones. Flooding and dam inundation areas are shown on the maps on the following two
pages.
City of Menlo Park Open Space, Conservation, Noise and Safety Elements
Adopted May 21, 2013                                                                      79

City of Menlo Park Open Space, Conservation, Noise and Safety Elements
Adopted May 21, 2013                                                   80
City of Menlo Park Open Space, Conservation, Noise and Safety Elements
Adopted May 21, 2013                                                   81
The San Francisquito Creek Joint Powers Authority (SFCJPA) in conjunction with the
U.S. Army Corps of Engineers and the Santa Clara Valley Water District, are
implementing improvements to provide 100-year flood protection for flood-prone reaches
of San Francisquito Creek both upstream and downstream from Highway 101. The goal
is to eliminate the need for more than 5,400 properties to contribute to the National
Flood Insurance Program because of overflows from San Francisquito Creek and San
Francisco Bay tides. The SFCJPA is also working with CalTrans to replace the Highway
101 crossing over the creek to improve traffic flow and also increase the creek’s capacity
to accommodate the 100-year storm event. The construction of this project is scheduled
to begin in 2014.
Sea Level Rise
California Executive Order S-13-2008 states that all State agencies planning
construction projects in areas vulnerable to sea level rise must consider a range of sea
level rise scenarios for the years 2050 and 2100 to assess project vulnerability and to
the extent feasible, reduce expected risks to sea level rise. The Governor of California’s
Delta Vision Blue Ribbon Task Force adopted a sea level rise of 55 inches by 2100 for
planning purposes. However, the San Francisco Bay Area Conservation and
Development Commission (BCDC), in the latest amendment to the Bay Plan (October,
2011), added new climate change findings and policies and has revised the 2100 sea
level rise from 55 inches to up to 69 inches. The BCDC has jurisdiction to regulate new
development within 100 feet inland from the Bay shoreline. The existing BCDC policy is
to require all projects within their jurisdiction to be built above the highest estimated tide
and wave run up levels for the life of the project.
Different scenarios and models used to predict sea level rise result in different estimates
in the magnitude of sea level rise. Most shoreline damage from flooding will occur as a
result of storm activity in combination with higher sea levels. The key factors that
contribute to coastal flooding include high tides, storm surge, high waves, and high
runoff rates from rivers and creeks.
The Association of Bay Area Governments (ABAG) has produced a sea level rise
scenario map for long range planning. The map on the following page shows the
projected sea level rise for the City of Menlo Park. The impacted area extends just south
of Ivy Drive.
City of Menlo Park Open Space, Conservation, Noise and Safety Elements
Adopted May 21, 2013                                                                          82

City of Menlo Park Open Space, Conservation, Noise and Safety Elements
Adopted May 21, 2013                                                   83
  C       Hazardous Materials
                                             The term “hazardous material” is defined in different
                                             ways for different regulatory programs. The
                                             California Health and Safety Code Section 25501
                                             definition of a hazardous material is — “any material
                                             that, because of its quantity, concentration, or
                                             physical or chemical characteristics, poses a
                                             significant present or potential hazard to human
                                             health and safety or to the environment if released
                                             into the workplace or the environment.”
                                             Once a hazardous material is released, it moves
from the source to a point of contact with the community or environment through an
exposure pathway. To reach that point of contact, the exposure pathway must have: (1)
a contamination source or point of release; (2) a transport mechanism from the source to
the air, surface water, groundwater, or soil; (3) contact point where people are exposed
to contaminated air, surface water, groundwater or soil; and (4) a route of entry into the
body. Routes of entry include ingestion (eating or drinking), inhalation (breathing), and
absorption (skin contact). If any of these requirements for an exposure pathway are not
                                               present, the pathway is incomplete and no
                                               exposure or risk is possible. In some cases,
                                               although a pathway is complete, the likelihood that
                                               exposure will occur is very small.
                                               The California Department of Toxic Substances
                                               Control (DTSC) divides hazardous material sites
                                               into three categories: clean-up sites, permitted
                                               sites, and other sites. Sites listed within these
                                               three categories can be at various stages of
                                               evaluation or clean up, from the beginning to the
end of the process. Maps on the next two pages show sources of toxic air contaminants
and hazardous materials locations in Menlo Park where the DTSC has identified
locations sites in Menlo Park that have been known or suspected to contain hazardous
materials. The table following the hazardous materials map lists the sites along with their
current status of evaluation or remediation.
City of Menlo Park Open Space, Conservation, Noise and Safety Elements
Adopted May 21, 2013                                                                             84

City of Menlo Park Open Space, Conservation, Noise and Safety Elements
Adopted May 21, 2013                                                   85
City of Menlo Park Open Space, Conservation, Noise and Safety Elements
Adopted May 21, 2013                                                   86
A total of 20 sites are listed under the Cleanup Sites category. Of these, approximately
half are under Corrective Action, State Response, or Voluntary Cleanup. Voluntary
cleanup is overseen by the Statewide Cleanup Operation Division. Of the remaining
sites, three are under evaluation, and another three are under Tiered Permits. The list
includes one inactive military site that is listed as needing evaluation. The list also
includes two school sites, overseen by the Schools Division, listed as “certified” or “no
action required.” Finally, two sites are listed as non-operating. There are no listed
Federal Superfund sites in Menlo Park. A single site is listed under the category of
Permitted, non-operating sites.
                                Hazardous Materials Locations
In addition, several Leaking Underground Fuel Tanks (LUFTs) are scattered throughout
the city, concentrated along El Camino Real and in downtown Menlo Park. LUFTs are a
common source of soil and groundwater contamination. A wide variety of industries
have historically used underground storage tanks for gasoline, diesel, waste oils,
solvents, and other chemicals. Prior to regulation in the 1980s, these underground tanks
were typically not monitored or provided with secondary containment. If a tank leaked,
the contents could migrate to the soil and groundwater.
City of Menlo Park Open Space, Conservation, Noise and Safety Elements
Adopted May 21, 2013                                                                      87

Several locations that are listed under the Spills, Leaks, Investigation, and Cleanups
(SLIC) Program — a program that investigates and regulates non-permitted discharges
— also have been identified within Menlo Park. These are found mostly in the
downtown area and the northeastern portion of the City.
  D       Fire Hazards
The severity of the wildfire hazard is determined by the relationship between three
factors — (1) fuel classification, (2) topography, and (3) critical fire weather frequency.
The California Department of Forestry and Fire Protection (CAL FIRE) defines Fire
Hazard Severity Zones for areas within the state. A fire hazard is defined as a “measure
of the likelihood of an area burning and how it burns,” with a zone being an area
characterized by a particular level of fire hazard. CAL FIRE Fire Hazard Severity Zone
maps indicate areas for which the State of California has fiscal responsibility for wildland
fire protection services as the State Responsibility Area, and areas for which local
jurisdictions have fiscal responsibility as the Local Responsibility Area.
As shown on the map on the next page, areas in the western portion of Menlo Park
contain areas of high Fire Hazard Severity and are designated as State Responsibility
Areas.
  E       Emergency Preparedness
In September 2011 the City of Menlo Park adopted the Annex to 2010 Association of
Bay Area Governments Local Hazard Mitigation Plan — Taming Natural Disasters and
an update to the City’s Emergency Operation Plan (EOP). Both of these documents
have been coordinated with the City’s General Plan and the City’s Capital Improvement
Plan (CIP). The Hazard Mitigation Plan assesses a full range of natural disasters and the
City’s response through disaster planning. The City developed the EOP to better prepare
for responses to emergency situations that could result from natural disasters and
technological incidents. To better prepare for these emergencies, the City estimated the
potential risks associated with earthquakes, flooding, wild-land fire, and other disasters.
Based on this evaluation, various preparation strategies were developed. These
strategies are addressed in Volume 2 of the EOP as follows:
(1)       Chapter 1 introduces the City’s Emergency Management System and four
          emergency management phases, as well as required activities and responsible
          parties for each phase;
City of Menlo Park Open Space, Conservation, Noise and Safety Elements
Adopted May 21, 2013                                                                        88

City of Menlo Park Open Space, Conservation, Noise and Safety Elements
Adopted May 21, 2013                                                   89
(2)       Chapter 2 describes regulatory frameworks and relevant legal authorities;
(3)       Chapter 3 provides a threat assessment including estimated potential risks
          associated with various natural and man-made disasters; and,
(4)       Chapter 4 provides a recovery plan, including damage assessments and disaster
          assistance programs.
The Police Department is the primary agency for establishing emergency evacuation
routes. Evacuation routes are generally the City’s major arterial streets. However, the
appropriate evacuation routes depend upon the type of incident (whether it is a flood,
fire, earthquake, etc.) and then which routes have the least hazards, traffic stress and
the most residential accessibility. Neighborhood disaster programs provide information
and help to coordinate resident and business responses during the first 72-hours of an
emergency event.
City of Menlo Park Open Space, Conservation, Noise and Safety Elements
Adopted May 21, 2013                                                                     90

