Circulation Element
   City of Mission Viejo
                                TABLE OF CONTENTS
Section                                                                      Page
INTRODUCTION TO THE CIRCULATION ELEMENT                                        1
PURPOSE OF THE CIRCULATION ELEMENT                                             1
CIRCULATON ELEMENT GOALS AND POLICIES                                          3
       Local Thoroughfares and Transportation Routes                           4
       Regional and Intercity Transportation                                   8
       Transportation Systems Management (TSM) and Transportation             11
              Demand Management (TDM)
       Public Transportation                                                  12
       Bicycle, Pedestrian and Equestrian Facilities                          14
       Parking                                                                17
       Goods Movement                                                         18
       Scenic Highways                                                        19
       Transportation Financing                                               19
       Transportation Modeling                                                21
       Advocacy                                                               21
       Air Transportation                                                     23
                                          i                       CIRCULATION ELEMENT
                                                                        AUGUST 19, 2013
                         LIST OF TABLES
Section                                              Page
Table C-1  Circulation Polices by Element             26
                        LIST OF FIGURES
Section                                              Page
Figure C-1 Master Plan of Streets                     24
Figure C-2 Bikeway Plan                               25
                               ii         CIRCULATION ELEMENT
                                                AUGUST 19, 2013
       INTRODUCTION TO THE CIRCULATION ELEMENT
The Circulation Element is one of seven mandated elements of the General Plan
and is intended to guide the development of the City’s circulation system in a
manner that is correlated with the Land Use Element. The State of California has
mandated the adoption of a citywide Circulation Element since 1955. The
anticipated levels and patterns of development upon build-out – not only in the City
of Mission Viejo, as identified in its Land Use Element, but also in surrounding
communities – will generate demands on the City’s roadway system. To address
these demands and achieve balanced growth, the City has adopted specific goals
and policies, which serve as the basis for the Circulation Element.
PURPOSE OF THE CIRCULATION ELEMENT
The purpose of the Circulation Element is to provide for a safe, sensible and
efficient circulation system for the City. The current State mandate for a
Circulation Element states that the General Plan shall include:
“A circulation element consisting of the general location and proposed major
thoroughfares, transportation routes, terminals, any military airports and ports, and
other local public utilities and facilities, all correlated with the land use element of
the plan.”
“Commencing January 1, 2011, upon any substantive revision of the circulation
element, the legislative body shall modify the circulation element to plan for a
balanced, multimodal transportation network that meets the needs of all users of
streets, roads, and highways for safe and convenient travel in a manner that is suitable
to the rural, suburban, or urban context of the general plan.” For purposes of this
paragraph, “users of streets, roads, and highways” means bicyclists, children, persons
with disabilities, motorists, movers of commercial goods, pedestrians, users of public
transportation, and seniors.
In order to provide for a safe, sensible and efficient circulation system for all users for
the City of Mission Viejo, a framework of city objectives on how the circulation
system is to perform (levels of service), and the different transportation strategies that
can be utilized to maintain these performance goals, are identified in the Element.
The Circulation Element recognizes the traditional capacity improvements such as
highway and intersection improvements, in addition to strategies incorporating signal
synchronization, transportation demand management, bus and rail transit,
telecommunications, and bicycle and pedestrian facilities.
The Circulation Element also recognizes tools, such as the City’s traffic model, to
assist in analyzing existing and future demands upon the circulation system triggered
by potential land use or circulation network changes that may be considered in the
                                                                      CIRCULATION ELEMENT
                                                                            AUGUST 19, 2013
                                             1

City or in surrounding communities. The Circulation Element also recognizes that
transportation financing and city advocacy on transportation issues is critical to the
implementation of the Element’s goals and objectives. Lastly, the Circulation
Element recognizes the investment of its circulation system, and the need to protect
this investment in roadways and related facilities through maintenance efforts.
The topical areas of utilities and transmission facilities are discussed in the Land Use
Element.
                                                                     CIRCULATION ELEMENT
                                                                            AUGUST 19, 2013
                                            2

        CIRCULATION ELEMENT GOALS AND POLICIES
The Circulation Element is based on a framework of goals and policies. The City
of Mission Viejo General Plan defines a goal as a broad statement of intended
direction and purpose. For each goal, there are corresponding policies, which are
defined as statements that guide action and imply a commitment towards the
respective goal.
The Circulation Element goals and policies acknowledge the changing economic,
social and environmental conditions in the City and surrounding regions, and the
anticipated needs of the community. Twelve topical areas, or Issue Areas, are
addressed. They are as follows:
1)      Local Thoroughfares and Transportation Routes;
2)      Regional and Intercity Transportation;
3)      Transportation System Management (TSM) and Transportation Demand
        Management (TDM);
4)      Public Transportation;
5)      Bicycle, Pedestrian, and Equestrian Facilities;
6)      Parking;
7)      Goods Movement;
8)      Scenic Highways;
9)      Transportation Financing
10)     Transportation Modeling
11)     Advocacy; and,
12)     Air Transportation
                                                              CIRCULATION ELEMENT
                                                                    AUGUST 19, 2013
                                          3
LOCAL THOROUGHFARES AND TRANSPORTATION ROUTES
The Mission Viejo community’s historical development of local, collector and
arterial streets has provided the basis for a safe, efficient roadway system.
Development within the City of Mission Viejo can be characterized as built-out,
until redevelopment options are proposed on existing, developed sites. The City’s
arterial streets have traditionally been planned and constructed with sufficient
capacity to accommodate long-term traffic growth with the city’s jurisdictional
boundaries and with original General Plan land use intensities for surrounding
communities. However, new communities not originally anticipated with earlier
versions of the Orange County Master Plan of Arterial Highways and the City’s
Master Plan of Streets, in addition to increased development intensities in
neighboring communities, are projected to impact both the capacity of the City’s
arterial network in addition to the capacity of regional facilities such as arterial
interchanges with freeways and freeway facilities.
The goals and policies in the Local Thoroughfares and Transportation Routes issue
area identify the City’s intended direction and guiding policies on the development,
use and maintenance of the City’s circulation system.
Fundamental to the City’s approach, is a goal that the City manage and optimize a
circulation system capable of serving the City’s General Plan land use plan.
Concurrently, the City recognizes the potential impacts on its transportation
infrastructure capacity that would result from new and redeveloped land use
proposals, especially in neighboring communities, and establishes goals and
policies to protect the capacity of the City’s transportation infrastructure by insuring
that new development be responsible for providing capacity mitigation capable of
maintaining the City’s established levels of service standards. Further, the safety of
pedestrians, bicyclists and vehicles in using the City’s transportation network to
access neighborhood school sites, and the retention of a residential character of
local neighborhoods, are important considerations in addressing traffic impacts on
the circulation system.
How the City’s circulation system can be maximized to increase its operational
efficiency is also recognized as policy objectives, to enable the existing system to
be more efficient in handling traffic demand through strategies such as coordinating
traffic signals, prohibiting parking on arterials, and limiting driveway access points
to and from arterials.
Just as important as protecting the capacity of the City’s circulation system is
protecting the infrastructure investment of the circulation system. The City’s
network of public streets is an infrastructure asset, and policies are established to
protect the infrastructure investment of the City’s circulation network through a
regular program of pavement maintenance treatment.
                                                                    CIRCULATION ELEMENT
                                                                           AUGUST 19, 2013
                                            4

GOAL 1:     Manage and optimize a balanced, multimodal transportation
            network that meets the needs of all users of streets, roads, and
            highways for safe and convenient travel in a manner that is
            based upon, and is in balance with, the Land Use Element of the
            City of Mission Viejo General Plan.
Policy 1.1: Adopt and maintain a City Master Plan of Streets which identifies
            and classifies city arterials that address circulation needs of the
            City’s Land Use Plan.
Policy 1.2: Design each arterial with sufficient capacity to accommodate
            anticipated traffic based on intensity of existing and planned land
            use.
Policy 1.3: Maintain at least a level of service D on arterial streets, except along
            Crown Valley Parkway, a Principal Arterial on the CMP Highway
            System, where a level of service E shall be maintained.
Policy 1.4: Maintain and implement circulation system standards for all users,
            such as roadway and intersection classifications, rights-of-way
            width, pavement width, pavement conditions, design speed, warrant
            requirements, capacity, maximum grades, green streets, and
            associated roadway features. All users means users of streets, roads,
            and highways, including bicyclists, children, persons with
            disabilities, motorists, movers of commercial goods, pedestrians,
            users of public transportation, and seniors.
GOAL 2:     Protect the City’s investment in its circulation system by
            assessing and mitigating the transportation impacts of new
            development proposed within and outside the City of Mission
            Viejo.
Policy 2.1: Require that proposals for major new developments include a traffic
            impact analysis, which identifies measures to mitigate the traffic
            impacts of new development.
Policy 2.2: Review development proposals proposed in surrounding
            jurisdictions to determine the impacts of that development on the
            City’s circulation system, and to identify transportation mitigation
            measures that shall be provided by said developments to maintain
            city-adopted levels of service standards on the City’s circulation
            system.
Policy 2.3: Continue to require new development to dedicate rights-of-way,
            construct required circulation improvements, and/or pay fees for
            circulation improvements necessary to mitigate project-related
                                                                CIRCULATION ELEMENT
                                                                        AUGUST 19, 2013
                                        5

            traffic impacts to city transportation facilities and to maintain city
            levels of service standards.
Policy 2.4: Regulate the intensity and stages of development so that traffic on
            any arterial remains in balance with roadway capacity.
GOAL 3:     Identify and assess the feasibility and funding of circulation
            improvements needed within the City, to address the impacts of
            regional traffic demands upon the City’s circulation system.
Policy 3.1: Periodically review critical intersections and roadways and
            recommend “special study areas” to confirm the feasibility of
            implementing “critical intersection improvements” and other
            transportation improvement needs within the City.
GOAL 4:     Preserve the residential character of local neighborhoods by
            minimizing through traffic and regulating vehicular speed.
Policy 4.1: Design local and collector streets to discourage their use as through
            traffic routes.
Policy 4.2: Identify alternatives, develop strategies, and implement traffic
            calming measures to minimize through traffic on existing local and
            collector streets.
Policy 4.3: Locate new development and its access points in such a way that
            traffic is not encouraged to utilize local residential streets for access
            to the development or its parking.
GOAL 5:     Facilitate the safe and efficient movement of people and vehicles
            to and from school sites.
Policy 5.1: Identify and promote strategies to minimize conflicts between
            pedestrians, bicyclists, and vehicles at local schools.
Policy 5.2: Coordinate with school districts, local schools, the Orange County
            Sheriff’s Department, parent-school organizations and the
            community in identifying school transportation issues and in
            developing and implementing traffic calming/traffic management
            strategies and safe school routes at local schools.
GOAL 6:     Coordinate and update the City’s traffic signal coordination
            system.
Policy 6.1: Coordinate with OCTA and adjacent jurisdictions to improve signal
            timing and signal coordination along major, interjurisdictional
                                                                CIRCULATION ELEMENT
                                                                       AUGUST 19, 2013
                                        6

            arterials.
Policy 6.2: Implement traffic signal coordination on City arterial streets to the
            maximum extent practical, and integrate signal coordination efforts
            with those of adjacent jurisdictions.
Policy 6.3: Review traffic signal spacing and traffic signal warrant requirements
            in conjunction with new development and re-development
            proposals, to insure that any new signal added to the City’s
            circulation system does not compromise the efficiency of traffic
            signal coordination and traffic flow.
GOAL 7:     Evaluate, monitor and implement operational improvements
            and traffic control measures to maximize efficiency of the City’s
            arterial circulation system.
Policy 7.1: Limit driveway access on arterial streets to maintain a desired
            quality of flow.
Policy 7.2: Prohibit on-street parking on arterial streets wherever possible.
Policy 7.3: Provide bus turnouts where appropriate along heavily traveled
            arterials or where impedance is noticeably detrimental to traffic
            flow.
Policy 7.4: Provide for safe operations of traffic by adhering to national
            standards and uniform practices.
Policy 7.5: Design and employ traffic control measures to ensure City streets
            and roads function with safety and efficiency.
Policy 7.6: Continue to evaluate, design and implement operational
            improvements such as medians, driveway closures, signal
            synchronization/phasing, and parking and turn restrictions, to
            improve the efficiency of city intersections.
GOAL 8:     Monitor the condition of, and regularly maintain city streets
            with preventive and rehabilitation treatments to protect the
            City’s investment in roadway infrastructure and extend the life
            of the City’s roadway pavement.
Policy 8.1: Conduct regular updates to the City’s pavement management
            program database to identify necessary preventive and rehabilitation
            treatments to roadway pavement surfaces.
Policy 8.2: Re-surface public residential streets every seven years to maintain
                                                                CIRCULATION ELEMENT
                                                                      AUGUST 19, 2013
                                       7

               the integrity of residential pavement surfaces before they deteriorate
               into more costly repair, subject to budgetary considerations and
               other factors.
Policy 8.3:    Promote use of pavement resurfacing materials, such as rubberized
               asphalt, on arterials to reduce ambient noise from roadway travel.
Policy 8.4:    Pursue federal, state, and county grant funding to secure outside
               funding sources for preventive and rehabilitation pavement
               treatment on city streets.
REGIONAL AND INTERCITY TRANSPORTATION
The City of Mission Viejo is served directly by two regional facilities: the San
Diego Freeway (Interstate 5) and the Foothill Transportation Corridor (SR-241). In
the City of Mission Viejo, access to the I-5 freeway is provided by interchanges at
Alicia Parkway, La Paz Road, Oso Parkway, Crown Valley Parkway, and Avery
Parkway. Access to the Foothill Transportation Corridor is provided by the
arterials of Santa Margarita Parkway and Los Alisos Boulevard to ramps on SR-
241.
A Strategic Plan Technical Report for the Orange County Master Plan of Arterial
Highways recognizes that arterials in South Orange County are influenced and
impacted by regional traffic. Many arterial segments located near freeway
interchanges and on arterials that parallel or feed Interstate 5 carry high volumes of
traffic and experience deficiencies. The development of new communities easterly
of the City of Mission Viejo, the limited number of east-west arterials in the
original Orange County Master Plan of Arterial Highways that access freeway
facilities, and the intensification of land uses in neighboring communities,
exacerbate the capacity and congestion impacts of regional traffic traveling through
the City of Mission Viejo.
The Circulation Element recognizes that solutions to these traffic conditions cannot
be solved solely through capacity enhancements to city intersections and city
arterials. Regional transportation planning efforts must be initiated to analyze and
identify corridor-level improvements capable of accommodating the existing and
projected demand upon freeways, tollroads and city arterials. Such improvements
will need to include solutions to improve existing interchanges, propose new
interchanges, and identify connector opportunities such as the Cabot/Camino
Capistrano bridge connector and a connector linking the San Joaquin Hills
Transportation Corridor (SR-73) to the Foothill Transportation Corridor (SR-241).
Completion of the Master Plan of Arterial Highways must also be advocated with
transportation planning agencies and Orange County jurisdictions to enable missing
links such as the extension of Crown Valley Parkway easterly to the Foothill
Transportation Corridor to be planned and constructed, to alleviate traffic demand
                                                                    CIRCULATION ELEMENT
                                                                          AUGUST 19, 2013
                                           8
on existing arterials and enable the City to maintain levels of service standards on
its transportation facilities.
The goals and policies listed below require a commitment to participate actively in
a breadth of activities, plans and funding considerations undertaken by federal and
state agencies, county transportation agencies, other jurisdictions, and the TCAs.
Such participation can enable the City to keep abreast of evolving transportation
planning efforts, understand impacts and benefits to the City of Mission Viejo, and
effect proposals and solutions that would benefit Mission Viejo’s circulation
system needs and benefit its residents, employers and employees.
GOAL 9:          Support the development and completion of a network of
                 regional roadway facilities which ensure the safe and efficient
                 movement of people and goods from within the City to areas
                 outside its boundaries, and which accommodate the regional
                 travel demands of developing areas outside the City.
Policy 9.1:      Support the completion of the Orange County Master Plan of
                 Arterial Highways and the Foothill Transportation Corridor.
Policy 9.2:      Support the addition of capacity improvements such as high-
                 occupancy vehicle lanes, general-purpose lanes, auxiliary lanes and
                 noise mitigation improvements such as noise barriers, on freeway
                 and toll road facilities.
Policy 9.3:      Monitor and coordinate with Caltrans and the Transportation
                 Corridor Agencies on freeway and toll road activities, to ensure that
                 any potential operational impacts to city roadway operations or
                 businesses are identified and mitigated.
Policy 9.4:      Maintain a proactive role with appropriate federal, state, regional,
                 and county agencies to address regional transportation issues
                 affecting the City.
GOAL 10:         Identify and assess the feasibility and funding of circulation
                 improvements needed outside the City, necessary to address the
                 impacts of regional traffic demands upon the City’s circulation
                 system.
Policy 10.1:     Participate in regional and countywide transportation planning
                 efforts to identify and address regional transportation improvements
                 for South Orange County.
Policy 10.2:     Initiate special studies to explore the feasibility of enhanced and new
                 improvements to the Orange County Master Plan of Arterial
                 Highways to address regional travel demands on the City’s
                                                                       CIRCULATION ELEMENT
                                                                             AUGUST 19, 2013
                                              9

             circulation system.
Policy 10.3: Support transportation infrastructure funding proposals at the
             federal, state, and local levels to provide funding to implement
             regional transportation improvements that address South Orange
             County traffic demand.
GOAL 11:     Coordinate the development of the City’s circulation system
             with regional transportation facilities and with transportation
             facilities in neighboring jurisdictions.
Policy 11.1: Coordinate city roadway improvements with transportation
             improvement programs conducted by federal, state, regional and
             county agencies, including freeway widenings, the extension of the
             Foothill Transportation Corridor-South, and any future regional
             facilities.
Policy 11.2: Coordinate street system improvements and signalization with
             regional transportation efforts and with adjacent jurisdictions, and
             encourage cooperative efforts to secure funding for areawide street
             and signalization projects.
Policy 11.3: Coordinate the development of city arterial streets with the Orange
             County Transportation Authority Master Plan of Arterial Highways,
             to ensure that city arterial streets will be compatible with those of
             neighboring jurisdictions.
Policy 11.4: Continue to oppose any amendment to the Master Plan of Arterial
             Highways (MPAH) to extend Avery Parkway easterly of its current
             terminus, until interchange improvements at I-5/Avery have been
             implemented by regional agencies that would maintain an
             operational level of service D on Avery Parkway.
Policy 11.5: Support regional planning efforts that explore new east-west
             connections and alternatives capable of providing an alternative to
             an Avery Parkway extension, such as a connector from SR-73
             easterly to SR-241.
Policy 11.6: Pursue the feasibility and funding of a roadway connection of
             Camino Capistrano and Cabot Road.
Policy 11.7: Support and advocate the extension of Crown Valley Parkway
             easterly of the city limits to the FTC-South, as identified on the
             Orange County MPAH.
                                                               CIRCULATION ELEMENT
                                                                     AUGUST 19, 2013
                                        10

TRANSPORTATION               SYSTEMS         MANAGEMENT              (TSM)       AND
TRANSPORTATION DEMAND MANAGEMENT (TDM)
To maximize the utility of the circulation system, reduce trips, and minimize the
need for major capital investments in transportation infrastructure, the Circulation
Element recognizes efforts to increase the capacity of the existing transportation
system, and to increase the number of occupants in one vehicle or use other travel
modes in lieu of driving alone, such as bus or rail transit. This involves two types
of actions: transportation systems management and transportation demand
management.
Transportation system management (TSM) maximizes the carrying capacity of the
existing system through measures such as traffic signal coordination or low-cost
capital improvements (such as re-striping or spot widening), to increase roadway
capacity and efficiency.
Transportation demand management (TDM) involves programs to reduce the
number of vehicles using the roadway system, particularly during congested
commute periods. TDM strategies include strategies to increase vehicle occupancy
versus driving solo, promoting the use of alternative modes of travel, and
encouraging the use of satellite work centers, to enable residents to reduce the
number of work trips and decrease the overall length of trips.
Support facilities, such as the development of park-and-ride lots, are critical to the
success of increasing vehicle occupancy, by allowing individuals to travel shorter
distances to park personal vehicles, and use the park-and-ride lot as a staging area
for carpool or vanpool opportunities.
Transportation also includes the movement of information, in addition to the
traditional characteristics of movement of people and goods. The Circulation
Element recognizes the utility of information technology and the application of
wireless communications and Internet accessibility as strategies that can enable
individuals to conduct work, school, and personal activities and needs without
having to drive. The breadth of TSM and TDM strategies that the City can pursue
are outlined in the following goal and policies.
GOAL 12:        Maximize the efficiency of the circulation system through
                transportation systems management (TSM) and transportation
                demand management (TDM) strategies.
Policy 12.1:    Coordinate transportation systems management and transportation
                demand management strategies with efforts pursued and
                implemented by federal, state, regional and county agencies.
                                                                  CIRCULATION ELEMENT
                                                                        AUGUST 19, 2013
                                         11
Policy 12.2:    Encourage the development of regional public transportation
                services and support facilities, including park-and-ride lots
                particularly near freeway and toll road facilities, and public and
                private alternative fuel fueling facilities.
Policy 12.3:    Require that proposals for major new developments include
                compliance with city-adopted regulations governing facility-based
                transportation demand management requirements.
Policy 12.4:    Encourage the implementation of employer TDM strategies,
                including actions and programs outlined in city regulations and
                additional TDM strategies supported by the South Coast Air Quality
                Management District, to reduce employee reliance upon the single-
                occupant vehicle.
Policy 12.5:    Support wireless communications technologies such as Wireless
                Fidelity (Wi-Fi) connectivity for existing and new businesses and
                facilities, in addition to proposals for new development, re-
                development, and modified development, to enable residents,
                employers, students and visitors to conduct wireless communication
                through remote access.
Policy 12.6:    Continue to explore strategies, secure funding, and implement
                approaches to expand and utilize the City’s backbone fiber-optics
                infrastructure network to accommodate communications access
                among city facilities and with special districts such as schools.
Policy 12.7:    Encourage the development of satellite off-site work centers for
                telecommuting employees.
PUBLIC TRANSPORTATION
Public transportation ensures the mobility of all residents, regardless of automobile
ownership, and provides an alternate means of travel for those who choose to leave
their cars at home.
The Orange County Transportation Authority (OCTA) is the transit supplier for
Mission Viejo, offering fixed route bus service on local and express routes. While
current usage of fixed route bus transportation in Mission Viejo has been identified
to be lower than other areas of Orange County, the Circulation Element recognizes
that efforts can continually be pursued to address the needs of transit-dependent
populations such as students, senior citizens, and disabled individuals.
The Circulation Element also recognizes that transit services can go beyond
                                                                    CIRCULATION ELEMENT
                                                                           AUGUST 19, 2013
                                           12

traditional public transit services offered by bus and rail. Transit services can also
include improvements and adjustments to service types such as shuttle services or
taxicab services that are capable of meeting the needs of transit-dependent
populations, while providing more flexibility than fixed route bus service,
especially in Mission Viejo’s hilly geographic communities that preclude
convenient pedestrian access to bus stop locations. These strategies may require
independent assessment and exploration by the City because of their localized
opportunity, but such a policy investment in supplemental transit services is
important in order to meet the needs of the community that would otherwise not be
captured through traditional public bus and rail services.
Efforts to promote public bus and rail transportation are also emphasized in the
Circulation Element. Additional express bus service, supported by park-and-ride
facilities, can attract additional commute trips to public transportation. Promoting
the development of high-occupancy vehicle lanes on all freeway and tollroad
facilities in regional transportation planning efforts further enhances the
attractiveness of express bus service, in addition to encouraging multi-occupant
vehicles, by providing shorter travel times than conventional lanes.
The cities of Laguna Niguel and Mission Viejo also jointly share responsibility for
the Laguna Niguel/Mission Viejo Metrolink Rail Station, located outside the
westerly boundaries of the City of Mission Viejo in the City of Laguna Niguel. The
rail station is a component of the Orange County Metrolink rail line that provides
service from Oceanside in northern San Diego County to Orange County and
downtown Los Angeles. Regional and countywide planning efforts to increase the
frequency of routes, and expanding the locations they serve, will enable rail transit
to be attractive to residents and employers as a travel mode to employment centers,
in addition to accommodating personal trips. A critical link to this opportunity is
allowing residents to have a way to travel from home to the rail station without
having to use a personal vehicle, and allowing employees using rail transit to access
Mission Viejo employment centers, a way to travel from the rail station to their
places of work. The development and operation of these linkages to the mainline
bus and rail transit routes needs to be pursued as a cooperative strategy with
surrounding communities and partners, to achieve cost-effectiveness and a range of
services and service locations that would meet the needs of rail patrons.
GOAL 13:         Support development of a public transportation system that
                 provides mobility to all City residents and encourages use of
                 public transportation as an alternate to automobile travel.
Policy 13.1:     Continue to promote resident and employee accessibility to rail and
                 bus services and rail and bus facilities.
Policy 13.2:     Work with the Orange County Transportation Authority and the City
                 of Laguna Niguel to promote patronage of the Laguna
                 Niguel/Mission Viejo Commuter Rail Station, and to support
                                                                  CIRCULATION ELEMENT
                                                                         AUGUST 19, 2013
                                           13

               connection services to allow patrons to access commercial,
               educational, and employment centers and residential areas from the
               Commuter Rail Station.
Policy 13.3:   Support the efforts of the Orange County Transportation Authority
               to provide additional local and express bus service to the Mission
               Viejo community, and to provide additional park-and-ride lots,
               particularly near freeway and toll road facilities.
Policy 13.4:   Monitor areawide and regional rail concepts, including any fixed
               guideway system, to determine city benefits to linking with any
               extension of a proposed facility.
Policy 13.5:   Ensure accessibility of transit-dependent populations, including
               students, the elderly, and disabled persons, to public transportation.
Policy 13.6:   Support the identification and provision of special transit services
               for transit-dependent populations, including such services as jitneys
               and taxicab services to supplement public transportation services.
Policy 13.7:   Coordinate with OCTA to construct bus turnouts at appropriate
               locations.
Policy 13.8:   Encourage new development to incorporate design techniques that
               facilitate transit services, such as accessibility to transit routes, bike
               trails, pedestrian walkways and bus stops.
Policy 13.9:   Encourage employers to reduce vehicular trips by offering
               employees incentives such as reduced rate bus and rail transit passes.
BICYCLE, PEDESTRIAN AND EQUESTRIAN FACILITIES
Mission Viejo has a developed network of bikeways. Class III (signed bike lanes)
are located along portions of Santa Margarita Parkway, Crown Valley Parkway,
Marguerite Parkway, Olympiad, Trabuco and La Paz roads, and Los Alisos
Boulevard. Class II striped bike lanes are located throughout the remaining arterial
street network. In addition, four Class I (off-street) facilities are located in Mission
Viejo, including along Aliso Creek, Los Alisos Boulevard and Entidad, through the
Jeronimo Open Space and along the Oso Creek, and through Cordova Park.
Bicycling is recognized as an alternative transportation mode that serves as an
alternative to the single occupant vehicle. Bicycle facilities can provide an
opportunity to meet commuter needs, in addition to provide recreational
opportunities. The OCTA Commuter Bikeways Strategic Plan identifies that
                                                                     CIRCULATION ELEMENT
                                                                            AUGUST 19, 2013
                                            14
commuter bicyclists can include employees who ride to work as well as students
who ride to school. Bicycle facilities can also be used as a link to bus and rail
transit, by allowing riders to access bus stop locations or the rail station in lieu of
riding a personal vehicle to these facilities if shuttle service opportunities cannot be
developed. Continued planning efforts such as the City’s Oso Creek Trail bicycle
plan need to be updated and coordinated with neighboring jurisdictions, to bridge
the gaps in existing trail linkages, so that uninterrupted bicycle routes can be
planned, funded and constructed to provide for commuter bicycle needs, especially
to the Laguna Niguel/Mission Viejo Commuter Rail Station.
The provision of sidewalks and the design and construction of pedestrian walkways
in developments also encourage non-automobile movements and provide a safe
pedestrian system capable of linking commercial, residential and open spaces. The
City’s Development Code governing transportation demand management identifies
facilities-based improvements that can be accomplished in conjunction with new
development to promote alternative modes such as bicycling and walking. Such
improvements include integrating on-site sidewalks to connect with off-site
external pedestrian systems, integrating bike trails with project development,
providing on-site bicycle parking and providing transit waiting shelters.
Equestrian facilities and hiking and biking trails supplement access to recreational
resources in the community and the county. The City’s Conservation and Open
Space Element, Figure COS-6: Open Space and Trail Opportunities should be used
as a resource to identify potential linkages for existing and planned equestrian and
hiking and biking trail facilities, and in integrating the citywide system of trails into
the countywide regional trail system. In particular, the City’s Conservation and
Open Space Element identifies five major trail corridors that are to be completed,
enhanced and expanded. They are: enhancement of the Oso Creek Trail;
completion of the Arroyo Trabuco Trail along the Trabuco Creek and coordination
with the County of Orange to complete this linkage; enhancement of the Aliso
Creek Trail; completion of the Wilderness Glen Trail, and completion of the
Naciente Trail.
GOAL 14:        Protect and encourage non-motorized transportation such as
                bicycle, pedestrian, and equestrian travel.
Policy 14.1:    Establish and maintain an adopted bicycle, pedestrian and equestrian
                circulation system to support and encourage such travel.
Policy 14.2:    Provide for safety of pedestrians, bicycles, and equestrians by
                adhering to national standards and uniform practices.
Policy 14.3:    Provide and maintain a non-vehicular component of the City’s
                overall circulation system that supports bicyclists, pedestrians and
                equestrians and is coordinated with areawide and regional bicycle,
                pedestrian and equestrian plans and facilities.
                                                                     CIRCULATION ELEMENT
                                                                           AUGUST 19, 2013
                                            15

GOAL 15:     Plan, provide and maintain a comprehensive bicycle trail
             network that links with the regional trail system and encourages
             use of bicycle trails for commuter and recreational purposes.
Policy 15.1: Coordinate the design and improvement of bicycle trails in major
             residential, shopping, employment centers, parks, schools, other
             public facilities, public transportation facilities and bicycle
             networks.
Policy 15.2: Support and coordinate the development and maintenance of
             bikeways in conjunction with the County of Orange Master Plan of
             County Bikeways and the Orange County Transportation Authority
             Commuter Bikeways Strategic Plan, to ensure that local bicycle
             routes will be compatible with routes of neighboring jurisdictions.
Policy 15.3: Encourage the provision of an accessible and secure area for bicycle
             storage at all new and existing developments.
Policy 15.4: Provide bicycle racks or storage facilities at all areas of public forum
             whenever possible.
GOAL 16:     Plan and provide a pedestrian network that links residential,
             employment, schools and commercial facilities to public
             sidewalks and bus stop locations.
Policy 16.1: Maintain existing pedestrian facilities, and encourage new
             development to provide pedestrian walkways between
             developments.
Policy 16.2: Ensure accessibility of pedestrian facilities to students, the elderly
             and disabled.
GOAL 17:     Promote linkage of residences, schools, shopping centers and
             other public facilities through an internal system of trails.
Policy 17.1: Utilize easement and/or rights-of-way along flood control channels,
             public utility rights-of-way, railroad rights-of-way, and street rights-
             of-way wherever possible for the use of bicycles and/or equestrian
             trails.
Policy 17.2: Provide off-street bicycle trails in areas with minimal cross-traffic,
             such as open space spines, and flood control and utility easements,
             where possible.
Policy 17.3: Identify gaps in the City’s bicycle, riding and hiking trails systems
                                                                  CIRCULATION ELEMENT
                                                                         AUGUST 19, 2013
                                        16

                and explore strategies and funding mechanisms to plan and complete
                trail links.
Policy 17.4:    Require new development to dedicate or reserve easements for
                bicycle, riding and hiking trails to complete trails networks as
                identified on city, county and regional master trail plans.
Policy 17.5:    Explore potential trail linkages with regional bicycle, riding, hiking
                and equestrian trails, where possible.
PARKING
Providing adequate and convenient parking for land uses is an essential component
to maintaining a safe and effective circulation system. Designing parking facilities
so that all required parking can be accommodated on-site, and restricting parking on
and access to and from high-volume arterials to the parking facilities, improves
traffic flow on the City’s circulation system.
GOAL 18:        Require sufficient off-street parking for all land uses and
                maximize the use of parking facilities in the City.
Policy 18.1:    Require all developments to provide off-street parking in
                compliance with the City’s Development Code.
Policy 18.2:    Restrict the use of on-street parking on identified arterial streets,
                where maximum traffic flow is desired.
Policy 18.3:    Promote the provision of access between parking areas of adjacent
                properties along arterial roadways to improve overall traffic flow.
Policy 18.4:    Joint use of parking facilities may be granted as part of an area plan
                or site plan, depending on the peak parking generation of the
                permitted uses in the planning area.
Policy 18.5:    Encourage employers to include parking provisions in transportation
                demand management plans.
GOAL 19:        Encourage the development of adequate recreational vehicle
                storage areas within the City.
Policy 19.1:    Ensure that priority for recreational vehicle storage is given to the
                citizens of the City of Mission Viejo.
                                                                    CIRCULATION ELEMENT
                                                                          AUGUST 19, 2013
                                           17

GOODS MOVEMENT
The movement of goods throughout Southern California is projected to increase
significantly. While goods movement provides an economic benefit to the region,
goods movement also affects localized impacts along the transportation corridors
that such goods travel on, whether by rail or truck surface routes. The Southern
California Association of Governments, Caltrans, and the transportation
commissions of the counties of Orange, Los Angeles, Riverside, San Bernardino,
Ventura and San Diego, are developing a multi-county goods movement action plan
to develop a consensus strategy and implementation plan for Southern California
goods movement, and to partner with the private sector in developing a plan that
maximizes the economic opportunities associated with goods movement while
reducing attendant environmental and community impacts.
Trucks, more than rail, are the predominant method by which goods are distributed
from the region’s ports to freight systems, warehouses and distribution centers,
factories, farms and commercial establishments. Goods movement circulation is an
important component of traffic flow on a City’s street network. To minimize the
impacts of goods travel on city arterials and sensitive land uses such as residential
communities and school facilities located adjacent to the traveled arterials, the
Circulation Element includes policies that encourage the City and developers to
consider design features in nonresidential development to minimize interference
and impacts of truck-related goods movement on traffic circulation and residential
communities.
GOAL 20:       Provide a circulation system that effectively provides for the
               transport of commodities while minimizing the negative impacts
               on neighborhoods.
Policy 20.1:   Provide appropriately designed and maintained roadways so that
               they can safely accommodate truck travel.
Policy 20.2:   Provide sufficient truck loading areas to minimize interference with
               efficient traffic circulation.
Policy 20.3:   Require the provision of loading areas and access ways in the design
               of new development to minimize vehicular conflicts with truck
               traffic and to promote efficient circulation on and off site.
Policy 20.4:   Discourage on-street loading and unloading of commercial and
               industrial products.
Policy 20.5:   Require new non-residential development to design site access
               locations and on-site circulation that minimizes the impacts of truck
               traffic in residential areas.
                                                                   CIRCULATION ELEMENT
                                                                          AUGUST 19, 2013
                                            18

SCENIC HIGHWAYS
The County of Orange, as part of its General Plan, established a Master Plan of
Scenic Highways, which designates the location of scenic highways in Orange
County. Oso Parkway is designated as a scenic highway. Scenic highways are
expected to provide a pleasant driving environment and community enhancement,
with development complementing the existing scenery.
GOAL 21:       Preserve and provide landscaped transportation routes which
               accentuate the beauty of the existing settings in order to provide
               pleasant and beneficial driving environments while maintaining
               safety.
Policy 21.1:   Visually enhance the appearance of city roadways through design
               techniques and landscaping, with particular attention to streetscape
               design.
Policy 21.2:   Protect rights-of-way along scenic corridors to maintain existing
               landscape.
Policy 21.3:   Indicate scenic highway designation to discourage littering and
               defacement of the environment.
Policy 21.4:   Maintain high levels of service along scenic corridors to accentuate
               the pleasant driving experience.
TRANSPORTATION FINANCING
Securing adequate transportation financing for projects and programs is challenged
by several factors: competing interests for available and limited financial
resources; and, significant increases in the costs to construct improvements and
operate and maintain facilities and programs. Reliance upon self-help county
initiatives such as local sales tax increases to supplement funding for local
transportation projects is also challenged by requirements for voter approvals and
thus cannot be guaranteed. Further, the scope of improvements capable of
addressing Mission Viejo’s transportation needs, are regional in nature. Thus,
potential improvements such as new freeway interchanges and new connector
routes require significant funding resources to plan, design and construct. Limited
financial resources will also require that the safety, maintenance and efficient
operation of existing transportation networks and facilities be balanced against the
need for system expansion investments.
                                                                 CIRCULATION ELEMENT
                                                                       AUGUST 19, 2013
                                         19

The Circulation Element recognizes that funding opportunities at the federal, state
and county arenas require vigilant monitoring and response to secure funding from
a variety of sources. Collaborate planning efforts with various agencies and
jurisdictions shall be necessary to secure funding for transportation projects and
programs that are multi-jurisdictional in scope.            Further, City review of
development proposals within and beyond the jurisdictional boundaries of the City
of Mission Viejo shall be necessary to insure that: needed improvements to the
City’s circulation network are funded by developer exactions and/or developer
construction of improvements; and, city levels of service standards can be
maintained without relying on city financial resources to fund transportation
improvements triggered by new development.
GOAL 22:       Maximize pursuit of outside funding sources to complement city
               resources to plan, design and construct transportation capacity
               improvements and implement transportation programs that
               benefit the City of Mission Viejo.
Policy 22.1:   Pursue local, state and federal funding to implement all elements of
               the city circulation system, including roadways, public transit, trails
               and transportation/traffic programs.
Policy 22.2:   Utilize available financing methods and sources of funding to make
               necessary improvements to the overall transportation system.
Policy 22.3:   Maintain the transportation standards required to qualify for revenue
               and competitive grant funding eligibility, as established by
               applicable state and countywide transportation funding programs.
GOAL 23:       Require new development to pay its fair share towards
               circulation improvements needed to accommodate project
               traffic.
Policy 23.1:   Require any new development, located within the City or outside the
               City, that contributes traffic impacts to intersections and roadway
               facilities, located in the City or outside the City, to pay its fair share
               contribution towards identified transportation improvements,
               including payment of fees towards adopted transportation fee
               programs, fair-share costs for identified transportation
               improvements, or construction of identified transportation
               improvements necessary to maintain adopted levels of service in the
               affected jurisdictions.
Policy 23.2:   Require that any grant funds and any Measure M sales tax revenues
               shall not be used to replace private developer funding which has
               been committed for any project or for required subdivision
                                                                    CIRCULATION ELEMENT
                                                                          AUGUST 19, 2013
                                           20

               obligations.
TRANSPORTATION MODELING
The City of Mission Viejo has completed the development of an in-house
transportation model that was developed to: provide an independent tool to assess
transportation conditions of the City’s transportation network; measure the impact
of proposed developments on the City’s transportation infrastructure; explore
transportation system options under consideration by the City; and make informed
decisions on transportation infrastructure improvements.
State Government Code Section 65089 (c) further requires a consistency between
local models, county models and the regional model, both in terms of database and
modeling methodology. Input into the City’s transportation model will require city
investment and budgetary resources to insure that the databases are current and
updated, and that the databases are consistent with countywide assumptions that
feed into the countywide transportation model administered by the Orange County
Transportation Authority and the regional model administered by the Southern
California Association of Governments.
Monitoring of county and regional forecasting issues and processes will also be
necessary to insure that database input and assumptions used for technical
transportation analyses, are not compromised when proposed for use for other
planning purposes.
GOAL 24:       Utilize the City’s transportation model as a technical tool to
               promote Circulation Element goals and policies.
Policy 24.1:   Develop, maintain, and utilize the City’s transportation model to
               establish forecasting analysis capabilities to evaluate and monitor
               development proposals and transportation improvements, policies,
               plans and programs.
Policy 24.2:   In the development, maintenance and use of the City’s transportation
               model, comply with state, regional and areawide policies and
               guidelines on transportation modeling consistency requirements,
               modeling assumptions, modeling analysis and modeling updates.
ADVOCACY
Orange County’s transportation system is an intermodal and interconnected
network of public freeways and private tollroads, state and local highways and
roads, bus and rail public transit facilities and services, freight systems, airports,
                                                                  CIRCULATION ELEMENT
                                                                         AUGUST 19, 2013
                                          21

and communications facilities. In turn, the agencies and governments responsible
for all aspects of this varied network of facilities and services span federal, state,
regional, county and local entities, and the planning efforts, published studies,
deliberations and actions of these agencies affect the daily operation of existing
transportation facilities and programs, and the delivery of new or upgraded facilities
and programs in the City of Mission Viejo.
Critical to the success of the City of Mission Viejo in addressing its transportation
priorities and meeting its transportation challenges for regional solutions, is a
commitment to engage in strategic planning and decision-making with the
fellowship of agencies and governments that are charged with transportation and
land use policy, planning and financing. Such participation, even at the level of
monitoring agency activities, requires a commitment and investment by City
technical staff and policy makers. However, this investment allows the City to be
abreast of evolving transportation policy and planning, and to work within
established processes and with agency decision makers, to ensure that City issues
are identified and addressed, City priorities are recognized, and most significantly,
that new or amended requirements upon the City of Mission Viejo have been
anticipated.
The Circulation Element promotes city advocacy on transportation policy and
transportation planning, and calls upon elected, appointed and technical city
representatives to engage in active participation on boards and committees of
transportation and land use agencies, to promote and elevate city and South Orange
County transportation needs and interests.
GOAL 25:        Pursue City of Mission Viejo transportation policy objectives
                through city advocacy efforts.
Policy 25.1:    Participate in transportation planning policy arenas, including but
                not limited to membership on boards or committees of the Orange
                County Transportation Authority, Transportation Corridor Agencies,
                Orange County Council of Governments, Measure M Growth
                Management Area InterJurisdictional Planning Forums, and others,
                to educate and promote transportation needs and interests of benefit
                to the City of Mission Viejo and South Orange County.
Policy 25.2:    Monitor, establish a City position, and advocate said City position
                on any amendments to the Orange County Master Plan of Arterial
                Highways that are proposed by neighboring or surrounding
                jurisdictions, to ensure that any impacts to City of Mission Viejo
                roadways resulting from any proposed changes or deletions to the
                Orange County MPAH, are analyzed, and that any City position is
                identified to applicable jurisdictions and the Orange County
                Transportation Authority.
                                                                  CIRCULATION ELEMENT
                                                                        AUGUST 19, 2013
                                          22
AIR TRANSPORTATION
The Airport Land Use Commission (ALUC) for Orange County is responsible for
ensuring that applicable actions of local governments are consistent with the
Airport Environs Land Use Plan (AELUP) for Heliports, and in insuring that
AELUP information and language is included in General Plan updates relating to
heliports and helistops.
Policy 26.1 implements recommended language from the ALUC to insure that any
applications for heliports and helistops that are submitted to the City of Mission
Viejo, are analyzed for consistency with permitting requirements and procedures
that are established for heliports by the State of California, the Federal Aviation
Administration, the ALUC for Orange County and Caltrans/Division of
Aeronautics, prior to city approval.
GOAL 26:        Comply with the Airport Environs Land Use Plan (AELUP) for
                Heliports.
Policy 26.1:    Insure that any city approvals for the construction or operation of a
                heliport or helistop comply with state permit procedures and with
                requirements as established by the Federal Aviation Administration
                (FAA), the Airport Land Use Commission for Orange County
                (ALUC), and Caltrans/Division of Aeronautics.
                                                                  CIRCULATION ELEMENT
                                                                        AUGUST 19, 2013
                                          23
      FIGURE C-1
MASTER PLAN OF STREETS
                                                                                                                  SA N
                                                                                                                    TA
                                                                                                                                                             ¾
                                                                                                                                                             A
                                                                                                                         M
                                                                                                                          AR GA
                                                                                                                                   RIT
                                                                                                                                      A PKWY
                                                    LAKE FOREST                                                                                                     RD
                                                                                                                                                             DA
                                                                                                                                                       IN
                                                                                                                                                      M EL
                                               RD
                                          RO
                                        TO
                                   EL
                                                                                      TR                                                                                 RANCHO SANTA
                                                               LOS ALISOS B LV D                                                                                          MARGARITA
                                                                                            UC
                                                                                          AB
                                                                                            OR
                                                                                             D
                          IR
                       MU
                              ND                                        Y
                            LA                                      W
                               S                               PK
RO  CK                           VD
                                                           IA
         FIE                   BL                           IC
             L   D                                     AL
                     BL
                       VD
                                                                                                                                   O
                                                                                                                                       R   D
                                                                                                                                                                                                       ¾
                                                                                                                                                                                                       A
                                                                                                                                  NI
                                                                                                                               M
                                                                                                                              O                                 RD                  WY
                                                                                                                         JE R
                                                                                                                                                             AD                 PK
                                                                                                                                                           OLYMPI
                                                                                                                                                                               IO
                                                                                                                                                                          ANT
                                                                                                                                                                             ON
                                                                                                    Y
                                                $
                                                ^
                                                "
                                                !                                                 PKW
                                                                                                 IT E             PAZ R D
                                                                                            ER               LA
                                                                                           GU
                                ALENCIA                                                   MA
                    O       DE V                                                             R
             PA S E
                                                                                                                                               OS
                                                                                                                                                  O
                                                                                                                                                      PK
                                                                                                                                                           WY
                                        LAGUNA
                                         HILLS
                                                                                                          RD
                                                                                                        LIP
                                                                                                            E
                                                                                                        FE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               C   AZ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            DE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       TO
                                                                                                                                               Y                                                                    CO
                                                                                                                                      KW
                                                                                                                              LE   YP
                                                                                                                        AL
                                                                                                                      NV
                                                                                                             CR O W
                       ¥
                       ?                                   RD
                                                           T
                                                       O
                                                    CA B                                                                                                                   Legend
                                                                                                                                                                                    City of Mission Viejo
                                                                 ¤                                                                                                                  Adjacent Cities
                                                                                                                                                                                    Water Area
                     LAGUNA                                                                                                                                                         Class I Off-Road (Paved) Bike Path
                      NIGUEL                                                                                                                                                        Class II On-Road (Striped Lane) Bike Lane
                                                                                                                                                                                    Class III On Road (Signed Only) Bike Route
                                                                            AV                                                                                                      Class I Off-Road Proposed Bike Path
                                                                                                                                                                           ¤
                                                                               ER
                                                                                 Y                                                                                                Laguna Niguel Metrolink Station
                                                                                 PK                                                                                                 Freeway and Toll
                                                                                     WY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   µ
                                                                                                                                                                                    Major Arterial
                                                                                                                                                                                    Minor Arterial
                                                                                                                                                                                    Ramp
                                                                                                                                                                                    Railroad
                                                                     SAN JUAN                                                                                              0        0.25         0.5                1                 1.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Miles
                                                                    CAPISTRANO
                                                                                                                                                                                                            Revised May 01, 2009
                                                                                                                                                                                                        Figure C-2
                                                                                                                                                                                                        Figure C-4
                                                                                                                                                                                                     Bikeway Plan
Source: V:\174629A-MissionViejoOnCall\Graphics\GIS\MXD-PDFS\BikewayPlan.050109.mxd

                                            TABLE C-1
                            CIRCULATION POLICIES BY ELEMENT
                                                   POLICIES BY ELEMENT
  ISSUE AREA        Land Use    Housing  Conserva-   Public       Noise   Economic       Growth
                                         tion/Open    Safety            Development   Management
                                            Space
Local               1.4                 1.1          8.7       1.2                    1.1–1.5
Thoroughfares &     2.1–2.8                                    1.3                    2.1–2.5
Routes:             2.13–2.16                                                         3.1–3.2
•balance with
Land Use Plan                                                                         4.1–4.3
•mitigation                                                                           5.1–5.4
•preserve
neighborhood
character
•safe school routes
•traffic signal
coordination
•maximize
efficiency of
existing system
•maintain streets
Regional &          2.15                                       1.1                    4.2
Intercity           2.16                                                              5.1
Transportation:     3.10
•complete regional
network
•coordinate with
regional facilities
and jurisdictions
TSM/TDM:            6.2                                                 2.1           1.5
•implement                                                              3.4
strategies to                                                           3.5
maximize system
efficiency
Public                         3.2      1.13
Transportation:
•support
development of
services &
facilities
Bicycle/                                1.13                                          1.5
Pedestrian/                             3.5
                                        3.6
Equestrian                              4.3
Facilities:
•plan &
implement
network and
facilities
                                                       22                 CIRCULATION ELEMENT
                                                                                 AUGUST 19, 2013

                                      TABLE C-1, continued
                                             POLICIES BY ELEMENT
  ISSUE AREA        Land   Housing Conserva-   Public     Noise      Economic          Growth
                     Use           tion/Open    Safety             Development      Management
                                      Space
Parking:                 1.5
•require adequate
off-street parking
•provide adequate
RV storage
Goods Movement:     3.1                        5.3
•provide for goods                             5.4
movement
transport &
protect residential
areas from impact
Scenic Highways:
•provide
landscaped
transportation
routes
Transportation      2.2                                          2.3               2.1–2.5
Financing:          2.4                                                            5.1–5.4
•pursue outside     2.6
funding
•require
development to
pay fair-share
Transportation
Modeling:
•use transportation
model to
implement
Element goals
Advocacy:           2.13                                 1.1                       1.3
•pursue city policy                                                                4.2, 4.3
objectives through                                                                 5.1
advocacy
Air
Transportation:
•comply with
AELUP for
Heliports
                                                 22                     CIRCULATION ELEMENT
                                                                               AUGUST 19, 2013

Conservation / Open Space Element
          City of Mission Viejo
                                 TABLE OF CONTENTS
Section                                                                                  Page
INTRODUCTION TO THE CONSERVATION / OPEN SPACE ELEMENT                                       1
       Purpose of the Conservation / Open Space Element                                     1
       Scope and Content of the Conservation / Open Space Element                           1
       Related Plans and Programs                                                           2
CONSERVATION AND OPEN SPACE ELEMENT GOALS AND POLICIES                                      6
       Ecological and Biological Resources                                                  6
       Protect Natural Resources and Open Space Areas                                       7
       Provide for Balanced Parks, Recreational, and Open Space Needs                       8
       Water Supply and Conservation                                                      10
       Water Quality, Storm Water, and Urban Runoff Management                            10
       Air Quality, Climate Change, Energy Conservation, and Green Building Practices     12
       Related Goals and Policies                                                         14
CONSERVATION PLAN                                                                          16
       Conservation / Open Space for the Preservation of Natural Resources                16
       Conservation / Open Space Used for the Production of Resources                     18
       Conservation / Open Space for Public Health and Safety                             18
       Conservation Measures                                                              21
OPEN SPACE PLAN                                                                            23
       Relation to the Land Use Plan                                                      23
       Parks Classification and Standards                                                 24
       Future Park Site Selection Standards                                               33
       General Plan Policies and Recreation Facilities                                    38
                                          i                    CONSERVATION / OPEN SPACE ELEMENT
                                                                                   AUGUST 19, 2013
                                 LIST OF TABLES
Section                                                                               Page
Table COS-1 Conservation and Open Space Matrix                                          15
Table COS-2 Mission Viejo Parkland - Existing                                           25
Table COS-3 Mission Viejo Private Parkland - Existing                                   27
Table COS-4 Mission Viejo Public Open Space - Proposed                                  27
Table COS-5 Parkland Standards                                                          28
Table COS-6 Trail Standards                                                             37
                                 LIST OF FIGURES
Section                                                                               Page
Figure COS-1 Open Space for the Preservation of Natural Resources                       17
Figure COS-2 Open Space for the Managed Production of Resources                         19
Figure COS-3 Open Space for Public Health and Safety                                    20
Figure COS-4 Regional Open Space                                                        23
Figure COS-5 Private Recreation Facilities                                              29
Figure COS-6 Existing and Proposed Open Space and Trail                                 32
Figure COS-7 Open Space Plan                                                            34
Figure COS-8 Trail Standards                                                            39
                                        ii                  CONSERVATION / OPEN SPACE ELEMENT
                                                                                AUGUST 19, 2013
________________________________________________________________________________
                      INTRODUCTION TO THE CONSERVATION
                               AND OPEN SPACE ELEMENT
________________________________________________________________________________
The purpose of this Element is to address the preservation and use of the City’s important natural
resources and open space areas. The goals and policies in this Element build upon those in the other
elements of the General Plan, especially the Land Use Element. The Conservation / Open Space
Element focuses on the preservation and enhancement of these resources to ensure a high quality
living environment for future years. The Element also addresses the City’s parks and recreation
system and includes a park enhancement plan. An open space and recreational facilities system was
established as part of Mission Viejo’s development. The City has both public and private parks and
facilities at the community and neighborhood level. Opportunities exist to expand and enhance the
recreational components of the City as the remaining lands are developed.
PURPOSE OF THE CONSERVATION / OPEN SPACE ELEMENT
_______________________________________________________________________________
This Element meets State requirements concerning the Conservation and Open Space Elements as
defined in Sections 65302(d) and 65302(e) of the Government Code. According to these
requirements, the Conservation Element must contain goals and policies that further the protection
and maintenance of the State’s natural resources such as water, soils, wildlife, minerals, and other
natural resources, and prevents their wasteful exploitation, degradation, and destruction. The
Conservation Element provides direction regarding the conservation, development, and utilization of
natural resources. The Open Space Element must contain goals and policies concerned with
managing all open space areas, including undeveloped wilderness lands and outdoor recreation areas.
The Open Space Element guides the comprehensive and long-range preparation and conservation of
open space land. State law requires that the use of open space for the following purposes be
addressed in the Open Space Element: preservation of natural resources, management of production
resources, outdoor recreation, and protection of public health and safety reasons. Additionally, while
air quality is not a State-mandated element, air quality is included in the Conservation / Open Space
Element to address reducing pollutant levels through stationary source, mobile source, transportation
and land use control, and energy conservation measures.
SCOPE AND CONTENT OF THE CONSERVATION / OPEN SPACE ELEMENT
_______________________________________________________________________________
The Conservation / Open Space Element are the City’s general goals and policies regarding the
preservation and protection of the environment, including natural resources and open space. The
                                                                      CONSERVATION / OPEN SPACE ELEMENT
                                                    1                                     AUGUST 19, 2013

goals identify City desires and consist of broad statements of purpose and direction. The policies
serve as guidelines for minimizing environmental effects, preserving open space resources, and
planning for future community service and facility needs in the City. The Conservation Plan and
Open Space Plan describe how goals and policies will be achieved or implemented.
RELATED PLANS AND PROGRAMS
_______________________________________________________________________________
There are several existing plans and programs that are directly applicable to the aims and objectives
of this Element. These plans and programs were enacted through Federal, State, and local legislation
and are administered by agencies or special districts that have been delegated with powers to enforce
Federal, State and local laws.
Federal Endangered Species Act
The Federal Endangered Species Act (ESA) administered by U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service applies
to federally listed species and habitat occupied by federally listed species. Federally listed species are
most likely to occur within riparian habitat area in the City’s floodplains, canyons, and hillsides.
ESA 9 forbids specified acts that directly or indirectly harm listed species. Section 9 also prohibits
“taking” any species of wildlife or fish listed as endangered. These restrictions apply to all federal
agencies and all persons subject to United States jurisdiction.
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service and California Department of Fish and Game
Both the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service and California Department of Fish and Game have
regulations to protect wildlife resources. Special permits are required for alteration, dredging, or any
activity in a lake or stream, as well as other activities that may affect fish and game habitat. Both
agencies also regulate impacts to sensitive plant and animal species. Any future development or
redevelopment in the City that has potential to affect wildlife habitat will be subject to the regulations
of these federal and state agencies.
Federal Clean Water Act
The Federal Clean Water Act (CWA) administered by the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA)
employs a variety of regulatory and non-regulatory tools to reduce or eliminate direct pollutant
discharges into waterways, finance municipal wastewater treatment facilities, and manage polluted
runoff. These tools are employed to achieve the broader goal of restoring and maintaining the
chemical, physical, and biological integrity of the nation’s waters so they can support the protection
and propagation of fish, shellfish, and wildlife.
Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA)
The Federal Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) of 1991 was adopted to make public areas,
including public facilities, parks and play areas accessible to all persons. Playground equipment,
                                                                       CONSERVATION / OPEN SPACE ELEMENT
                                                      2                                      AUGUST 19, 2013

trails, and facilities must be usable by adults and children with disabilities under ADA. The City
utilizes ADA accessible design standards in the construction of new public and recreational facilities
and the retrofitting of existing facilities.
California Environmental Quality Act and Guidelines
The California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) was adopted by the State legislature in response
to a public mandate for more thorough environmental analysis of projects that might affect the
environment. Provisions of the law and environmental review procedures are described in the CEQA
statutes, State CEQA Guidelines, and the City’s guidelines implementing CEQA. CEQA is the
instrument for ensuring that environmental impacts of local development projects are appropriately
assessed and mitigated.
California Endangered Species Act
The California Endangered Species Act (CESA) generally parallels the main provisions of the
Federal Endangered Species Act and is administered by the California Department of Fish and Game.
CESA prohibits the “taking” of listed species except as otherwise provided in State law. Any future
development or redevelopment in the City that has potential to affect wildlife habitat will be subject
to the regulations of this Act.
National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES)
Mission Viejo is under the jurisdiction of the San Diego Regional Water Quality Control Board
(SDRWQCB) which implements the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES)
permit for the San Diego area (including southern Orange County). The NPDES permit, a
requirement under the Clean Water Act, addresses pollution from urban runoff that impacts water
quality of receiving waters (such as streams and lakes). Under the NPDES permit, each jurisdiction
must implement measures to reduce urban runoff during all phases of land use development starting
with: planning, during construction, and after completion of the development. Requirements include
incorporating Best Management Practices to reduce water runoff from new and redevelopment sites,
construction activities, and existing uses, reporting any violations to the SDRWQCB and educating
the community of the negative water quality impacts from urban runoff. In 2010, the City adopted a
Standard Storm Water Mitigation Plan to implement low impact development techniques for new
and redevelopment sites and develop a Hydromodification Management Plan to manage increases in
runoff discharge rates and durations from new and redevelopment sites.
South Coast Air Quality Management Plan
The City of Mission Viejo is located in the South Coast Air Basin. The South Coast Air Quality
Management District (SCAQMD) sets and enforces regulations for stationary sources in the basin.
The SCAQMD in coordination with the Southern California of Governments (SCAG) periodically
develops an Air Quality Management Plan (AQMP) for the air basin. The AQMD includes a
comprehensive analysis of future emission forecasts which reflect demographic and economic
                                                                      CONSERVATION / OPEN SPACE ELEMENT
                                                     3                                    AUGUST 19, 2013

growth forecasts provided by SCAG. The build-out of the City of Mission Viejo is included in these
forecasts.
Natural Community Conservation Plan and Habitat Conservation Plan (NCCP / HCP)
The County of Orange has prepared a Natural Community Conservation Plan and Habitat
Conservation Plan (NCCP / HCP) for the Central, Coastal, and Southern subregions of the County of
Orange. The NCCP / HCP for these subregions were prepared in cooperation with the U.S. Fish and
Wildlife Service and the California Department of Fish and Game. The intent of the NCCP / HCP
program is to provide long-term, regional production of natural vegetation and wildlife diversity,
while allowing compatible land use and appropriate development and growth. The NCCP / HCP is
accomplished with the institution of a subregional Habitat Reserve System, and implemented through
a coordinated program to manage biological resources within the habitat reserve.
County of Orange General Plan Resources Element
The County of Orange General Plan Resources Element includes an inventory of the county-wide
resources such as agricultural, mineral, and wildlife resources, energy, water, air, open space, and
cultural-historic resources. The element also includes goals, policies and programs for the
development, management, preservation, and conservation of the County’s resources.
County of Orange Master Plan of Local Parks
The County of Orange Master of Plan Local Parks provides goals, objectives and policies and
provides implementation programs for a comprehensive county-wide park Plan. In conjunction with
the County’s Local Park Code, specific criteria are intended to provide an adequate supply of usable
parkland. This plan is important from the City’s standpoint because many of Mission Viejo’s parks
were developed under the County’s Local Park Code.
County of Orange Master Plan of Regional Riding and Hiking Trails
The County of Orange Master Plan of Regional Riding and Hiking Trails provides policies and
programs to implement the future development and operation of the county-wide trails system. The
plan includes an inventory of existing and proposed trails and standards and criteria for new trails.
The City has incorporated the County’s trails criteria into the Conservation and Open Space Element.
County of Orange Master Plan of Regional Recreation Facilities
The County of Orange Master Plan of Regional Recreation Facilities includes an inventory of
existing and proposed regional parks, harbors, marine life refuges, County beaches, and historical
sites. The purpose of the plan is to provide a countywide regional recreation network to meet the
needs of present and future residents of Orange County.
                                                                      CONSERVATION / OPEN SPACE ELEMENT
                                                     4                                    AUGUST 19, 2013

City of Mission Viejo General Plan Land Use Element
The City of Mission Viejo General Plan Land Use Element contains two land use designations that
encompass open space land uses: Recreation/Open Space and Community Facility. The
Recreation/Open Space land use designation encompasses most of the open space that exists in the
City including active and passive parkland and natural open space. Distinctions between the active
recreation/open spaces and the passive recreation/open areas including wilderness areas are made in
the Development Code and on the Zoning Map. The Community Facility land use designation
contains more intensive recreational and/or cultural facilities such as community or cultural facilities,
museums, and art galleries.
City of Mission Viejo Development Code
Chapter 9.13 of the City of Mission Viejo Development Code which is embodied in the Mission
Viejo Municipal Code contains the regulations for the Open Space Zone and Recreation Zone. The
regulations are intended to provide for the preservation of the City’s important natural resources and
open space areas, and to provide for public and private recreational land use activities necessary to
meet both passive and active recreation needs of City residents.
City of Mission Viejo Community Services Master Plan
In 2006, the City Council adopted a Community Services Master Plan. The purpose of the master
plan is to provide a guide towards the orderly development of recreation programs, recreation
facilities, parks, and open space areas in the City. The master plan provides a set of actions for
implementation of goals, policies, and objectives as well as community services for the public. The
Community Services Master Plan is one of the primary implementation tools for the Conservation /
Open Space Element and the goals and polices it contains.
City of Mission Viejo Green Building Program
In 2006, the City Council adopted a two year Green Building Pilot Program. The goal of the
program is to improve the quality of life for Mission Viejo residents through recommendations for
energy efficiency, water conservation, better indoor air quality, the use of sustainable materials, and
the reduction of environmental impacts. In 2008, the City Council approved this program as the
City’s permanent “Green Building Program.”
City of Mission Viejo Wireless Master Plan
In 2007, the City Council received and filed a Wireless Master Plan relating to the future
development of cell sites throughout the City. The goals of the Wireless Master Plan are to: 1)
reduce the number of potential cell site locations through a coordinated co-location process; 2)
mitigate the visual impact of towers and antennas from view of the community by adopting design
standards that employ the best available “stealth” technologies; and 3) facilitate the development of
efficient wireless networks by taking a proactive approach and implementing a wireless master plan.
                                                                       CONSERVATION / OPEN SPACE ELEMENT
                                                    5                                      AUGUST 19, 2013

________________________________________________________________________________
          CONSERVATION AND OPEN SPACE GOALS AND POLICIES
________________________________________________________________________________
Mission Viejo is located along Interstate 5 in southern Orange County. Most of the natural open
space and biological habitat has been recently replaced with urban development. The undeveloped
area of Mission Viejo, in the eastern portion of the City, contains natural resources, such as steep
slopes, canyons, and drainage courses that are associated with the physical characteristics of the land.
 These natural resources can act as constraints to development, but also define the area’s
environmental character.
The Mission Viejo study area includes lands outside of the City’s boundaries having physical
attributes that relate to planning in Mission Viejo. The unincorporated lands to the north and east of
Mission Viejo contain natural resources significant to the sub-region. The City of Mission Viejo
does not exercise control over these unincorporated lands. However, from a regional context, these
lands are important in relation to planning for the open space uses in the City and the conservation of
resources.
The undeveloped portions of Mission Viejo contain natural habitat directly adjacent to the
biologically and archaeologically important Arroyo Trabuco which runs in a southerly direction
between the City of Mission Viejo and the City of Rancho Santa Margarita and County of Orange
unincorporated areas. The steep slopes along Mission Viejo’s eastern City boundary form an edge
between Mission Viejo and the Arroyo Trabuco. The undeveloped areas of the City are only the
remnants of a pre-developed environment. Plant and animal species that were once common are now
confined to the greatly reduced remaining habitats.
The goals and supporting policies included in the Element are concerned with specific issues and
opportunities to conserve the city’s remaining sensitive lands and to enhance the open space within
the City. Some of the goals and policies in this Element are intended to protect the sensitive lands
that exist along the City’s borders, especially those adjacent to the Arroyo Trabuco and Upper Oso
Reservoir. Other goals and policies are formulated to take advantage of recreational and open space
opportunities that augment the City’s existing recreational systems.
ECOLOGICAL AND BIOLOGICAL RESOURCES
_______________________________________________________________________________
For a city that is near build-out, it is important to conserve its remaining natural resources. The
creeks provide scenic beauty and provide wildlife corridors. The quality of the water that reaches the
creeks is important to the overall health of the habitat. Mission Viejo contains many important
ecological and biological resources such as Aliso, Oso, and Trabuco Creeks, O’Neill Regional Park,
and the natural plants and wildlife that inhabit them. Another important resource is the oak
woodland, a reflection of the community’s ranch history. The coast Live Oak (Quercus agrifolia),
                                                                      CONSERVATION / OPEN SPACE ELEMENT
                                                     6                                    AUGUST 19, 2013

was named as the Official City Tree by the City Council on April 9, 1990. To conserve these
important resources for future generations and to preserve the quality of life in the community, these
ecological and biological resources need to be protected. The following goal and policies support the
protection of the City’s natural resources.
GOAL 1:         Protect and enhance the significant ecological and biological resources within
                and surrounding the community.
Policy 1.1:     Preserve and protect important natural plant and animal communities and their
                associated habitats, such as areas supporting rare and endangered species, riparian
                areas, wildlife movement corridors, wetlands, and significant tree stands through
                appropriate site planning and grading techniques, revegetation, and soil management
                practices and other resource management techniques.
Policy 1.2:     Utilize a development proposal review process to mitigate the impacts of
                development on sensitive lands such as steep slopes, wetlands, cultural resources, oak
                woodlands and sensitive habitats.
Policy 1.3:     Regulate the removal or destruction of the Coast Live Oak (Quercus agrifolia) tree.
Policy 1.4:     Participate in the development of Natural Community Conservation Plan / Habitat
                Conservation Plan Programs for threatened habitats located within the city, such as
                coastal sage scrub.
Policy 1.5:     Establish and manage wildlife habitat corridors within public parks and natural
                resource protection areas where appropriate to allow for wildlife use.
Policy 1.6:     Encourage programs to educate youth and adults about natural resources to develop
                concern and support for conservation and preservation.
PROTECT NATURAL RESOURCES AS OPEN SPACE AREAS
_______________________________________________________________________________
The open space that is undeveloped in Mission Viejo contains natural and cultural resources and
provides habitat for plant and animal species that help define the remaining land’s natural
character and form. Sensitive plant communities, such as riparian areas and coastal sage scrub,
provide habitat for locally or regionally important animal species. Due to the City’s proximity to
the natural open space of the O’Neill Regional Park and other regional open space, Mission Viejo
identifies with the vicinity’s regional importance and value as natural habitat. The City will utilize
careful planning of its remaining natural lands to provide a gradual transition between urban uses
and natural open space and to allow the City to utilize its remaining open space effectively.
                                                                     CONSERVATION / OPEN SPACE ELEMENT
                                                    7                                    AUGUST 19, 2013

GOAL 2:          Protect open space areas to preserve natural resources.
Policy 2.1:      Preserve unique and important geographic features and landforms unique to Mission
                 Viejo.
Policy 2.2:      Support preservation of portions of the Arroyo Trabuco as a prime bird
                 nesting/foraging habitat and major wildlife movement corridor.
Policy 2.3:      Support the preservation of the remaining prime bird nesting/foraging habitats in the
                 City, particularly in the canyon areas and ridgelines.
Policy 2.4:      Protect environmentally sensitive buffering areas such as the area between Upper Oso
                 Reservoir and O’Neill Regional Park.
Policy 2.5:      Support the efforts of other agencies to preserve undisturbed portions of the O’Neill
                 Regional Park identified as a sensitive habitat.
Policy 2.6:      Ensure long term preservation of identified open spaces through the use of
                 conservation easements, or land purchases by community organizations that assist
                 in land acquisitions for conservation purposes, or land purchases by the City for
                 similar purposes.
PROVIDE FOR BALANCED PARKS, RECREATIONAL, AND OPEN SPACE NEEDS
_______________________________________________________________________________
Mission Viejo has a strong and well distributed recreational land use component. The City’s
recreational components consist of public and private parks, golf courses, regional trails,
greenbelts, utility easements, recreational centers, Lake Mission Viejo, and the O’Neill Regional
Park. Opportunities exist to enhance the City’s parkland within the eastern portion of the City
along Arroyo Trabuco Creek and to complete the City’s open space and recreational system.
In 2006, the City Council adopted a Community Services Master Plan. The purpose of the master
plan is to provide a guide towards the orderly development of recreation programs, recreation
facilities, parks, and open space areas in the City. The master plan provides a set of actions for
implementation of goals, policies, and objectives as well as community services for the public.
GOAL 3:          Provide for the orderly development of exceptional recreation programs,
                 recreation facilities, parks, and open space areas in the City.
Policy 3.1:      Implement and periodically update the Community Services Master Plan.
Policy 3.2:      Implement a comprehensive maintenance program for existing and future recreational
                 facilities.
                                                                        CONSERVATION / OPEN SPACE ELEMENT
                                                       8                                    AUGUST 19, 2013

Policy 3.3:  Ensure that new residential development provides some on-site passive recreation
             and/or park land or in-lieu fees as specified in the City of Mission Viejo Subdivision
             Code using the established standard of five acres of park land per 1,000 population.
Policy 3.4:  Coordinate and cooperate with adjacent jurisdictions to develop and enhance adjacent
             open space lands, regional parks, and access to parkland.
Policy 3.5:  Participate and assist in the implementation of the regional parks / open space / trails
             corridors such as the Aliso Creek, Arroyo Trabuco Creek, and San Juan Creek
             corridors.
Policy 3.6:  Investigate the opportunity for trail connections between the Upper Oso Reservoir
             and the O’Neill Regional Park and between Upper Oso Reservoir and the local trail
             following the north/ south Southern California Edison easement.
Policy 3.7:  Preserve views of significant scenic value along streets and highways that adjoin such
             areas as a lake, hillside, ridgeline, creek, open space, or recreational area.
Policy 3.8:  Encourage and maintain high quality long term maintenance programs for
             architectural and landscape improvements to preserve the community’s visual
             character and promote continuous rehabilitation.
Policy 3.9:  Provide a range of recreational facilities, including physical, cultural, and social types
             serving all ages, to meet the needs of City residents.
Policy 3.10: Preserve public and private open space lands for active / passive recreational
             opportunities.
Policy 3.11: Utilize utility easements as open space linkage corridors.
Policy 3.12: Encourage and implement a public / private outdoor public art program for new
             development and rehabilitation of existing development.
Policy 3.13: Encourage and implement architectural and landscape improvements that are
             consistent with City design standards, guidelines and criteria.
Policy 3.14: Preserve public and private golf courses in their entirety as important and valuable
             community recreational amenities and open space lands.
GOAL 4:      Establish a long-term funding mechanism for the acquisition, development, and
             maintenance of future city park facilities
Policy 4.1:  Actively pursue all available sources of financing for parkland acquisition,
             development, and maintenance.
Policy 4.2:  Encourage the joint use, planning, and funding of school district and City park
             facilities.
                                                                      CONSERVATION / OPEN SPACE ELEMENT
                                                     9                                     AUGUST 19, 2013

Policy 4.3:     Establish a reserve fund and reserve account for the repair and future renovation of
                City park facilities.
Policy 4.4:     Develop a system of user fees and charges for recreational facility use and programs
                to supplement operational and overhead maintenance costs.
Policy 4.5:     Encourage and utilize volunteers as resources to improve and beautify parks, trails,
                and open spaces as appropriate, such as past large scale community events like Tierra
                Nativa and Artes de la Vida.
WATER SUPPLY AND CONSERVATION
_______________________________________________________________________________
The City depends on imported water for its urban activities. Urban development depends on
adequate water supplies of water. The City must promote the conservation of water resources in
order to sustain existing and future economic population and growth.
GOAL 5:         Promote an adequate supply of water through the conservation of water
                resources.
Policy 5.1:     Work with local water districts and regional suppliers to ensure that adequate water
                supply is provided to meet the demands of new development and reuse of properties
                in the City.
Policy 5.2:     Participate in and implement local and regional programs that promote water
                conservation for residential and non-residential uses.
Policy 5.3:     Encourage the production, distribution, and use of recycled and reclaimed water for
                landscaping projects throughout the community while maintaining urban runoff water
                quality objectives.
Policy 5.4:     Reduce the amount of water used for landscaping by employing water efficient
                irrigation and maximizing use of native, low water / drought tolerant plants.
Policy 5.5:     Continue to inspect, maintain, and enhance City facilities for water use and to ensure
                they are water efficient.
Policy 5.6:     Specify and install water conserving plumbing fixtures and fittings in public facilities
                such as parks, community and recreation centers, and government buildings.
WATER QUALITY, STORM WATER, AND URBAN RUNOFF MANAGEMENT
_______________________________________________________________________________
                                                                       CONSERVATION / OPEN SPACE ELEMENT
                                                    10                                     AUGUST 19, 2013
The City of Mission Viejo has ground and surface water resources such as Lake Mission Viejo,
Upper Oso Reservoir, El Toro Reservoir, Aliso Creek, Oso Creek, and Trabuco Creek that are
subject to various sources of pollution associated with urban runoff. To protect public safety and
these water resources the quality of our water resources needs to be monitored and protected.
The City of Mission Viejo is committed to minimizing the effects of storm water and urban runoff
pollution. Not only does storm water runoff affect local groundwater, it has the potential to impact
neighboring jurisdictions and the region. Unlike sewage which goes to treatment plants, urban
runoff flows untreated through the storm drain system. Anything thrown, swept or poured into the
street gutter, or catch basin (the curbside openings that lead into the storm drain system) can flow
directly into channels, creeks, bays, and the ocean. The problem is particularly acute during heavy
rains, but can be a problem at any time during the improper disposal of products associated with
business, industry, restaurants, and home, garden, and automotive maintenance.
Management of storm water is a federal requirement mandated by the San Diego Region of the
California State Water Resources Control Board. The Clean Water Act requires permitting under
the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES). The County of Orange serves as
the principal permittee while Orange County Flood Control District and all incorporated
municipalities are co-permittees. The mandate requires the development and implementation of
twelve distinct programs, to the “Maximum Extent Practicable,” which are intended to prevent and
reduce pollution from urban runoff and storm water as these sources are considered significant
contributors of pollutants to waters of the United States. This includes, but is not limited to, illegal
discharges and illicit connections to storm drains, runoff from construction sites, restaurants,
outdoor storage sites, and industrial areas.
GOAL 6:          Promote a safe supply of potable water for community uses.
Policy 6.1:      Coordinate water quality programs with responsible local water districts and state and
                 federal agencies.
Policy 6.2:      Participate in applicable enforcement local, regional, state, and federal efforts to
                 protect and enhance potable water quality.
Policy 6.3:      Encourage the development of new water sources, especially efforts made by the El
                 Toro, Moulton-Niguel, and Santa Margarita Water Districts.
GOAL 7:          Reduce urban runoff flow and the discharge of pollutants from existing and
                 new development.
Policy 7.1:      Ensure compliance with Federal Clean Water Act requirements for National
                 Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permits, including developing
                 and requiring the development of Water Quality Management Plans for all new
                 development and significant redevelopment in the City.
Policy 7.2:      Continue to implement urban runoff reduction programs consistent with regional
                                                                     CONSERVATION / OPEN SPACE ELEMENT
                                                    11                                    AUGUST 19, 2013

                and federal requirements which include requiring and encouraging the following:
                       Increase permeable area and install filtration controls (including grass lined
                        swales and gravel beds) and divert flow to these permeable areas to allow
                        more percolation of runoff into the ground;
                       Use natural drainage, detention ponds or infiltration pits to collect runoff;
                        and
                       Prevent rainfall from entering material and waste storage areas and
                        pollution-laden surfaces.
Policy 7.3:     Cooperate with surrounding jurisdictions and the County of Orange to provide
                adequate storm drainage facilities.
Policy 7.4:     Require new development and significant redevelopment to utilize site
                preparation, grading, and best management practices that provide erosion and
                sediment control to prevent construction-related contaminants from leaving the
                site and polluting waterways.
Policy 7.5:     Coordinate with Federal, State, and local resource agencies on development
                projects and construction activities affecting waterways and drainages.
Policy 7.6:     Limit disturbances of natural water bodies and natural drainage systems caused by
                development including roads, highways, and bridges.
Policy 7.7:     Provide public information and outreach materials regarding proper materials
                handling practices to assist residents and businesses in complying with surface
                water quality regulations and to increase awareness of potential impacts to the
                environment resulting from improper containment or disposal practices.
AIR QUALITY, CLIMATE CHANGE, ENERGY CONSERVATION, AND GREEN
BUILDING PRACTICES
_______________________________________________________________________________
Air quality within the South Coast Air Basin does not presently meet state and federal standards.
Cooperation among agencies in the basin is necessary to achieve desired improvements to air
quality. Mission Viejo can participate and contribute its share to those efforts by proper planning
and participation in regional and state air quality management programs.
In 2006, a new state law known as “The California Global Solutions Warming Act of 2006” (AB
32, Nunez) was approved by the Governor to address the issue of global warming and climate
change. The law requires the California Air Resources Board to adopt regulations regarding the
reporting and verification of statewide greenhouse gas emissions and to monitor and enforce
compliance with this program. The law also requires the California Air Resources Board to adopt
                                                                     CONSERVATION / OPEN SPACE ELEMENT
                                                    12                                   AUGUST 19, 2013

a statewide greenhouse gas emissions limit equivalent to the statewide greenhouse gas emission
levels in 1990 to be achieved by 2020. Greenhouse gas or greenhouse gases include carbon
dioxide, methane, nitrous oxide, hyrdofluorocarbons, perfluorocarbons, and sulfur hexaflouride.
As it plans for future development, the City will need to address air quality impacts on the
environment and seek ways to reduce greenhouse gas emissions.
Most activity in the City depends on adequate supplies and distribution of energy in the form of
electricity and natural gas. The City promotes both conservation of energy and the identification of
alternative energy sources in order to sustain existing and future economic and population growth.
The City’s growing energy conservation programs and outreach efforts offer practical advice on
making homes more energy efficient.
The City has taken a leading role in promoting environmentally friendly energy-efficient and
sustainable development by establishing and implementing a “green building” program. In 2006,
the City Council adopted a two year Green Building Pilot Program. The goal of the program is to
improve the quality of life for Mission Viejo residents through recommendations for energy
efficiency, water conservation, better indoor air quality, the use of sustainable materials, and the
reduction of environmental impacts.
GOAL 8:         Cooperate with local, regional, and state agencies to improve air quality and
                reduce greenhouse gas emissions.
Policy 8.1:     Cooperate with South Coast Air Quality Management District and Southern
                California Association of Governments in their efforts to implement the regional
                Air Quality Management Plan.
Policy 8.2:     Cooperate with the California Air Resources Board in their efforts to prepare and
                implement plans and programs to address the issue of global warming and climate
                change.
Policy 8.3:     Integrate air quality planning with land use, economic development, and
                transportation planning.
Policy 8.4:     Consider future development or redevelopment that mixes homes with businesses to
                minimize the length and frequency of vehicle trips.
Policy 8.5:     Encourage local serving businesses such as childcare centers, restaurants, banks,
                family medical offices, drug stores, and other similar services near employment
                centers to minimize mid-day vehicle use.
Policy 8.6:     Encourage alternate modes of transportation, such as walking, biking, and public
                transportation to reduce emissions associated with automobile use.
Policy 8.7:     Support the development of publicly accessible alternative fuel stations and other
                infrastructure.
                                                                     CONSERVATION / OPEN SPACE ELEMENT
                                                    13                                   AUGUST 19, 2013

Policy 8.8:    Continue replacing city vehicles with alternative fuel vehicles.
Policy 8.9:    Continue to expand the City’s current recycling program with the goal of creating a
               comprehensive recycling program that makes recycling mandatory for all types of
               residential and non-residential uses in the City.
GOAL 9:        Continue to encourage energy conservation programs and site design practices
               that reduce and conserve energy.
Policy 9.1:    Participate in local, regional, and state programs that promote energy conservation
               and alternative energy sources.
Policy 9.2:    Collaborate with energy suppliers and distributors to institute energy conservation
               programs, and inform the public of these programs.
Policy 9.3:    Continue to maintain and update energy conservation programs and information
               provided to the public.
Policy 9.4:    Enforce building code requirements and apply standards that promote energy
               conservation.
Policy 9.5:    Encourage increased use of passive and active solar design in existing and new
               development such as orienting buildings to maximize exposure to cooling effects of
               prevailing winds and locating landscaping and landscape structures to shade
               buildings.
Policy 9.6:    Encourage energy efficient retrofitting of existing buildings throughout the City.
Policy 9.7:    Work with utility providers to provide free energy audits for the public.
GOAL 10:       Encourage building and site design standards that reduce energy costs.
Policy 10.1:   Continue to encourage green building designs for new construction and renovation
               projects within the City.
Policy 10.2:   Continue to evaluate opportunities to enhance the City’s “Green Building Program”
               for residential and commercial / industrial applications.
Policy 10.3:   Encourage designs that incorporate solar and wind exposure features such as day-
               lighting design, natural ventilation, space planning, and thermal massing.
RELATED GOALS AND POLICIES
_______________________________________________________________________________
A number of goals and policies included in the other elements of the City’s General Plan will also
support, either directly or indirectly, the goals and policies that correspond with the major issue
areas considered in the Conservation and Open space Element. Table COS-1 illustrates the
consistency between these General Plan elements by describing related policies.
                                                                     CONSERVATION / OPEN SPACE ELEMENT
                                                    14                                   AUGUST 19, 2013

 RELATED GOALS AND POLICIES
 ______________________________________________________________________________
 A number of goals and policies included in the other elements of the City’s General Plan will
 also support, either directly or indirectly, the goals and policies that correspond with the major
 issue areas considered in the conservation and Open space element. Table COS-1 illustrates the
 consistency between these General Plan elements by describing related policies.
                                            TABLE COS-1
                  CONSERVATION AND OPEN SPACE POLICIES BY ELEMENT
                                               POLICIES BY ELEMENT
  ISSUE AREA
                                                                                  Economic       Growth
                  Land Use  Housing   Circulation  Noise     Public Safety
                                                                                Development   Management
                  2.8- 2.9           3.3-3.8              3.4-3.5
Conserve
                  3.3                4.1-4.7              3.7
Natural                     2.2                                                 3.10               1.5
                  4.1-4.4            5.1-5.8              6.7
Resources
                  9.1                6.1-6.3              8.3
                  9.3-9.4
                  1.3                                     3.1
Protection of                        5.1-5.8
                  3.1-3.4   4.1-4.4                2.1    8.3
Open Space                           6.1-6.3
                  4.1-4.4
Provision of
                  2.1-2.8
Recreational and                                          3.1
                  4.1-4.4            5.1-5.8
Open Space                                                3.8
                  7.3
Balanced
Recreational      7.3                5.1-5.8
System
                                                                                1.1-1.7
Long-Term                                                                       3.1-3.3
Funding
                                                                        CONSERVATION/OPEN SPACE ELEMENT
                                              15                                           AUGUST 19, 2013
                                               1

_______________________________________________________________________________
                                   CONSERVATION PLAN
______________________________________________________________________________
The undeveloped land remaining in Mission Viejo exists mainly in the eastern portion of the City,
as well as a few parcels scattered throughout the City. These lands, on the eastern edge of the City
particularly, offer or represent opportunities for preservation and use. Some of these lands contain
natural resources, some contain constraints that make them difficult to develop, and some provide
potential connections to regionally significant open space uses. The Conservation Plan identifies
those undeveloped lands that contain open space for the preservation of natural resources, open
space for the managed production of resources, and open space for public health and safety. This
element’s goals and policies were formulated as ways in which these lands can benefit the City as
open space resources.
CONSERVATION / OPEN SPACE FOR THE PRESERVATION
OF NATURAL RESOURCES
_______________________________________________________________________________
Figure COS-1 identifies those lands that represent the natural resources in the Mission Viejo study
area. The natural resources include riparian corridors, biologically sensitive lands, steep slopes
(slopes over 30 percent), water bodies, and lands that may contain cultural resources. Most of
these lands are located along the City’s eastern border, still largely undeveloped.
Studies associated with the Foothill Transportation Corridor have identified lands that contain
archaeological and paleontological resources as well as lands that are biologically sensitive. The
lands surrounding the Upper Oso Reservoir contain a high potential for cultural resources that
provide information about the area’s history. The steep slopes along Naciente Ridge provide a
natural edge between developed and undeveloped lands and also act as a transition between
developed lands and the sensitive habitat of the O’Neill Regional Park. The three riparian
corridors that exist within the City occur along the Aliso Creek, north of the Upper Oso Reservoir,
along portions of Oso Creek, and along Trabuco Creek which runs through the southeast edge of
the City. The regionally significant riparian corridors along Aliso and Trabuco Creeks begin in the
Cleveland national forest and terminate at the Pacific Ocean. The City has incorporated the
existing regional corridors into their overall Conservation and Open Space Plan. Riparian open
space also exists along Oso Creek which extends from Lake Mission Viejo to west of Interstate 5.
Water resources are described in greater detail in the Land Use Element of the General Plan which
includes goals and policies to protect potable water resources.
                                                                       CONSERVATION / OPEN SPACE ELEMENT
                                                    16                                     AUGUST 19, 2013


The City has also adopted water efficient landscape regulations. These regulations apply to all new
and rehabilitated landscaping for public agency project and private development projects that require
a permit. The goal of the City’s water efficient landscape regulations is to promote alternative
landscape and irrigation methods and strategies for water conservation. Drought tolerant vegetation
and responsible water management practices are encouraged in order to reduce dependency on the
water supply.
Watershed protection is a regional concern. The City, the County, other local agencies and the U.S.
Army Corp of Engineers are developing a partnership effort to study south county watersheds. Two
Watershed Studies involving Mission Viejo began in 1998; San Juan Creek Watershed and Aliso
Creek Watershed. The City will continue it’s involvement with programs to improve streambeds,
water quality, riparian habitat, flooding, and recreation opportunities.
Properties supporting natural resources will be planned in a manner that recognizes the importance of
these sites to the City and the region.
CONSERVATION / OPEN SPACE USED FOR THE MANAGED PRODUCTION OF
RESOURCES
_______________________________________________________________________________
Currently, there is no managed production of natural resources in Mission Viejo. Figure COS-2
identifies the Trabuco Creek flood plain. Only a small portion of Trabuco Creek runs through the
southeast portion of the City, and is located within the Arroyo Trabuco Golf Club.
CONSERVATION / OPEN SPACE USED FOR PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFETY
_______________________________________________________________________________
As an incorporated city, Mission Viejo must protect the public health and safety. This involves the
identification of lands that pose a threat to health and safety and the implementation of proper
planning techniques to minimize potential threats to health and safety. Figure COS-3 depicts the
lands in the City that require special planning considerations to avoid those potential impacts. These
lands include the 100-year floodplain zones, dam inundation areas, slopes over 30 percent grade, and
Very High Fire Hazard Severity Zone areas. Floodplain zones occur along Aliso Creek, English
Canyon channel, Oso Creek, and the southern portion of Trabuco Creek. Areas that are susceptible
to inundation in the event of a dam failure exist downstream of the Upper Oso Reservoir, the El Toro
Reservoir, and Lake Mission Viejo. The City’s Special Fire Protection Area occurs near the
undeveloped canyons and hillsides in the northern and eastern portions of Mission Viejo. Dry
grasslands and brush provide fuel for potential fires that may threaten development within eastern
Mission Viejo.
                                                                       CONSERVATION / OPEN SPACE ELEMENT
                                                      18                                   AUGUST 19, 2013



The hillsides and canyons in Mission Viejo occur along the west side of Trabuco Creek. These lands
contain slopes over 30 percent that represent a constraint to traditional development practices. The
steeply sloped lands also define the natural landform of Mission Viejo and are an aesthetic resource.
The canyons form a separation and a natural edge between the development in Mission Viejo and the
sensitive lands of the O’Neill Regional Park.
CONSERVATION MEASURES
_______________________________________________________________________________
To protect and conserve sensitive lands that occur within the eastern and northeastern portions of the
City, the following measures will be utilized:
  Grading shall not be permitted on slopes with a grade equal to or over 30 percent except grading
     necessary for the construction of Circulation Element roadways or public improvement projects
     unless a site-specific geologic/soils study indicates that no safety problems will result from such
     grading.
  Archaeological and biological surveys shall be required for any development projects on lands
     identified in this Element as archaeologically or biologically sensitive. Mitigation measures
     shall be developed and implemented to mitigate any significant impacts.
  The following techniques may be used to acquire or dedicate land for open space purposes:
     1. Open Space Easements – pursuant to the Open Space Easement Act of 1974 (Government
        Code Section 51070 et seq.).
     2. Conservation Easements – pursuant to the Conservation Easement Act (Civil Code Sections
        815-816).
     The City may accept or purchase easements from private landowners for open spaces and
     resource conservation purposes. The deed transferring the easement to the City restricts the
     transferred properties use to open space or resource conservation activities.
  The City will participate in regional and state efforts for Natural Community Conservation
     Plan/Habitat Conservation Plan Programs (NCCP)/(HCP) for multi-species habitat protection.
     NCCP is intended to protect wildlife heritage while continuing to allow appropriate
     development. It is a regional program that seeks to protect a particular habitat verses a single-
     species. The City has participated in the NCCP/HCP for Coastal Sage Scrub that targets the
     protection of the California gnatcatcher, the coastal cactus wren the orange-throated whiptail
     lizard.
  The City will work with the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service to pursue grant funding to create a
                                                                        CONSERVATION / OPEN SPACE ELEMENT
                                                     21                                     AUGUST 19, 2013

Habitat Conservation Plan for portions of the City. The City desires to improve open spaces
to assist in the protection of sensitive plants, animals, and their habitats in the City. For
example, the City is specifically interested in the conservation potential of undeveloped City-
owned property along the north side of El Toro Road easterly of State Route 241, 60 acres of
property easterly of Los Alisos Boulevard and Vista del Lago, and property along the east
edge of the City generally located between Alicia Parkway and Oso Parkway bordering
O’Neill Regional Park. In addition, the City desires to provide a combination of conserved
open space and housing or other urban development on approximately 37 acres of City-owned
property located off Hillcrest / Center Drive, easterly of the City’s animal shelter and
Saddleback College. The City is also interested in potential habitat improvements to open
spaces that are not City-owned. The work to be completed includes review of existing
vegetation and species distribution information, information regarding property ownership
and habitat improvement constraints and opportunities, and development of a draft Habitat
Conservation Plan to protect, restore, and manage open space lands within the City while
allowing for needed urban development. The plan will include the placement of conservation
easements on property identified by the City to be protected from future development. The
end point is a draft plan that will be submitted for public review and permitting by the
appropriate agency or agencies. This plan will maintain or improve the status of threatened
and endangered species and assist in eliminating the need for future listings of species under
the Federal and State Endangered Species Acts. Specifically, the plan will benefit the
federally threatened coastal California gnatcatcher and the federally and state endangered least
Bell’s vireo. The plan will also benefit other native plants and animals and be complementary
to the recently completed Orange County Southern Subregion Habitat Conservation Plan.
The City’s plan will be the basis for continued conservation of important biological resources
while accommodating planned housing and economic growth.
                                                                CONSERVATION / OPEN SPACE ELEMENT
                                               22                                   AUGUST 19, 2013


PARKS CLASSIFICATION AND STANDARDS
______________________________________________________________________________
The Open Space Plan establishes a classification system that applies to all existing and future park
and recreation facilities in the City. The overall Open Space Plan is described on Figure COS-7 and
Tables COS-2, 3, and 4. Because much of Mission Viejo developed while under the jurisdiction of
the County of Orange, the city’s park classification system is based on the County of Orange Master
Plan of Local Parks. Specific standards, based on existing parkland, have been developed for each
category of park and facility that address the spatial requirements, function, service area, and desired
improvements.
The parkland policy for the establishment of future parkland is a minimum of five (5) usable acres of
parkland for every 1,000 persons living in the City. Usable parkland acreage must meet the local
parks criteria in the City’s Development Code. Parkland includes public neighborhood and
community parkland that has been dedicated to the City. The City also provides for other open space
land consisting of greenbelts, natural open space linkages between public and private parkland, joint
school/recreation uses, and trails. Standards for each parkland type are summarized in Table COS-5,
along with typical facilities to be provided for each park category.
Mission Viejo is different from many Orange County communities in that the privately-owned
parkland in the city contributes greatly to the City’s overall recreational picture. The largest privately
owned recreational assets are Lake Mission Viejo, Mission Viejo Country Club golf course, Casta
del Sol Golf Course, and Arroyo Trabuco Golf Club as shown in Figure COS-5. There are also
numerous recreational facilities and areas owned and maintained by homeowner associations.
The following is a breakdown of the parkland classification system in Mission Viejo. Parkland is
categorized into mini-parks, neighborhood parks, community parks, open space linkages, regional
parks, joint-use schools, and trails.
Mini-Parks
Mini-parks are small, passive local parks, generally less than one acre in size. Most mini-parks are
established in higher density areas as a substitute for backyards. Size and location are usually
determined by the availability of vacant land. These parks may serve any age group, depending on
the characteristics of the neighborhood. They usually feature a paved area for wheeled toys, benches,
and landscape treatment. They may also feature children’s passive play areas, quiet game areas, and
some sports activities such as multi-purpose courts, if space allows. Some mini-parks are natural
areas with minimal improvements (e.g., benches) which safeguard identified archaeological /
paleontological sites or other natural resources, or serve as viewpoints. Mission Viejo, due to its
suburban nature and relatively low density, has established few mini-parks within its overall park
system. As the City approaches build-out, it becomes more important to take advantage of
opportunities available to the City for the establishment of park space. For example, mini-parks
could be established in areas that lack conveniently accessible parkland.
                                                                        CONSERVATION / OPEN SPACE ELEMENT
                                                     24                                     AUGUST 19, 2013

                                                            TABLE COS-2
                             MISSION VIEJO PUBLIC PARKLAND – EXISTING
 NO.          PARK NAME                           LOCATION                         ACREAGE          FACILITIES
MINI PARKS
1       Aegean Hills Park           25362 Maximus                                       0.5         Tot-lot, play area
2       Castlewood Park             22126 Castlewood                                    0.9         Turf
3       Seville Park                22832 Alturas Drive                                 0.9         Tot-lots
TOTAL MINI PARKS                                                                       2..3
NEIGHBORHOOD PARKS
   4    Aurora Park                 23202 Via Guadix / Marguerite                       8.9         Basketball, softball, soccer/football, volleyball,
                                                                                                    tot-lot, turf
   5    Barbadanes Park             26462 Barbadanes / Felipe                           7.0         Basketball, soccer/football, tot lot
   6    Barcelona Park*             22800 Via Santa Maria / Via Tercero                 3.5         Soccer/football, volleyball, tot-lot, turf
   7    Birchwood Park              21992 Birchwood / Cedarwood                         2.0         Turf, walking trail, picnic tables
   8    Sgt. Matt Davis Park        26210 Camino Largo                                  6.0         Turf
   9    Castille Park               27032 Via Oviedo / Via Victoria                     6.0         Softball, soccer/football, volleyball, tot-lot, turf
  10    Christopher Park            26801 Valpariso                                     2.7         Softball, soccer/football, basketball, tot-lot, turf
  11    Cordova                     26931 El Retiro / Nogal                            12.7         Softball, soccer/football, volleyball, turf, trail,
                                                                                                    tot-lot
  12    Coronado Park               26652 Las Ondas Dr.                                 2.2         Tot-lot
  13    Crucero Park                27672 Crucero / Camorgo                             5.2         Softball, soccer/football, basketball, tot-lot
  14    Doria Park                  24692 Doria / Aurora                                2.5         Volleyball, basketball, tot-lot, turf
  15    Eastbrook Park              21530 Eastbrook                                     4.8         Soccer/football, turf, tot-lot
  16    El Dorado Park              24335 Carrillo / Papagayo                           4.9         Turf, tot-lot
  17    Florence Joyner             22760 Olympiad                                     19.9         Baseball, soccer/football, Olympiad Gardens,
          Olympiad Park                                                                             Plaza of Champions, turf, tot-lot, picnic
  18    Granada Park                27122 Via Grande/ / Puerta Real                     3.8         Softball, soccer, tot-lot
  19    La Mancha Park              26482 Country Club Drive                            5.2         Turf
  20    Linda Vista Park            26601 Pepita Dr.                                    3.3         Tot-lot, turf
  21    Madrid Fore Park            26182 Via Oceano / Marino                           3.1         Basketball, tot-lot, turf
  22    Melinda Park                28951 Melinda / Santa Pola                          8.3         Softball, soccer/football, basketball, tot-lot
  23    Minaya Park                 27552 Minaya                                        3.8         Volleyball, turf, tot-lots
  24    Napoli Park*                27682 Ridgemark / Napoli                            4.0         Soccer/football, turf
  25    O’Neill Park,               24771 San Doval / San Rogue                         3.4         Basketball, tot-lot
          Marguerite M.
  26    Pacific Hills Park          28050 Fieldcrest / Baccara                          7.8         Basketball, soccer/football, turf, tot-lot
  27    Pavion Park*                24051 Pavion                                        5.0         Soccer/football, play area, tot-lot
  28    Pinecrest Park              21310 Pinecrest / Santa Margarita                  15.3         Soccer/football, turf, trails, picnic area
  29    Preciados Park              27033 Preciados Dr.                                 2.0         Tot-lot, turf
  30    Spendlove Park, Bart        25801 Delta Avenue / Po                             7.5         Volleyball, turf, tot-lot
  31    Sycamore Park               25101 Charlinda                                     6.5         Volleyball, turf, tot-lot, play area
  32    Valyermo Park               24091 Valyermo / Oro Grande                         1.9         Softeball, basketball, turf
  33    Vista del Lago Park         27642 Vista del Lago / Marguerite                   5.0         Baseball, softball, basketball, turf
TOTAL NEIGHBORHOOD PARKS                                                              174.2
COMMUNITY PARKS
  34    Alicia Park                 23650 Via Linda / Alicia                           16.7         Softball, volleyball, tot-lot
  35    Beebe Park, William M.      24190 Olympiad                                      9.8         Baseball, soccer/football, skateboard park, tot-
                                                                                                    lot, play area
  36    Curtis Park, Robert A.      24460 Olympiad                                      6.0         Softball, soccer/football, basketball, turf, tot-lot
  37    Gilleran Park, James G.     24960 Felipe                                       15.2         Baseball, soccer/football, tot-lot, play area
     *Joint Powers Agreement with Capistrano Unified School District or Saddleback Unified School District
                                                                       25
                                                                                            CONSERVATION / OPEN SPACE ELEMENT
                                                                                                                           AUGUST 19, 2013

                                                  TABLE COS-2 Continued
                            MISSION VIEJO PUBLIC PARKLAND – EXISTING
NO.             PARK NAME                        LOCATION                   ACREAGE                            FACILITIES
COMMUNITY PARKS (Continued)
 38     Oso Viejo Community Park*       24932 Veterans Way                      52.1         Softball, soccer/football, tot-lot, Oso Creek Trail,
                                                                                             community center
 39     Youth Athletic Park             22056 Olympiad                          41.2         Baseball, soccer/football
COMMUNITY PARKS TOTAL                                                          141.0
RECREATION & COMMUNITY CENTERS
 40     Felipe Tennis Center            27161 Nogal                              9.0         Tennis, tot-lot
 41     Marguerite Aquatics Ctr.        27474 Casa Del Sol                       4.0         Swimming pools, diving pool
 42     Marguerite Tennis Center        23840 Marguerite Parkway                 4.0         Tennis
 43     Montanoso Rec. Center           25800 Montanoso Drive                    1.0         Basketball, swimming pools, tennis, fitness
 44     Norman P. Murray Com.           24932 Veterans Way                       0.3         Community and Senior Center
          & Senior Ctr
 45     Sierra Rec. Center              26887 Recodo                             2.0         Swimming pool, tennis, half court basketball
 46     World Cup Center                27301 La Paz Road                        7.0         Soccer, meeting rooms
RECREATION & COMMUNITY CENTERS TOTAL                                            27.3
OPEN SPACE
 47     Abanico Open Space              27587 Abanco / Hidalgo                   9.8         Undeveloped open space
 48     Colinas/ Escorial Open Space    23361 Trabuco / Via Bahia /             15.1         Turf
                                         Via San Gabriel
 49     Corsica Open Space              Corsica/Napoli Way                       6.9         Undeveloped open space
 50     El Retiro Open Space            El Retiro/Eastern border                 2.0         Undeveloped open space
 51     El Toro Open Space              El Toro Road                            40.0         Aliso Creek Regional Trail, undeveloped
 52     Flamenco Open Space             28097 La Barca                          19.6         Undeveloped open space
 53     Ganiza Open Space               Ganiza & Marguerite                      9.1         Undeveloped open space
 54     Jeronimo Greenbelt              28072 Jeronimo Rd.                      18.0         Walking trails
 55     La Paz Open Space               La Paz & Marguerite                     29.8         Undeveloped open space
 56     Los Alisos Open Space           Los Alisos & Vista del Lago             85.6         Aliso Creek Regional Trail, undeveloped
 57     Loyola Park Open Space          22621 Via Santa Maria                    5.0         Undeveloped
 58     Melinda Open Space              Melinda/Eastern border                  13.1         Undeveloped open space
 59     Mojave Open Space               22561Mojavel Lane                       38.0         Undeveloped open space
 60     Olympiad Open Space             24474 Olympiad                         100.0         Walking trails
 61     Pacific Circle Open Space       Pacific Circle                           8.7         Undeveloped open space
 62     Pacific Hills Open Space        Pacific Hills/Glenwood                  28.1         Undeveloped open space
 63     San Gabriel Park/Open Space     22996 Via San Gabriel                   12.0         Undeveloped open space
 64     Santa Lucia Park / Open         26850 Santa Lucia & Via                  4.6         Undeveloped open space
          Space                         Santa Rosa
 65     Santa Maria Park/Open           22602 Via Santa Maria & Via              3.1         Undeveloped open space
          Space                          Fiesta
 66     Wilderness Glen                 22500 Los Alisos between                82.4         Wilderness Trials
                                        Entidad & Trabuco
 67     Vista Del Lago Open Space       27062 Vista Del Lago                   61.89         Undeveloped open space
OPEN SPACE TOTAL                                                               592.7
   O.S. = Open Space
   *Joint Powers Agreement with Capistrano Unified School District or Saddleback Unified School District
                                                                     26
                                                                                         CONSERVATION / OPEN SPACE ELEMENT
                                                                                                                         AUGUST 19, 2013

                                                   TABLE COS – 3
                          MISSION VIEJO PRIVATE PARKLAND – EXISTING
 NO.                 PARK NAME                         LOCATION             ACRES                 FACILITIES
COMMUNITY PARKS
  68     Lake Mission Viejo                 22555 Olympiad Road              60.0   Water sports, picnic facilities, beach
PRIVATE GOLF COURSES
  69     Casta del Sol **                   27601 Casta del Sol               62.0  Golf course
  70     Mission Viejo Country Club         26200 Country Club Drive         160.0  Golf course, tennis courts, rec. facilities
  71     Arroyo Trabuco Golf Club**         26772 Avery Parkway              206.0  Golf course, banquet facilities
    **Available to Public
                                                     TABLE COS-4
                          MISSION VIEJO PUBLIC OPEN SPACE - PROPOSED
OPEN SPACE LINKAGES
71       Arroyo Trabuco slopes              East of Saddleback College       32.71  Trail, access points to O’Neill Regional
           and blufftops                                                             Park
72       SCE Easements                      SCE Utility Easements from       114+   Trail
                                              northern City boundary to
                                              south of Jeronimo Road at
                                              eastern City boundary, and
                                              from Interstate 5 to eastern
                                              City boundary
73       Oso Creek/ OCTA Railway            Oso Creek riparian area east of   32+   Trail
                                            OCTA rail line adjacent to
                                             Interstate 5
74       Oso Creek – South of Casta del Sol Oso Creek open space from         29.6  Trail
                                              Casta del Sol to Oso Viejo
                                              Park.
    TBD = To be Designed
                                                                27
                                                                            CONSERVATION / OPEN SPACE ELEMENT
                                                                                                     AUGUST 19, 2013

                                      TABLE COS – 5
                               PARKLAND STANDARDS
   TYPE                      SERVICE                                 USUAL FACILITIES
                 SIZE                           LOCATION
                               AREA                                     AND REMARKS
Mini Park    1 acre or    Approximately     In highly developed    Children’s play area,
             less         1/4 mile radius   neighborhoods where    landscaping, picnicking,
                                            neighborhood park-     sports.
                                            land is unavailable
                                            and there are no
                                            other services.
Neighbor-    Up to 20     Approximately     Preferably adjoining   Play areas, multi-
hood park    acres        ½ mile radius     an elementary school   purpose courts, tennis
                                            near the center of a   courts, picnic areas,
                                            neighborhood unit.     open turf area, ball
                                                                   fields, on-site or off-site
                                                                   parking as appropriate.
Community    15 to 50     Approximately 1   At or near the inter-  Ball fields, court sports,
Park         acres        to 3 miles radius section of major or    and other active athletic
                                            secondary thorough-    areas, children’s play
                                            fares near center of   area, on-site parking,
                                            service area.          restrooms and picnic
                                                                   areas.
Open Space   No size      Varies            Along easements,       Pedestrian and bicycle paths,
Linkages     constraints                    flood-plains, steep    natural open space.
                                            slopes, greenbelts.    Generally linear in shape.
Regional     No size      Regional          Within 1 to 3 hours    Hiking, camping and picnic
Park         constraints                    travel time from ur-   facilities.
                                            ban populated areas.
                                              O’Neill
                                            Regional Park.
Joint-use    5 to 7 acres Approximately     Park space adjacent    Playground, grass, ball
with schools              ½ mile radius     to or within a public  fields and multi-purpose
                                            school site.           courts.
Special Use  No size      Varies            Within floodplain,     Private country club,
             constraint                     adjacent to major      golf course, sometimes
                                            arterial, private com- privately owned land.
                                            munity facilities.
                                            28
                                                                   CONSERVATION / OPEN SPACE
                                                                                 AUGUST 19, 2013


Neighborhood Parks
A neighborhood park is any general use local park developed to serve the active recreation needs of a
particular neighborhood within a community. The size of the park depends on the population within
its service area and the extent of the desired amenities, but includes up to 20 acres. Typically,
neighborhood parks have a maximum service radius of one-half mile and are within walking or
cycling distance of park patrons. The neighborhood parks in Mission Viejo feature such amenities as
landscaping, children’s play areas, active ball fields, multi-purpose playfields, game courts, open turf
areas and lighting for night use. In some cases, the neighborhood parks provide off-street parking
and rest rooms. Most of the parks in Mission Viejo are categorized as neighborhood parks serving
individual neighborhoods. However, these parks also serve the needs of all residents. Preferably, a
neighborhood park should be located adjoining an elementary school and near the center of a
neighborhood unit so that it can best serve the pedestrian user.
Community Parks
The community park is typically 15 to 50 acres and is designed to meet the active recreational needs
of several neighborhoods. These parks are intended to serve pedestrian and motorists within a radius
of up to three miles. They contain facilities which require more space than neighborhood parks and
which may include: extensive landscaping; nature areas; lighted multi-purpose playfields for
softball, baseball, soccer and football; court sport facilities for basketball, racquetball/handball and
tennis; swimming pools; and community centers with adequate off-street parking. Community parks
provide the greatest economy of scale in terms of active and passive recreation benefit versus cost of
maintenance and operation.
Open Space Linkages
Open space linkages are usually linear strips of open space along lands such as easements,
floodplains, and canyons. These linkages form trails and open space systems that connect parkland
or neighborhoods. Pedestrian, bicycle, and equestrian trails are usually located along the open space
linkages. Natural open space along hilltops, within canyons, or along riparian corridors form
excellent linkages to other open space. These linkages include undeveloped open space and several
small linear parks throughout the City.
Regional Parks
A regional park does not have any particular size standard. Each is intended to serve a regional
population and usually contains a special feature that the county or city wishes to preserve. No
specific standards apply to this parkland category other than recognition of its unique function in
preserving significant natural ecological areas. Mission Viejo is directly adjacent to the County’s
O’Neill Regional Park along the Arroyo Trabuco. This 2,400-acre regional park provides passive
and active open space for the region consisting of camping facilities, picnic facilities, wilderness
areas, playground equipment, a softball field, a nature center, hiking and equestrian trails, and
parking facilities. The trails along the Trabuco Creek potentially form a regional trail extending from
                                                                       CONSERVATION / OPEN SPACE ELEMENT
                                                     30                                     AUGUST 19, 2013

the Cleveland National Forest to the Pacific Ocean. The Trabuco Creek travels through the
southeastern portion of Mission Viejo. The City may cooperate with the County and other cities in
exploring the potential southerly extension of the O’Neill Regional Park. Five potential access points
from Mission Viejo to the O’Neill Regional Park, shown on figure COS-6, will help to link the City
to this regionally significant open space system.
Joint-Use With Schools
Mission Viejo has established joint-use agreements with the Capistrano Unified School district, the
Saddleback Valley Unified School District, and the South Orange County Community College
District to share in the use and maintenance of park and school playground facilities. These joint-use
agreements allow for jointly funded recreation programming to take place between the school
districts and the City. The City has agreements with the school districts for the joint-use of several
schools and also has opportunities for additional agreements.
The Saddleback Valley Unified School District has fifteen schools in Mission Viejo including three
high schools, two intermediate schools, nine elementary schools and one special facility for the
handicapped. The Capistrano Unified School District has six elementary schools, one high school,
and one intermediate school in Mission Viejo. The South Orange County Community College
District contains Saddleback College. The recreational facilities available at these schools include
ballfields, courts, tot lots, and multipurpose rooms.
Trails
The City has established local trails throughout the City and has participated in the County’s Master
Plan of Regional Riding and Hiking Trails General Plan component. The City has adopted portions
of the County’s Trail Dimension Criteria in the County Master Plan of Regional Riding and Hiking
Trails which establishes standards for trail development.
Local trails consist of the Southern California Edison Easements, the Wilderness Glen trail, the Oso
Creek trail, and the Jeronimo greenbelt. These trails connect parkland and other open space features.
There are also popular walking trails around and above Lake Mission Viejo. Two regional off-road
trails traverse the City: The Aliso Creek Trail, which presently commences at Cook’s Corner near
the Cleveland National Forest and terminates at Niguel Road, at which point the trail joins on/off-
road trails that lead to the Pacific Ocean. The Arroyo Trabuco Trail potentially commences in
Trabuco Canyon at the Cleveland National Forest boundary, extends southwesterly along Arroyo
Trabuco, and joins the San Juan Creek Trail to terminate near Doheny State Beach.
                                                                     CONSERVATION / OPEN SPACE ELEMENT
                                                      31                                 AUGUST 19, 2013


FUTURE PARK SITE SELECTION STANDARDS
______________________________________________________________________________
The City’s Local Park Code (Chapter 9.85 of the Subdivision Code) was adopted pursuant to
Section 66477 of the Government code of the State of California. With this authorization from the
State, the City may require the dedication of land or the payment of fees in lieu thereof, or a
combination of both, for park and recreational purposes as a condition to the approval for a final
tract map or parcel. The formula for park land dedication is five (5) net, usable acres of parkland
per 1,000 residents resulting from a new residential subdivision map or tract. The City has the
option of accepting a fee in lieu of the land dedication which correlates to the value of the required
parkland. The standards identified in Table COS-5 and in the following text, should be utilized in
selecting sites for parks and should serve as guidelines governing the acceptance of land dedicated to
satisfy the provisions of the City’s Local Park Code.
Future park development will focus on expanding and improving existing parks as well as obtaining
easements and property for trails.
Figure COS-6 illustrates the open space opportunities that exist within Mission Viejo. These
opportunities, combined with the City’s existing recreational setting, define the City’s overall Open
Space Plan. The opportunities for additional open space and recreation in the city relate to the
linkage of existing parkland to establish an open space system. The Mission Viejo Open Space Plan
is shown in Figure COS-7. The completion of the City’s Open Space Plan will involve the
acquisition and development of new parkland based on the objectives discussed below.
Neighborhood Parks
Many of the facilities located within neighborhood parks are associated with active recreation. All
neighborhood parks should contain some area for active and passive recreation depending on the size
of the park.
Neighborhood parks should have a minimum parcel size of two (2) acres. Size criteria should
conform to the City’s standards listed in Table COS-5. The park site should contain consolidated
parcels with appropriate area devoted to active recreation such as ball fields, court sports, tot lots,
picnic facilities, swimming pools, community buildings, on-site parking, and passive recreation such
as seat and picnic areas and garden spaces.
Neighborhood parks should be located near the center of a neighborhood unit and, if possible,
adjoining an elementary school. Easy access should be provided to pedestrians, bicyclists, and
maintenance and public safety vehicles. The neighborhood park should serve an area approximately
within a ½ mile radius. However, these parks also serve the needs of all residents. A neighborhood
park should not be separated from its user population by major highways, railroads, or un-traversable
obstacles. A neighborhood park should be situated adjacent to or near greenbelts, open space
linkages, or other community open space/recreation facilities to facilitate an open space system
throughout the City.
                                                                     CONSERVATION / OPEN SPACE ELEMENT
                                                    33                                   AUGUST 19, 2013


Community Parks
Minimum parcel size of a community park should be 15 to 50 acres as they are intended to serve an
approximate radius of one (1) to three (3) miles. Individual community parks should meet the size
criteria outlined in Table COS-5. No specific shape is required for community parks as they are
intended to incorporate both active recreational facilities and passive open space in the form of
unique physical features such as a ridgeline. Community parks should encompass pedestrian and
bicycle paths and natural open space and may be partially linear in shape.
Community parks should contribute to the City’s open space system by connecting to neighborhood
parks through open space linkages or connecting to other recreational facilities. They should be
located at or near the intersection of an arterial near the center of their service area. Community
parks should contain space for active recreational facilities such as ballfields, court sports, and play
areas as well as on-site parking, restrooms, and picnic areas. Also, they might include passive
recreation such as interpretive gardens, seating, and picnic areas. The City will continue efforts to
improve Wilderness Glen Park, a popular park utilized for more passive activities. Further, park
improvements and the completion of the trails system will complete this 82.4-acre park.
Open Space Linkages
The City recognizes the following as future open space linkages in its Open Space Plan as shown on
Figure COS-7:
 SCE Utility Easements from northern City boundary to south of Jeronimo Road at the eastern
     City boundary, and from Interstate 5 to eastern City boundary.
 The slopes which form the westerly side of the Arroyo Trabuco.
 Oso Creek riparian area east of the Orange County Metrolink rail line adjacent to Interstate 5.
 Oso Creek open space from Casta del Sol Road to Jeronimo Road. Developing a trail through
     this open space would connect the Marguerite Recreation Center, and from Via Angelia across
     the creek to the Oso Creek trail. This would connect the Montanoso Recreation Center to the
     Oso Creek trail.
 Los Alisos Open Space which includes the ridgeline open space east of Los Alisos Boulevard
     between Vista Del Lago and Via Noveno and east of Via Santiago.
Future Joint School/Recreation Agreements
Several opportunities exist to establish future school/recreation joint use agreements with the three
school districts in the City. These opportunities are shown on Figure COS-6 by school name and
type. The City will initiate agreements with these schools whenever feasible to enter into a joint
school/recreation use and maintenance program. In general, parks and schools that are located next
to each other are the most likely candidates for establishing a joint use agreement. However, the City
                                                                       CONSERVATION / OPEN SPACE ELEMENT
                                                     35                                    AUGUST 19, 2013

and districts are not limited to adjacent parks and schools.
Trail System
A number of policies included in this element are concerned with the expansion of the city-wide
system of hiking and biking trails particularly those that link into regional trail systems. Precise
development standards for the various types of trails are difficult to establish since trail width and
gradient will depend on topography, surface features, and availability of an easement. The County’s
Master Plan of Regional Riding and Hiking Trails contains trail standards which have been adopted
as part of this element. The City’s trail system includes pedestrian and bike trails within open space
corridors and along regional trails which link to local and regional parkland. The bike ways located
along the City’s street system is addressed in the City’s Circulation element. The five major trail
corridors to be completed, enhanced, and expanded are shown on Figure COS-6 and are as follows:
 Completion of Arroyo Trabuco Trail coordination with County - The County-designated regional
    Arroyo Trabuco Trail connects the Cleveland National Forest to the Pacific Ocean. A portion of
    this corridor travels through southeastern Mission Viejo along the Trabuco Creek. The City will
    cooperate with the County, landowners and other communities to complete and enhance this trail
    and develop linkages from this trail to other recreation and open space features in the City. The
    trail has been implemented from Avery Parkway to the southern City border. The emphasis will
    be to complete the trail from Avery to the north connecting with the trails in Rancho Santa
    Margarita and other City facilities.
 Enhancement of Aliso Creek Trail – The County-designated Aliso Creek Trail also connects the
    Cleveland National Forest to the Pacific Ocean. This trail travels along the northeastern City
    boundary. Linkages will be established and enhanced between this trail and Oso Creek Trail.
 Completion of Wilderness Glen Trail – Local segments along the Wilderness Glen trail will be
    completed and will be connected to the open space system with directions to the nearby Aliso
    Creek Trail.
 Completion of Naciente Trail – The Naciente Ridge runs along the City’s eastern boundary and
    provides an opportunity for the public to enjoy a view of the City to the west and the Arroyo
    Trabuco to the east. Portions of the trail are completed; however, there are possibilities of
    extending the existing trail to the city parks located along Felipe Road and Marguerite Parkway.
    Access to O’Neill Regional Park via this trail may be provided subject to County approval.
 Enhancement of Oso Creek Trail – This local trail travels from Marguerite Parkway, along the
    Oso Creek and the Jeronimo Greenbelt, connecting to the Naciente Ridge Trail along the SCE
    Easement. The Oso Creek Bicycle Trail Feasibility Report identified means of connecting the
    existing Class II bicycle trail along Camino Capistrano in Laguna Niguel with the Aliso Creek
    Trail in North Mission Viejo, thereby providing a new north-south linkage for cyclists. In
    addition, connectors could be provided on the Oso Creek Trail between the Marguerite
    Recreation Center and the Montanoso Recreation Center, and to the Arroyo Trabuco Trail in
    O’Neill Regional Park. Another possibility is connecting the trail to Alicia Parkway and Lake
                                                                      CONSERVATION / OPEN SPACE ELEMENT
                                                     36                                   AUGUST 19, 2013




Economic Development Element
      City of Mission Viejo
                                 TABLE OF CONTENTS
Section                                                                               Page
INTRODUCTION TO THE ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT ELEMENT                                        1
       Purpose of the Economic Development Element                                      1
       Scope and Content of the Economic Development Element                            1
COMMUNITY ECONOMIC OVERVIEW                                                             2
       Historical Perspective of the Local Economy                                      2
       Current Economic Conditions                                                      3
       Projected Economic Conditions                                                    4
       Employment Characteristics and Demographics                                      5
ECONOMIC ISSUES FACING THE COMMUNITY                                                    7
       Land Use Considerations                                                          7
       Land Use Inventory and Analysis                                                  7
       Infrastructure                                                                   8
       Financing and Fiscal Considerations                                              9
       Financial Policies                                                               9
       Mission Viejo Community Development Agency                                      10
       Fee Studies                                                                     11
       General Fund Revenue Sources                                                    12
ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT ELEMENT GOALS AND POLICIES                                        20
       Fiscal Strength and Stability                                                   20
       Modernization and Improvement to Infrastructure and Public Facilities           21
       Enhancing Employment, Educational, and Business Opportunities                   22
       Related Goals and Policies                                                      23
                                           i                    ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT ELEMENT
                                                                               FEBRUARY 4, 2002
________________________________________________________________________
    INTRODUCTION TO THE ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT ELEMENT
________________________________________________________________________
The Economic Development Element of the General Plan sets future direction for economic
development planning and program efforts. This element is characterized under State planning law
as an optional element. This element is a comprehensive update to the City’s first Economic
Development Element adopted on October 8, 1990.
PURPOSE OF THE ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT ELEMENT
________________________________________________________________________
The purpose of the Economic Development Element is to maintain and enhance the economic
character of the community while providing for a stable annual budget. The element establishes a
consistent set of policies which provide general direction on how the community can form
resources to retain local businesses, attract new businesses, support the tax base, and sustain the
ability to provide public services for existing and future residents. The element serves a vital need
by relating community land use and other quality of life objectives with goals and policies directed
to the improvement and strengthening of the local economy.
SCOPE AND CONTENT OF THE ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT ELEMENT
________________________________________________________________________
 The Economic Development Element consists of economic and fiscal goals and policies for the
City. The structure of the City’s economy plays an important role in the physical development of a
planning area and the stability of a local tax base. The Economic Development Element is intended
as a dynamic component of the General Plan. The element is directed at a wide range of economic
issues that will not all need to be dealt with simultaneously, but at various stages of the
community’s evolution and even on a repetitive basis. Therefore, the economic goals and policies
are of such general nature as to encompass the directed scope of specific program efforts described
in the Economic Development Strategy Plan whenever and as often as they must be undertaken.
Finally, it should be noted that many of the research data projections and policies cited in the
Economic Development Element are based on an Economic Development Strategy Report dated
November 2000 prepared by Economic Research Associates.
                                                                       ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT ELEMENT
                                                                                      FEBRUARY 4, 2002
                                                   1

________________________________________________________________________
                          COMMUNITY ECONOMIC OVERVIEW
________________________________________________________________________
This section of the Economic Development Element provides background discussion that will help
guide the formulation of the City’s goals and policies. Included in this examination are historical
perspectives of the local economy, current economic trends, projected economic trends, and
employment characteristics and demographics.
HISTORICAL PERSPECTIVE OF THE LOCAL ECONOMY
________________________________________________________________________
In 1990, the City’s population was 72,820 persons and the community was approximately 75%
built-out. Quality housing, commercial, office and industrial projects constructed at that time
generated a fiscally viable tax base that benefited the City’s ability to provide community
resources. Mission Viejo had a relative shortage of local employment opportunities despite the
City’s proximate location within the employment rich area of South Orange County. A
disproportionately low level of local employment opportunities contributed to long employment
commutes endured by a majority of the resident workers. In 1990, the retail environment in
Mission Viejo was characterized by a strategically located regional mall, commercial community
centers, and over 30 neighborhood and convenience centers, as well as numerous freestanding
retail facilities offering a wide range of goods and services. There were also many vacant and
underutilized properties with excellent freeway visibility and development potential in the City.
The City was well represented in terms of small shops and businesses with the greatest
opportunity for retail development among anchor-related retail sectors including general
merchandise, home improvement, and food stores. Despite a high level of retail representation,
the City achieved less than 75.0 percent of the taxable retail sales potential consistent with the
community’s population base. Reasons for retail sales performance below levels consistent with
Citywide expenditure potential include underutilized commercial properties along the I-5
Corridor, undersized anchor space in strategic neighborhood centers, tactical location of
competitive facilities outside City boundaries, and under representation of certain retail goods or
product strata.
Mission Viejo sustained extraordinary growth in the 1990’s despite the protracted real estate
recession and County of Orange bankruptcy of the early and mid 1990’s. Census 2000 identifies
a population of 93,102 persons which represents a 27.8 % increase in population since 1990.
Major developments since 1990 include renovation and expansion of the Shops at Mission Viejo
Mall, Kaleidoscope retail/entertainment center, Mission Viejo Freeway Center, Home Depot,
four new auto dealerships, expansion of Mission Hospital Regional Medical Center, build-out of
                                                                     ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT ELEMENT
                                                                                    FEBRUARY 4, 2002
                                                 2

Saddleback Technology Park, near build-out of High Park Business Center, Mission Ridge office
complex, and the Mission Viejo Library.
CURRENT ECONOMIC CONDITIONS
________________________________________________________________________
In 2000, the South Orange County market area contained 11 percent of total Orange County
office inventory. During 1999, approximately 433,000 square feet of new net rentable floor space
was added to the market area. Vacancy rose from 5.5 percent in late 1997 to 8.5 percent in late
1999. Construction under way in mid 2000 was expected to add 1,540,000 square feet of new
office floor area. During the period from 1994-1999, the total net addition to floor space was
approximately 407,000 square feet. This amount included the construction of 232,000 square feet
of new floor space in Mission Viejo at the Legacy Partners Mission Ridge project adjacent to the
I-5 Freeway. This suggests that some office floor space fell out of inventory. No new office space
was constructed in the sub-market area for about four years. The sudden significant run-up in
asking rents spurred new construction that was expected to add about 1.5 million square feet to
the inventory. In 2001, the office market has slowed considerably due to changing market
conditions.
The South Orange County marketplace holds roughly 12 percent of Orange County industrial
floor space inventory. An estimated 3.47 million square feet of floor space was added in the sub-
market during 1998, followed by nearly 9 million more in 1999. Also, roughly 0.76 million
square feet of new floor space was under construction. Vacancy rates increased to 16 percent as
additional floor area built in 1999 was added to the market. During the period from 1994-1999,
total net additions to floor space had been about 11.8 million square feet, or a 63 percent
cumulative increase since early 1994. Asking rents increased after late 1995. Huge additions to
inventory now being delivered may result in both capture of tenants from elsewhere and a
slowdown in planned new construction. In mid 2000, the South Orange County market had a 12
percent vacancy rate as compared to a 10 percent countywide rate.
Of interest is the 1999 Retail Sales Analysis Report for Orange County Cities prepared by Ultra-
Research, Inc. dated December 28, 2000. The report is published every year and reports on prior
year data. The report discusses 1999 taxable sales and individual Orange County city 1999
Taxable Sales Analysis. Particular focus is placed in the report on estimating the potential retail
sales leakage (sales tax leakage) or a total taxable retail sales basis and specifically, on the basis
type of retail store. In this context, “retail sales leakage” is defined as the difference between the
total county experience, on a per capita basis, for a particular taxable retail sales category.
According to the report, the taxable retail sales leakage for Mission Viejo has decreased slightly
over the previous year (1998), probably as a result of increased sales at The Shops at Mission
Viejo mall due to the renovation and expansion. The City of Mission Viejo has a sales tax
leakage of 28% (for comparison, in 1990, the City’s sales tax leakage was 39%). The City was
specifically light in the areas of auto dealers and suppliers, eating and drinking establishments,
and home furnishings and appliances.
                                                                         ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT ELEMENT
                                                                                         FEBRUARY 4, 2002
                                                     3

PROJECTED ECONOMIC CONDITIONS
________________________________________________________________________
The strengths of contemporary economic activities in Mission Viejo are due largely to the
proactive initiatives that City management and elected leadership have taken together with the
business community during the past decade. Simultaneously, however, market forces and
technological developments challenge many of the assumptions that things will remain the same.
Big corporations no longer generate job growth at the same scale that smaller firms are doing.
Nontraditional job locations are more prevalent. Economic development wealth is no longer
solely the capture of retail and taxable sales volumes, although it is key to municipal revenues.
The value of residents’ income is what sustains the higher quality, higher value communities.
Hosting and partnership in growth of the small, locally-based, high-growth firms appear to yield
much greater contemporary results in terms of opportunities for employment and in the creation
of clusters of similar type firms in the same environments. The creation of “intellectual property”
has become a leading component of wealth in fields such as design, music, literature, and
consulting services. The electronic transfer of intellectual property is now one of the evolving
imperatives for business growth and change.
Mission Viejo is near build-out and it’s quite possible that the City has arrived at a point where it
meets the demands of the contemporary market. The City will need to attract significant
additional sales volumes from discretionary expenditures by newly arriving residents in the City,
in the “eastern areas” such as Ladera, and elsewhere in South Orange County. The growth in
taxable retail sales has steadily increased since 1990 and should continue to increase due to the
recent expansion of the Shops at Mission Viejo Mall. Also of note are the changes in average
annual sales growth for the period between 1990-1997. The strongest performance has been
created by the sale of building materials and home improvement goods, as well as in the specialty
retail types which are collected in the “other” retail sales categories. During the same time frame,
however, home furnishings and appliance sales, and apparel sales (by apparel stores) have fallen.
All of this contemporary, trend line information, which generally defines very positive retail
business volumes and sales captures by Mission Viejo from its residents and from surrounding
regional residents, is in the process of being challenged by oncoming retail distribution changes.
In the early 1990’s internet retail sales did not exist. In 2000, internet retailing gained at least 4
percent of retail sales. When combined with catalog/TV sales, the amount is approaching 10
percent and will grow. Much of the internet retailing growth lies in the discretionary purchase of
entertainment goods including books, music, video, and the onset of the ability to download such
products directly via electronic communications. This movement directly competes with the
simultaneous rise of urban entertainment centers that feature retail goods and services that are
entertainment driven.
Mission Viejo contains nearly 20% of all office space in South Orange County. While the office
market is slow, it is likely that more people will work at home which could affect future office
development and growth.
                                                                       ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT ELEMENT
                                                                                       FEBRUARY 4, 2002
                                                  4

Recent growth from vehicle volumes on the three primary freeways and tollways (I-5, San
Joaquin Hills Transportation Corridor, and the Foothill Transportation Corridor) in and adjacent
to Mission Viejo is expected to increase as South Orange County continues its fast pace of
development. Continued growth is also expected to occur in new planned communities such as
Ladera situated easterly of the City. Other growth factors which could affect the City’s projected
economic conditions include the future Laguna Niguel/Mission Viejo commuter rail station, fiber
optic network, and telecommuting facility at the Mission Viejo Library. A probable future for
Mission Viejo is the capture of market business volumes due to transportation and rail
improvements in the area and the growth of new communities easterly of the City.
A review of the rough scale of firms in the City by average number of employees presents a
surprising view. Given that more than 75 percent of contemporary job growth comes from
smaller firms, it is important to note that a very large number of the nearly 3,000 firms in
Mission Viejo have modest numbers of employees. Thus, it is important to continue to underline
the importance of a “business friendly” series of policies which will invite and sustain the
founding and growth of small firms.
The jobs that will come from South Orange County growth, which will be located in Mission
Viejo, can be expected from the construction trades and construction technologies, from the
growth of education, and in the utility services sectors. Additionally, higher value manufacturing
and the design and delivery of goods and services will play strong roles in job development in the
City and its immediate environs. It’s anticipated that the vast scale of recent industrial floor space
growth really means that large floor areas in South Orange County are likely to be occupied by
office park type tenants. Highly flexible buildings built elsewhere in Orange County in the past
five years, demonstrate this phenomenon. While much has previously been written about the
clustering of new technologies, the dependability of electronic communications strongly suggests
that new technology companies need not be intensively clustered but, in fact, may create their
own new and oncoming clusters in peripheral locations such as are developing in the South
Orange County.
EMPLOYMENT CHARACTERISTICS AND DEMOGRAPHICS
________________________________________________________________________
Mission Viejo has sustained extraordinary growth during the 1990’s. For the period between
1990 and 2000, the City added 20,282 residents, or roughly a 28 percent increase. Approximately
6,615 of these residents were added through annexation of the Aegean Hills community in 1992.
The median age has moved up by nearly 5.2 years to 37.5. Personal income growth, stagnant or
declining in the early 1990’s, has rebounded. Mission Viejo enjoys strong median household and
median family incomes. The number of employed residents has grown by more than 11,000
persons, or roughly 28 percent, in the period 1990-1998. As of March 2001, the California
Employment Development Department projected a labor force for Mission Viejo of 46,240
persons of which 45,580 persons were employed and 660 persons were unemployed; this equates
                                                                       ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT ELEMENT
                                                                                       FEBRUARY 4, 2002
                                                  5

to an unemployment rate of 1.4 percent. Seventy-eight percent of employed Mission Viejo
residents hold white-collar jobs. Nearly 19 percent of employed residents are engaged in
manufacturing, 15 percent are involved in retail trade jobs, and one third of the employed
residents perform professional and other types of services. The educational attainment of the
work force in 1998 demonstrates a strong 50 percent of the resident employees having some form
of college degree. When all persons with college education are considered, the number rises to 77
percent.
The housing lifestyle in Mission Viejo has continued to be nearly 80 percent owner occupancy.
Indications are that this choice will continue so long as the real estate product is available.
Seventy five percent of all existing housing units are single- family detached homes.
The enormously rapid growth of Orange County has brought renewed vigor in the office and
industrial space markets. By the end of 1999, roughly 6 million square feet of rentable office
space was in inventory in South Orange County. This can be compared to 30.5 million square
feet of industrial, warehousing, and research and development floor space. In the retail sector,
larger property owners have been repositioning regional malls to become newly energized, super-
regional malls including significant commitments to urban entertainment floor spaces. The super-
regional malls all tend to be moving toward high-end retail goods and are also emphasizing
increased “lifestyle” discretionary goods and services and significant entertainment and dining.
The recovery from the real estate recession was rapid in South Orange County until 2001. There
were rapid increases in asking rents for office space and an extraordinary amount of new floor
space being added by construction for industrial usage. Approximately 407,000 square feet of net
additional floor space was added to office inventories during the period 1994-1999, while there
was a 63 percent cumulative increase in industrial floor space since early 1994. Very recent
evidence suggests that industrial floor spaces will be positioned more competitively in the
marketplace in order to secure tenants. In 2001, the market has slowed considerably due to
changing market conditions.
                                                                      ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT ELEMENT
                                                                                     FEBRUARY 4, 2002
                                                 6

_______________________________________________________________________________
                  ECONOMIC ISSUES FACING THE COMMUNITY
______________________________________________________________________________
The economic and fiscal environment characterizing Mission Viejo can be generally described by
the following issues.
LAND USE CONSIDERATIONS
________________________________________________________________________
Land Use Inventory and Analysis
The City of Mission Viejo will be built-out in 2002. As cities mature, it’s expected that
properties will recycle to similar or different land uses over time.
The Mission Viejo Land Use Element provides for 17 land use categories or designations. Four
of these designations are established for residential development, ranging from low density
single-family to high density multiple-family development. Four commercial designations, one
office, one industrial and a community facility category are included. Additionally, a special
intensive overlay designation is provided to allow the most intensive development in the City for
the commercial/office/community facility core in the Crown ValleyParkway/I-5 area. Generally,
the borders of the Commercial Intensive Overlay Area include the Southern California Edison
Easement (which crosses Crown Valley Parkway) to the north, Marguerite Parkway to the south,
Medical Center Road to the east, and the Interstate 5 Freeway to the west. Three mixed use
districts are established to offer some flexibility in providing complimentary commercial, office,
residential, and community facility uses. Parkland and open space areas are combined under the
recreation/open space designation. Major transportation facilities are included in a single
transportation corridor category. The maximum allowable development intensity on individual
parcels of land for commercial, office, and industrial properties ranges in floor area ratio (FAR)
from .25:1 to 1.7:1. The overall intensity of development within the City of Mission Viejo is low,
although certain commercial areas, like those along Crown Valley Parkway are of medium
intensity. For various reasons, not every parcel in the City has in the past, nor will it in the future,
develop to the maximum allowed intensity. The assumed overall development intensity for
commercial, office, and industrial properties ranges in FAR from .25:1 to .50:1. As the City
continues to grow, the City will promote an economic development strategy that maintains the
existing distribution of land uses within the City, while encouraging non-residential activities
that will provide revenue for the City and employment opportunities for existing and future
residents.
                                                                       ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT ELEMENT
                                                                                        FEBRUARY 4, 2002
                                                   7

Infrastructure
By 1999, a significant portion of the built housing inventory had come of age. Approximately 38
percent of the existing housing inventory is between 20 and 30 years old. It is estimated that 30
percent of the public infrastructure is now more than 30 years old, having been built before 1970.
Cumulatively, it is believed that roughly 65 percent of all public infrastructure is now more than
20 years old, having been built before 1980. Indicators of public infrastructure age can be seen
from the dates key educational and economic activity centers opened in the City. In other words,
the City of Mission Viejo is approaching a time when it will need to identify and sequester larger
amounts of public capital for the repair and replacement of the public infrastructure.
The City has been fortunate in the past to be able to fund the City’s street improvement needs
with gas tax, Measure M, and other outside funding. However, the Measure M program has a
limited life. It is scheduled to expire in 2011.
The City is well known for its master planning and development of public, quasi-public, and
private recreation and community facilities and activities serving the residents of the City. These
community facilities include recreation and community centers, athletic fields and parks, golf
courses, riding and hiking trails, regional bike paths, lakes and reservoirs, churches, hospitals,
schools, and government and library facilities. Some of these facilities are over 30 years old. The
City will continue to plan for the recreation and community service needs of the community.
Over time, these facilities will require reinvestment and rehabilitation to meet the future needs of
residents.
The capacity of existing and planned infrastructure needs for water, sewer, telephone, and cable
television has been planned to accommodate future growth. However, the City will need to focus
its attention on water quality management and monitor electricity. The City will be taking a
proactive approach with neighboring cities and the county to address the regional problem of
urban runoff and drainage. Additionally, the energy crisis facing the State in early and mid 2001
appears to be waning. The City relies on the financial stability of the two electric utilities serving
the City (SCE and SDG&E) not only to provide adequate power for its own needs and those of
local homes and businesses, but also as a component of its annual budget review. In calendar
2001, franchise fee revenues paid to the City by the two electric companies serving Mission
Viejo total about $550,000 annually. It is hoped that the State will address long term pricing and
supply issues to avoid the negative effects that either a prolonged electricity problem or the fear
of a recurrence of such a problem could have on the State’s ability to retain and attract major
businesses and industry.
                                                                      ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT ELEMENT
                                                                                      FEBRUARY 4, 2002
                                                  8

FINANCING AND FISCAL CONSIDERATIONS
________________________________________________________________________
Financial Policies
The City prepares an update to its long-range Master Financial Plan (MFP) every two years. The
MFP consists of a trend analysis section (which includes analysis of past trends and comparisons
with other comparable cities) and a seven year financial plan (which projects revenues, operating
expenditures, capital projects and reserve requirements for the General Fund). The plan update
serves as the starting point for development of the following two year budget.
In July 1992, the City Council adopted a set of Management and Budget Policies to guide the
City’s financial administration and to provide continuity for the City’s future through changes in
City Council and/or city staff. These policies are amended from time to time and include policies
related to revenue, reserves, cash management, capital and debt management, operating budget,
employee compensation, capital improvement program, and long range financial planning.
The City’s Department of Administrative Services prepares a Comprehensive Annual Financial
Report (CAFR) for each fiscal year. The CAFR reviews financial and statistical information
about the City including current and projected economic conditions and trends, major
accomplishments and initiatives, and comparable statistical data for expenditures, revenues,
taxes, and debt.
In December 1996, the City of Mission Viejo’s budget was changed from an annual to a two-year
basis. Within the biennial budget cycle are two distinct fiscal years, each of which begins on July
1 and ends on June 30. Funds for these fiscal years are appropriated one year at a time. The
budget is the City’s main financial plan that identifies revenues and expenditures for the specific
types and levels of services to be provided during a specified period of time. The budget serves to
present a clear picture of the types and costs of services the City provides to the public and
provides City management staff with a financial and operating plan that conforms to the City’s
accounting system.
Funding for the City’s budget comes from several different sources. The General Fund is the
primary operating fund. It provides for such basic government services as police protection, street
and park maintenance, and planning and building services. The principal revenue sources for the
General Fund are property taxes and the City’s share of State sales tax. Another fund group is
Special Revenue Funds, which represent revenues legally restricted for expenditures for specific
purposes, such as gas taxes, which are restricted to street-related costs. The City also utilizes
Enterprise Funds, to account for services financed in large part by user charges and for which
income measurement is important. The City accounts for its animal services program in this
fashion.
                                                                      ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT ELEMENT
                                                                                     FEBRUARY 4, 2002
                                                 9

The expenditures within the budget are divided into two groups: the Operating Budget,
representing the costs to deliver basic municipal services; and the Capital Improvement Program
(CIP) Budget, for the acquisition, expansion, or rehabilitation of Mission Viejo’s physical assets.
Operating Budget expenditures are organized by program (i.e. expenditures are clustered to show
the cost of the service being provided, not strictly by organizational units). Each program budget
is in turn further broken down into one or more of the following expenditure categories:
personnel services, operations, capital outlay, debt service, and operating transfers. Personnel
Services reflects the costs of staff salaries, overtime, medical benefits, and retirement. Operations
include the costs of service contracts, consultants, office supplies, small equipment, dues, travel,
and training. Capital Outlay consists of the costs of office furnishings, equipment, vehicles, and
improvements. The Capital Improvement Program Budget represents an assessment of the near-
term infrastructure and other capital improvement needs of the community. The CIP budget is
made up of several different projects, examples of which include sidewalk repairs, rehabilitation
of arterial highways, and structural modifications to City facilities. Longer-range CIP needs are
addressed in the City’s Master Financial Plan.
In response to the Orange County bankruptcy in 1994, the City Council formed an Investment
Advisory Commission. The Investment Advisory Commission oversees the implementation of
the City’s and the Community Development Agency’s investment programs, assuring the
consistency of these programs with the investment policies of both agencies and recommending
changes to the investment policies for consideration by the City Council and the Agency Board.
Mission Viejo Community Development Agency
In 1991, the City of Mission Viejo created a Community Development Agency in accordance
with California Community Redevelopment Law, Health and Safety Code Section 33000, et. seq.
On July 13, 1992, the City Council adopted Ordinance No. 92-86, adopting a Community
Development Plan for the Mission Viejo Community Development Project Area located in the
southern end of the City. The Community Development Project Area encompasses
approximately 1,000 acres of commercial, industrial, residential and public uses. The boundaries
of the Area include properties between Cabot Road and the OCTA Metrolink Railroad right-of-
way on the west and Interstate 5 Freeway on the east, south of La Paz Road; properties along
Puerta Real, Las Ramblas, and La Alameda; and all nonresidential properties in the City from
Southern California Edison easement to the southern City boundary.
The Community Development Plan is designed to correct public infrastructure and facility
deficiencies, and improve the traffic circulation system to accommodate current community
requirements and future economic development. The Plan does not initiate any changes in land
uses nor does it directly implement any specific development proposals. The Plan is intended to
be implemented over a 40 year period.
The City has used redevelopment techniques to partner with private developers and property
holders to achieve the new construction or expansion and modernization of more than 1.6 million
                                                                       ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT ELEMENT
                                                                                       FEBRUARY 4, 2002
                                                   10

square feet of retail space in Mission Viejo. This includes the 215,000 square foot Kaleidoscope
retail/entertainment center, the 290,000 square foot Mission Viejo Freeway Center, and the
current modernizing and expanding of The Shops at Mission Viejo Mall at more than 1,090,521
square feet. Owner participation agreements have also been made with Comp USA, Best Buy,
Lexus, Infiniti, and Saab. Other rehabilitation or financial assistance may be made in future years
to assist local businesses.
The Community Development Agency’s Five Year Implementation Plan (2000-2004) identifies
proposed non-housing and housing programs to meet the Agency’s goals and objectives,
including without limitation undertaking additional projects cited in the Community
Development Plan, to eliminate blight in the community. Non-housing programs include: 1)
improvements to the Crown Valley Parkway Interchange with the Interstate 5 Freeway; 2)
reconfiguring the intersection of Crown Valley Parkway at Marguerite Parkway; 3) completing
the construction of a bridge over the OCTA Metrolink railroad tracks thereby providing a
connection between Camino Capistrano and Cabot Road; 4) construction of the Laguna
Niguel/Mission Viejo commuter rail station at the end of Forbes Road in the City of Laguna
Niguel; 5) widening of Crown Valley Parkway to eight lanes between Puerta Real and Jardines;
and 6) assisting businesses as required for business expansion or development in the Project Area
via commercial rehabilitation and owner participation agreements. Housing programs include: 1)
implementation of a Housing Rehabilitation Program to maintain the quality of housing in
neighborhoods for low and very low income households by providing deferred loans and/or
grants for housing rehabilitation to owner occupants; 2) an affordable housing outreach program
to meet the City’s regional housing need allocation (RHNA) for all income groups with specific
focus on low and very low income families and individuals; 3) a Mortgage Credit Certificate
Program to assist first time home buyers by obtaining a federal tax credit of 15% of the interest
paid on the mortgage to buy a home; 4) a Shared Equity Program to help provide home
ownership opportunities to low and moderate income households through the creation of equity
partnerships; 5) a Development Fee Reduction Program to provide funding to reduce
development fees for the development of affordable and senior housing; 6) a Preservation of At-
Risk Housing Units Program to promote the preservation and retention of affordable housing by
allowing the purchase of federally assisted housing units by housing organizations who will
continue to rent the housing to very low, low, and moderate income persons; 7) rental subsidies
that the Agency will seek to obtain from the Orange County Housing Authority for additional
section 8 certificates or vouchers affected by the conversion of affordable units to market rate; 8)
encouraging the owners of recently developed apartment complexes to finance or refinance the
property/project with Multi-family Housing Revenue Bonds; and 9) work with potential housing
developers (both profit and non-profit developers) to construct new affordable housing.
Fee Studies
The City conducts comprehensive fee studies to identify the relative amount of recovery for the
services provided as compared with other jurisdictions. There continues to be no negative impact
on the City’s finances as a result of Proposition 218, approved by the voters of California in
                                                                      ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT ELEMENT
                                                                                     FEBRUARY 4, 2002
                                                 11

November 1996 (in general, the intent of Proposition 218 is to ensure that all taxes and most
charges on property owners are subject to voter approval). Mission Viejo residents confirmed all
general taxes at the time of the City’s incorporation in 1988. The one City assessment district
(Community Facilities District No. 92-1) is for flood control facilities for which bonds were
issued; it is therefore exempt form the provisions of the measure. The City currently levies no
property-based fees affected by the measure. There has not been a need to increase any general
taxes, nor establish any new general taxes, property-based fees or assessments since the measure
passed.
The City of Mission Viejo has been ranked a “top spot” in California for being known as a
business friendly city with a low cost of doing business. The City does not have a business
license tax or a utility user tax. These facts were noted in the 1998, 1999, 2000, and 2001
Kosmont Cost of Doing Business Survey reports.
General Fund Revenue Sources
The following is an exploration of City revenue sources as identified in the 2001-2003 Adopted
Budget. The total estimated revenues for all City funds combined in the 2001-2003 Adopted
Budget is $92.8 million, and the appropriation budget (operating and capital budget combined) is
$88.2 million.
Property Taxes
Property Tax revenue for Fiscal Year (FY) 2001-2002 is estimated at $10,920,000, a 5% increase
from the prior year budget. Assessed values have continued to grow and will trail any economic
downturn. Property tax represents 31.5% of total general fund revenues in FY 2001-2002. An
increase of 5% is projected for FY 2002-2003 yielding $11,466,000 in property tax revenue
projections.
In accordance with State law, property is assessed at actual full cash value and the maximum tax
is 1% of the assessed valuation. Increases in assessed valuation are limited to 2% per year unless
there is a change in property ownership or major improvements. In FY 1992-1993 and 1993-
1994, the State of California permanently shifted property tax revenues from local agencies to an
Educational Revenue Augmentation Fund. The loss to the City of Mission Viejo in 1992-1993
was approximately $1 million, and the City continues to lose that amount to the State, plus the
growth on that amount, each year.
Property Transfer Tax
The California Government Code authorizes the County of Orange to impose a transfer tax on
real property sold at the rate of $1.10 per $1,000. These taxes are evenly allocated between the
county and the city in which the sale occurs. This revenue source is expected to climb to
$485,700 in FY 2001-2002, representing an increase of 4% from FY 2000-2001 budgeted levels.
                                                                     ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT ELEMENT
                                                                                    FEBRUARY 4, 2002
                                                12

A 4% increase to $505,100 is expected in FY 2002-2003 as well. As the economy cools down,
real estate activity is expected to slow down but maintain a slight level of growth.
Sales and Use Taxes
The retail sales and use tax is collected by the State Board of Equalization. The City receives 1%
of the total based on sales within its jurisdiction; .25% is allocated to the County of Orange, .50%
is allocated to the Orange County Transportation Authority (OCTA) and the remainder is
retained by the State. Due to positive economic conditions in prior years, the State temporarily
reduced the sales tax by ¼ %, from 7 ¾ % to 7 ½ % in Orange County effective January 1, 2001,
but this just reduced the State’s share of this revenue source. This action did not affect the City’s
allocation. Sales tax revenue for FY 2001-2002 is estimated at $12,219,754, a 5% increase over
the prior year budget. Sales tax revenue is expected to increase by 6%, to $12,984,320 for FY
2002-2003. This growth includes two new auto dealerships that opened during spring 2001, the
expansion of a third existing auto dealership, and the final phase of the Shops at Mission Viejo
being completed by calendar 2003.
The City and the Mission Viejo Community Development Agency have formed the Mission
Viejo Community Development Financing Authority, a joint exercise of powers authority, for the
purpose of issuing bonds to fund certain public improvements at the Shops at Mission Viejo.
Debt service on the bonds will be partially paid from available mall sales tax revenue which is
defined as an amount limited to 50% of annual sales tax revenue generated by the renovated mall
subject to the City receiving at least $1.5 million plus inflationary growth on that amount. The
sales tax from the Shops to be devoted to debt service is not included in the above amounts, but
rather in the separate Mission Viejo Mall Parking Lease Fund.
Transient Occupancy Tax
The City of Mission Viejo Municipal Code authorizes the City to levy a tax for the privilege of
occupying hotel rooms and lodgings on a transient basis. This rate has been set at 8% since the
City’s incorporation and is estimated to generate $380,000 during fiscal year 2001-2002, an
increase of 40% over the prior year budget. For FY 2002-2003, no change is anticipated in this
revenue source. The substantial increase in FY 2001-2002 is due to a full year of operations of a
118-room hotel that opened in 2000. Once that hotel is fully operational, revenues are expected
to be constant with only occasional minor changes.
Franchise Taxes
Franchise Taxes are imposed by the City on gas, electric, cable television and garbage companies
for the privilege of using City streets. Each company is assessed between 1 and 5 percent of gross
receipts. This revenue source is estimated to generate a total of $2,021,800 for the city during FY
2001-2002, a 3% increase from the prior fiscal year. This increase is primarily attributable to
cable television franchise taxes due to the steady rise in the number of users as new housing
                                                                        ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT ELEMENT
                                                                                       FEBRUARY 4, 2002
                                                   13

developments are completed and the growing number of services offered by the cable company.
A 3% increase is projected for the FY 2002-2003 for a revenue estimate of $2,089,100.
Electric utility franchise revenue represents about 25% of total franchise taxes. That revenue is
received primarily from Southern California Edison and to a lesser degree, San Diego Gas &
Electric. The fate of those two utilities hinges on the resolution of the energy crisis and the
decisions by the Governor and State Legislature, so it is difficult to assess to what degree, if any,
franchise payments may be affected.
Licenses and Permits
The California Government Code and the State Constitution give cities the authority to assess
certain license and permit fees as a means of recovering the cost of regulating various activities.
Examples of these activities include building permits, several kinds of construction permits, and
engineering permits for grading and inspection services. Anticipated revenue for FY 2001-2002
is budgeted at $756,850, a 39% decrease from the prior year. Revenues from this source are
expected to remain constant during FY 2002-2003. The decrease is entirely in private property
development permits, which makes up 65% of this category. Public property encroachment
permits, which account for 33% of this category are actually projected to increase by 14%.
Revenues generated from private property development were expected to decline as the City
reaches build-out of its planned community in 2002.
Intergovernmental – State Subventions
The California Revenue and Taxation Code exempts motor vehicles and a portion of
homeowner-occupied dwellings from local property taxation. The Code then requires the State to
reimburse cities for tax losses due to these exemptions. The largest source of State subvention
revenue is derived from the motor vehicle in-lieu subvention. A special license fee equivalent to
2% of the market value of motor vehicle is collected annually. Of this assessment, 81.25% is
divided equally between cities and counties and apportioned on the basis of population. The
remaining 18.75% of this fee is distributed to certain cities that lost limited taxing authority when
it was abolished by the State in 1978, with any remaining amounts apportioned to the counties.
The FY 2001-2002 estimate for this revenue source is $4,500,000, a 5.8% decrease from the
prior year budget. That amount is expected to remain constant in FY 2002-2003.
In addition, the State budget for FY 1998-1999 included both a 25% cut in automobile
registration fees and corresponding replacement State subvention revenue such that the effect of
the car tax cut on the City has been neutral. In 2001, the State general fund replacement revenue
represents about 67.5% of the City’s revenue from this source.
Charges for Services
Service charges or fees are imposed on the user of certain services provided by the City, under
                                                                        ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT ELEMENT
                                                                                        FEBRUARY 4, 2002
                                                14

the rationale that benefiting parties should pay for all or part of the cost of that service rather than
the general public. Examples include planning-related services such as design review,
environmental impact review, plan check fees and variance applications; engineering services
such as grading plan check, street plan check and soils reporting; building services related to
construction plan check; and park and recreation fees. Total revenue estimated for FY 2001-2002
is $1,258,420, which represents an 18% decrease from FY 2000-2001. The primary reason is
declining development revenue, although a 32% increase in recreation center and tennis fee
levels is planned during FY 2001-2002. FY 2002-2003 revenue is estimated to be $1,300,420, an
increase of $15,000 from the prior year representing a full year of the planned recreation center
and tennis fee increases.
Fines and Forfeitures
Fines and penalties are imposed for vehicle and parking violations occurring within the City
limits as well as infractions of local ordinances. FY 2001-2002 revenues are expected to increase
to $689,100, representing a 7% increase from the prior year budget. A modest 2% increase is
projected for FY 2002-2003, to $704,200. Revenue from this source has increased in recent
years as a result of increases to the City’s contract with the Orange County Sheriff for additional
enforcement staffing.
Use of Money and Property
Interest earnings make up the largest portion of this category with anticipated revenue budgeted
at $868,000 for FY 2001-2002, a 24% increase from the prior year projections. Actual receipts in
FY 2001-2002 were higher than budget projections due to greater than expected fund balances
and favorable interest rates locked in before rates began their downward spiral. An 8% decrease
is projected for FY 2002-2003, for a revenue estimate of $794,000. The decrease is due to
declining excess funds available for investment and dropping interest rates. Also included in this
category is rent and concession payments earned on City-owned property. Estimates from this
source are expected to be $203,000 for FY 2001-2002 and $213,600 in FY 2002-2003. This
revenue source increased from a budget of $99,100 in FY 2000-2001 to current projections due
to lease revenue from Saddleback Valley Unified School District for ball field lighting at
Trabuco Hills High School, sports field lighting revenue at other locations, non-resident fees for
athletic field use, and projected rent revenue from the new Thomas R. Potocki Conference
Center.
Other Revenue
Projected revenue from other revenue sources is expected to drop by almost 90% due primarily
to budgeted reimbursements from bond proceeds of $1.2 million during FY 2000-2001. For FY
2001-2002, a total of $379,814 is projected. $309,889 is projected for FY 2002-2003. The
largest items in this category include payments from the Lake Mission Viejo Association to pay
for their share of the Lakeside Promenade improvements, contributions from the Shops at
                                                                        ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT ELEMENT
                                                                                         FEBRUARY 4, 2002
                                                  15

Mission Viejo property owner Simon Property Group made pursuant to a development
agreement, and reimbursements from the Nadadores Swim Team for a portion of utility costs at
the Marguerite Aquatics Complex.
Computers/Equipment/Furnishings/Vehicles (CEFV) Replacement Fund
This fund, formerly known as the General Fixed Asset Replacement (GFAR) Reserve, is used to
account for the accumulation of resources and expenditures for the replacement of computers,
equipment, furnishings and vehicles. Contribution levels for the CEFV Replacement Fund are
based on a 100% rate of accumulated depreciation of the current inventory.
Pursuant to City Council action, a proportionate share of interest earnings from the General Fund
is allocated to this reserve fund. Interest earnings based on projected fund balances are estimated
to be $75,942 in FY 2001-2002 and $63,199 in FY 2002-2003. The remainder of the necessary
funding for this comes from operating transfers from the General Fund.
Facility Rehabilitation and Replacement Fund
This fund, established in the 1999-2001 budget cycle, is used to account for the accumulation of
resources and expenditures for the rehabilitation and replacement of existing City facilities. The
funding level for this fund is 60%.
A proportionate share of interest earnings from the General Fund is allocated to this reserve fund.
Interest earnings based on projected fund balances are estimated to be $120,800 in FY 2001-2002
and $101,585 in FY 2002-2003. The remainder of the necessary funding for this fund comes
from operating transfers from the General Fund.
Library Fund
The Library Fund is used to account for the receipt and expenditure thereof of funds restricted for
library purposes only. In FY 2001-2002, $1,810,826 in Library Fund revenue is expected, a 12%
increase over FY 2000-2001 budget with several revenue sources enjoying significant increases.
FY 2001-2002 revenues include $1,295,700 in property tax revenue (up 5% over prior year
budget), $163,226 in State funding, $95,000 in Library fines (up 28%), $51,000 from the Mission
Viejo Community Development Agency pursuant to a tax sharing agreement (up 82%), and
$103,400 from a variety of other revenue sources. Library Fund revenues are expected to grow by
four percent in FY 2002-2003 to $1,885,711.
Supplemental Law Enforcement Services Fund (SLESF)
The Citizens’ Option for Public Safety (COPS) program was established in FY 1996-1997. This
is a State-funded program requiring annual appropriation by the State Legislature for continued
funding. The COPS program provides supplemental funding to local jurisdictions for front-line
                                                                      ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT ELEMENT
                                                                                     FEBRUARY 4, 2002
                                                  16

municipal police services. The allocation for FY 2001-2002 and FY 2002-2003 is expected to be
$200,000 annually.
Local Law Enforcement Block Grant Fund
The Federal FY 1998 Omnibus Appropriations Act authorized the Department of Justice to make
funds available to local governments under the Local Law Enforcement Block Grants (LLEBG)
Program for the purposes of reducing crime and improving public safety. The program requires
ten percent matching funds from the local agency and that the funds be deposited into a separate
interest bearing trust fund. The FY 2000-2001 budget of $86,778 represented two years’
allocation. An allocation of $38,351 is projected for FY 2001-2002, and $42,000 is projected for
FY 2002-2003.
OCTA Fund Exchange Fund
The City of Mission Viejo and other local jurisdictions, including the Orange County
Transportation Authority (OCTA), entered into an agreement supporting legislation to finance an
acceptable plan of adjustment in the 1994 Orange County bankruptcy case. State legislation
provided for a shift of OCTA sales tax revenue to the County of Orange and of fuel tax revenue
to OCTA from the County of Orange. This agreement also asked cities to exchange General Fund
appropriations (earmarked for Measure M eligible transportation projects) for OCTA fuel tax
revenues as part of the cooperative effort. The OCTA Fund Exchange Fund represents Mission
Viejo’s participation in this agreement. The City’s exchange amount for both FY 2001-2002 and
FY 2002-2003 is estimated at $1,356,120.
Gas Tax Fund
The State of California assesses a tax on gasoline purchases as authorized by Sections 2105,
2106, 2107, and 2107.5 of the California Streets and Highways Code. A portion of this tax is
allocated to the City based on a formula established by law. These funds are earmarked for
maintenance, rehabilitation or improvement of public streets. The estimate for this revenue
source is $1,710,000 for both FY 2001-2002 and FY 2002-2003, a 3% decrease from the FY
2000-2001 budget, plus $100,000 in related investment earnings in each year. The City receives a
flat amount of $7,500 annually from Section 2107.5 Gas Tax revenue based on population. The
Section 2107.5 amount is restricted for engineering costs related to street improvements.
Transportation Funds
State, Orange County Transportation Authority (OCTA), and County funding are available for
the construction and improvement of major streets. The City receives an apportionment of
Measure M money and also competes with other Orange County cities based on an application
process for specific projects. The City anticipates receiving $1,078,262 and $1,135,987 in
Measure M local apportionment during FY 2001-2002 and FY 2002-2003, respectively. Another
                                                                     ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT ELEMENT
                                                                                    FEBRUARY 4, 2002
                                                17

$735,000 in other Measure M funding is budgeted during FY 2001-2002 and $34,000 in FY
2002-2003. Projections from the Federal Regional Surface Transportation Program are $277,946
in FY 2001-2002, and $234,855 in FY 2002-2003. The Arterial Highway Resurfacing Program
represents additional Federal funding for transportation; $555,672 is projected for FY 2001-2002
from this source and another $61,881 is expected in FY 2002-2003. State Assembly Bill 2928
approved during the 2000 session of the Legislature established the Transportation Congestion
Relief Fund (TCRF) to provide funding for street and road maintenance (as opposed to
expanding the roadway capacity). An initial allocation of $701,832 was received during FY
2000-2001 to be followed by four annual payments of one-quarter that amount or approximately
$175,000 each year for four years. Total projected transportation funding in FY 2001-2002 is
$2,821,880 and $1,641,723 in FY 2002-2003.
Air Quality Improvement Fund
Assembly Bill 2766 from the 1990 State legislative session authorized a fee on motor vehicle
registrations to fund programs to reduce air pollution from mobile sources such as cars, trucks
and buses. The South Coast Air Quality Management District (SCAQMD) administers the
program, which distributes money based on population as well as for specific requests. The FY
2001-2002 budget of $100,000 represents Mission Viejo’s per capita share. The City’s per capita
share is expected to remain constant in FY 2002-2003.
Community Development Block Grant (CDBG) Fund
In July 2000, the City became an entitlement city and applies directly to the U.S. Department of
Housing and Urban Development (HUD) for its CDBG funding. The primary objective of the
CDBG program is the development of viable urban communities, by providing decent housing
and suitable living environment and expanding economic opportunities, principally for persons
of low and moderate income. The City’s CDBG funding allocation is projected to be $541,000,
in FY 2001-2002, a six percent increase from the prior year. The City’s allocation is based on a
complex formula using ratios of population, poverty, age of housing stock, housing
overcrowding and amount of growth.
Animal Services Fund
This fund is used to account for the City’s animal services operations. The City provides animal
licensing, field patrol and shelter services to the City of Laguna Niguel under contract to that City
and shares the total costs of the program, net of total program revenues, with that city on a basis
proportionate to population. FY 2001-2002 revenue into this fund will include an estimated
$220,700 in licenses and permits, $105,150 in fees and charges, an intergovernmental service
charge from the City of Laguna Niguel for services provided in the amount of $206,453, and
$10,000 in fines for total revenues of $542,303. This represents a slightly less than 4% increase
from the FY 2000-2001 budget. The intergovernmental service charge from the City of Laguna
Niguel will increase to $209,118 during FY 2002-2003 resulting in total revenue of $544,968.
                                                                      ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT ELEMENT
                                                                                     FEBRUARY 4, 2002
                                                   18

The General Fund subsidy in FY 2001-2002 will be $346,850, a 2% increase from prior year
budget, and will increase to $350,848 in FY 2002-2003.
Other Funds
The Senior Center Operating Fund receives the revenue collected from the operation of the
Norman P. Murray Community and Senior Center. These funds are restricted, based on
requirements in the funding for building the center, to be used only to fund Senior Center
activities. Total revenues are expected to be $33,600, a 39% increase from prior year budget, in
each fiscal year. The increase is in line with Senior Center actual receipts that are surpassing FY
2000-2001 budget projections.
The Used Oil Recycling Block Grant is part of the State’s Integrated Waste Management Board
Household Hazardous Waste (HHW) and Used Oil Program which develops and promotes
alternatives to the illegal disposal of household hazardous waste and used oil for the protection of
California’s environment and the health of its inhabitants. Major goals of the program are to
provide the public with convenient collection locations for used oil and other types of HHW and to
increase the demand for new products made from oil and HHW. The Household Hazardous Waste
and Used Oil Program administers a program to provide opportunities for the recycling of used oil.
As part of this program, the Board issues block grants to help local governments establish or
enhance permanent, sustainable used oil recycling programs. The block grant is noncompetitive and
provides funds to establish and maintain used oil and filter collection programs. Grants are
calculated at approximately 32 cents per capita using the State’s Department of Finance population
statistics. Mission Viejo has been awarded $33,473 for FY 2001-2002 and that same amount is
expected in FY 2002-2003.
Mission Viejo Television (MVTV) Fund revenue estimates consist primarily of the one-half of one-
percent (.05%) part of the Cable TV franchise fee which is used to provide public, educational and
governmental (PEG) access to cable television programming. The City retains this funding and, in a
joint effort with Saddleback Valley Unified School District, provides such programming. For FY
2001-2002, MVTV projected revenue is $108,300, a 19% increase over prior year budget, and for
FY 2002-2003 that amount is $111,200. Budget projections for the next two fiscal years are in line
with FY 2000-2001 actual receipts.
Mission Viejo Mall Parking Lease Fund: As discussed earlier in the Sales Tax section, the City and
the Agency have formed the Mission Viejo Community Development Financing Authority (the
“Authority”), a joint exercise of powers authority, for the purpose of issuing bonds to fund certain
public improvements at the Mission Viejo Mall. Debt service on the bonds will be partially paid
from available mall sales tax revenue which is defined as an amount limited to 50% of annual sales
tax revenue generated by the renovated mall, subject to the City receiving at least $1.5 million. This
fund accounts for the receipt of the portions of mall sales tax available to pay debt service on the
mall bonds, and the disbursement thereof to the Authority’s bond trustee. In FY 2001-2002,
$1,427,532 is expected from this source and $1,559,565 is expected in FY 2002-2003. Projections
are based on consultant- developed projections related to Mall bond debt service, of 4.84% growth
in retail sales tax activity at the Shops in each of calendar years 2001 and 2002.
                                                                      ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT ELEMENT
                                                                                       FEBRUARY 4, 2002
                                                  19

_______________________________________________________________________________
      ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT ELEMENT GOALS AND POLICIES
_______________________________________________________________________________
The goals and polices of this element address highly tangible fiscal requirements for the community
plus other less tangible, but equally important, economic and social needs. All aspects of the stated
economic objectives may not be mutually consistent. For instance, maximizing fiscally efficient
land use developments (hotel, highway commercial, restaurants, etc.) may hamstring the City’s
ability to achieve a greater balance of viable local employment opportunities for residents
(administrators, engineers, accountants, etc.). Likewise, the City must maintain and provide for
sound fiscal operations over the long run or jeopardize the loss of many valid community services
and benefits as a result of imprudent fiscal planning. Consequently, diverse development and
lifestyle objectives of the community must be balanced so that the overall economic objective is
realized. The following goals and policies focus on achieving and maintaining a fiscally stable
economic base, planning for modernization and improvement to the City’s infrastructure and public
facilities, and enhancing employment, educational, and business opportunities in the community.
FISCAL STRENGTH AND STABILITY
________________________________________________________________________
The City’s ability to provide the community with a quality level of public services hinges on its
ability to maintain strong fiscal operations, secure State and Federal funds for qualifying programs,
and use all available resources wisely and efficiently. The general fund operating budget represents
a primary funding source for all public services. It is also the funding source most directly affected
by local policy decisions involving administration, planning, and development. In effect, the City’s
fiscal strength and stability over the long run will be greatly influenced by land use and
development decision of the past and present. For these reasons, the following goal and policies are
established:
GOAL 1:          Provide for the long-term fiscal stability of the community.
Policy 1.1:      Maintain a stable revenue base that is promoted by a diversified economic base
                 (diversity yields stability).
Policy 1.2:      Adopt a balanced budget.
Policy 1.3:      Maintain a balance between pay-as-you-go financing and debt financing for
                 capital projects.
Policy 1.4:      Maintain prudent levels of reserves.
                                                                       ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT ELEMENT
                                                                                       FEBRUARY 4, 2002
                                                  20

Policy 1.5:     Consider fiscal benefits of large-scale development projects or other projects that
                include a major change in land use type.
Policy 1.6:     Periodically review policies and continue to prepare financial reports to serve as a
                guide for planning and administration of the City’s financial resources including,
                but not limited to, Management and Budget Policies, Investment Policies, long-
                range Master Financial Plan, the budget document, and the Comprehensive
                Annual Financial Report.
Policy 1.7:     Continue to periodically conduct comprehensive updates to the City’s fee
                schedules.
MODERNIZATION AND IMPROVEMENT
TO INFRASTRUCTURE AND PUBLIC FACILITIES
________________________________________________________________________
Much of the City’s public right-of-way, utilities, community facilities, and housing stock are
aging. All were built to capture a market that desired very high quality residential living at low
density. The costs of maintenance and repairs are increasing. The costs of major rehabilitation
and replacement will be arriving with even great fiscal impacts in the next decade. The
community will be faced with a need for a consistent and sophisticated public works financing
strategy. For these reasons, the following goal and policies are established:
GOAL 2:         Plan for modernization and improvement to the City’s infrastructure and
                public facilities.
Policy 2.1:     Develop and maintain public facilities, infrastructure, and fiber optic network to
                encourage business recruitment, support future demand, and ensure an adequate
                supply.
Policy 2.2:     Achieve sustainable economic development by limiting growth to that which is
                compatible with the carrying capacity of the environment and the service
                infrastructure.
Policy 2.3:     Explore additional traditional and nontraditional funding sources that can be used
                for necessary rehabilitation, improvement, and replacement to the City’s
                infrastructure and public facilities.
Policy 2.4:     Continue to prepare updates to the Seven-Year Public Works Capital
                Improvement Program to be utilized as a long-range planning tool in identifying
                future capital improvement projects that will improve the performance of the
                City’s transportation system.
                                                                      ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT ELEMENT
                                                                                     FEBRUARY 4, 2002
                                                   21

Policy 2.5:     Continue to plan for and periodically update the City’s Facility Rehabilitation and
                Replacement Fund.
ENHANCING EMPLOYMENT, EDUCATIONAL, AND BUSINESS OPPORTUNTIES
________________________________________________________________________
The quality of life for residents of any community not only depends on the physical setting and
social amenities afforded to individuals and families while at home, but also on the convenience
and availability of adequate job opportunities to support their home lifestyle. Although the long
and tiresome work commute has become more and more prevalent throughout Southern
California and other metropolitan economies, increased traffic congestion, time lost en route, and
associated daily stress undermine the positive benefits of a quality physical home style
environment for many working residents of the community. Increasing the availability of local
employment opportunities consistent with local labor skills affords residents with realistic
alternatives to enhance their quality of life within the community. Likewise, increased business
investment can enhance the local economic base and breadth of land use activities available to
support fiscal operating requirements of the City. For these reasons, the following goal and
policies are established:
GOAL 3:         Enhance employment, educational, and business opportunities in the
                community.
Policy 3.1:     Encourage long-term partnerships between the City, businesses, business
                organizations and the educational, arts, and environmental communities.
Policy 3.2:     Develop a business retention and recruitment program including permit assistance
                and other incentives, especially for those businesses that offer important public
                benefits and make significant contributions to the local economy.
Policy 3.3:     Enhance recruitment and retention factors that attract employees such as
                ambiance, educational, cultural, recreational, and environmental resources.
Policy 3.4:     Support job evolution and development strategies that promote the City as a
                desired location for small businesses, for technical training, and for oncoming
                types of commerce and industry that rely upon the rapidly exploding goods and
                services markets supported by electronic communication.
Policy 3.5:     Support frameworks for small businesses, entrepreneurs, and office-at-home
                enterprises through technical assistance, venture capital, and business services.
Policy 3.6:     Encourage mutually reinforcing businesses to locate near one another.
Policy 3.7:     Promote cultural amenities and facilitate community-based events.
                                                                      ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT ELEMENT
                                                                                      FEBRUARY 4, 2002
                                                 22

Policy 3.8:     Coordinate local programs with regional programs for economic development.
Policy 3.9:     Provide opportunities for low and moderate income families and individuals.
Policy 3.10:    Implement and periodically update the City’s Economic Development Strategy
                plan.
Policy 3.11:    Continue support and partnership with the Mission Viejo Chamber of Commerce
                to attract, promote, and encourage economic development in the City.
Policy 3.12:    Continue to reinforce the City’s existing strengths of being a major hub for retail
                commercial, health care, and public education facilities in the South Orange
                County region.
RELATED GOALS AND POLICES
________________________________________________________________________
The goals and policies contained in other elements of the City’s General Plan are also important
in addressing economic development issues. The Land Use Element provides the commercial,
business park and office-professional land use designations that define geographic locations
where economic development will occur. City services, which can be enhanced by economic
development, are described in the Circulation and Public Facilities Elements. Table ED-1
identifies the policies within this Element and how these policies relate to the other elements
within the General Plan.
                                                                     ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT ELEMENT
                                                                                    FEBRUARY 4, 2002
                                                 23

                                                        TABLE ED-1
                         ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT POLICIES BY ELEMENT
                                                         POLICIES BY ELEMENT
  ISSUE AREA          Land         Housing   Circulation   Conservation Public    Noise    Public         Growth
                       Use                                 / Open Space  Safety           Facilities   Management
Provide for the      1.1-1.3,      4.1       1.13          5.1-5.5      4.3-4.4          1.1-1.3,      2.1
long-term fiscal     2.8                                                                 4.1,
stability of the                                                                         5.1-5.6
community
Plan for                                     1.1-1.3,
modernization        1.1-1.3,      4.1                                                   6.1-6.3,      2.1-2.3
and                                          1.7                                         7.1-7.4
improvement to       2.1-2.9
the City’s
infrastructure
and public
facilities
Enhance                                                                 4.1-4.2                        3.1
employment,          1.1-1.3,      1.2, 1.4, 1.10-1.17,                          2.1-
educational,         2.10-         1.5,      2.1-2.5,                            2.4     3.1-3.3
and business         2.13,         3.5-3.7   3.1-3.8,
opportunities in
the community        2.16                    4.1-4.7,
                                             7.1-7.3
    Page revised November 17, 2003
                                                                                ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT ELEMENT
                                                                                                 FEBRUARY 4, 2002
                                                             24

Growth Management Element
      City of Mission Viejo
                               TABLE OF CONTENTS
Section                                                                               Page
INTRODUCTION TO THE GROWTH MANAGEMENT ELEMENT                                            1
       Purpose of the Growth Management Element                                          1
       Related Plans and Programs                                                        2
       Scope and Content of Element                                                      6
GROWTH MANAGEMENT ELEMENT GOALS AND POLICIES                                             7
       Transportation Capacity                                                           7
       Development Mitigation, Phasing, and Monitoring                                   8
       Traffic Impacts Generated from Development Outside the City                      10
       Area-Wide Traffic Congestion                                                     11
       Jobs / Housing Balance                                                           12
       Growth Management Areas (Figure GM-1)                                            13
RELATED GOALS AND POLICIES                                                              14
       Growth Management Policies by Element (Table GM-1)                               14
THE GROWTH MANAGEMENT PLAN                                                              15
       Growth Management Element and Plan Framework                                     15
       Growth Management Element / Plan Framework for Implementation (Table GM-2) 17
                                        i                        GROWTH MANAGEMENT ELEMENT
                                                                               February 2, 2004
______________________________________________________________________________
     INTRODUCTION TO THE GROWTH MANAGEMENT ELEMENT
______________________________________________________________________________
The City of Mission Viejo Growth Management Element responds to a mandatory requirement
that all Orange County jurisdictions adopt a Growth Management Element to its General Plan.
This mandatory requirement results from the 1990 passage of the Revised Traffic Improvement
and Growth Management Ordinance, also known as Measure M, by Orange County voters.
Pursuant to the provisions of Measure M and in accordance with the requirements of a developed
jurisdiction as defined by Measure M, this Element mandates that growth and development be
based upon the City’s ability to provide an adequate circulation system.
This element outlines goals and policies to implement effective growth management in the City
of Mission Viejo, to ensure that the capacity of the City’s transportation infrastructure, and the
levels of service standards adopted by the City, are assessed in conjunction with new
development proposals within and outside the boundaries of the City.
This element is a comprehensive update to the City’s first Growth Management Element adopted
on April 27, 1992.
PURPOSE OF THE GROWTH MANAGEMENT ELEMENT
______________________________________________________________________________
The purpose of the Growth Management Element is to ensure that land use decisions include an
assessment of how the additional traffic generated by proposed new development, will impact
transportation capacity and levels of service conditions on the city’s existing and planned
circulation system.
The Growth Management Element establishes a set of policies which provide direction on how
the community can ensure that its transportation system can service new development while
maintaining its traffic levels of service standards.
In summary, the goals of this Element are to:
 Manage traffic congestion to maintain city-established levels of service standards;
 Maintain levels of service standards by requiring new development to contribute its fair
    share towards identified traffic improvements;
 Phase new development in concert with roadway infrastructure provision;
                                                   1
                                                                       GROWTH MANAGEMENT ELEMENT
                                                                                       February 2, 2004

 Ensure that new development located in neighboring jurisdictions are analyzed to identify
    and mitigate traffic impacts upon city streets;
 Participate with neighboring jurisdictions to address areawide and regional traffic congestion
    issues; and,
 Strive towards achieving balanced land uses in residential, nonresidential and public land
    uses.
The Growth Management Element responds to the provisions of the Orange County Measure M
Growth Management Program and the statewide Congestion Management Program (CMP) in
addressing land use impacts upon transportation systems.
RELATED PLANS AND PROGRAMS
______________________________________________________________________________
Orange County Division, League of California Cities Countywide Traffic Improvement
and Growth Management Program
On November 6, 1990, Orange County voters approved Measure M, the Revised Traffic
Improvement and Growth Management Ordinance, providing the funding for needed countywide
transportation improvements. Measure M authorized the imposition of a 1/2 cent retail
transaction and use tax for a period of twenty years effective April 1, 1991.
Annually, 14.6 percent of the Measure M net tax revenue shall be made available to eligible
Orange County jurisdictions, for street maintenance and transportation improvement projects and
programs. This apportionment, referred to as the Measure M “turnback,” is apportioned to each
jurisdiction by applying a formula using population, miles of Master Plan of Arterial Highways
roadways, and taxable sales. To maintain eligibility for receipt of the Measure M turnback funds,
each Orange County jurisdiction is required to annually comply with specific requirements
outlined in the Measure M Ordinance, including adopting a Growth Management Element to its
General Plan and implementing a Growth Management Plan.
The Countywide Traffic Improvement and Growth Management Program is designed to achieve
a cooperative process among Orange County local jurisdictions to coordinate and implement
traffic improvements and stronger planning on a countywide basis, while also maintaining local
authority over land use decisions and establishing transportation performance standards.
The Countywide Traffic Improvement and Growth Management Program states that each
jurisdiction is to adopt a Growth Management Element of its General Plan, with its provisions to
be applied in the development review process. Growth management provisions that are required
to be included in the General Plan are as follows:
                                                  2
                                                                        GROWTH MANAGEMENT ELEMENT
                                                                                      February 2, 2004

   Specify Traffic Level of Service (LOS) standards;
   Adopt a Development Mitigation Program;
   Adopt a Development Phasing and Annual Monitoring Program; and,
   Participate in inter-jurisdictional planning forums.
In addition, local jurisdictions are required to:
 Address balanced housing opportunities and jobs opportunities; and
 Adopt a transportation demand management ordinance.
These provisions are addressed in the goals, policies and implementation programs outlined in
the Growth Management Element.
Orange County Congestion Management Program
With the passage of the June 1990 gas tax increase (Proposition 111), urbanized areas in the
State with a population of 50,000 or more are required to adopt a Congestion Management
Program (CMP). In 1991, a majority of Orange County local jurisdictions designated the Orange
County Transportation Authority (OCTA) as the Congestion Management Agency for Orange
County, with said agency responsible for developing, monitoring and biennially updating Orange
County’s CMP.
The goals of Orange County’s CMP, as required by the Government Code, are to reduce traffic
congestion and to provide a mechanism for analyzing and coordinating land use and development
decisions upon a defined circulation network called the CMP Highway System. In the City of
Mission Viejo, the CMP Highway System includes Interstate 5, the Foothill Transportation
Corridor, El Toro Road, and Crown Valley Parkway. The Orange County CMP also identifies
Levels of Service Standards for the CMP Highway System, and a traffic analysis process and
methodology by which to analyze the impacts of land use decisions upon the CMP Highway
System. Every two years, local jurisdictions are required to report compliance with the
provisions of the Orange County CMP, as a prerequisite to receiving state gas tax funds.
The Measure M Ordinance recognizes the similarity of its goals and implementation strategies to
the Orange County CMP, and required that the Measure M Growth Management Program be
reconciled with the Congestion Management Program to minimize duplication.                       The
reconciliation processes and methodologies have been established. The policies and objectives
contained in the City of Mission Growth Management Element are consistent with both
programs, and the applicable implementation requirements identified in the City of Mission
Viejo Growth Management Plan are consistent with both programs.
                                                   3
                                                                     GROWTH MANAGEMENT ELEMENT
                                                                                      February 2, 2004

State and Federal Highway System
Although the Growth Management Element places specific emphasis on the phasing of arterial
highway improvements commensurate with development, the County’s overall transportation
system is greatly influenced by the federal and state highway system. Thus, any growth
management plan must also recognize the existing federal and state highway system in policy
development and plan implementation.
The Orange County Master Plan of Arterial Highways (MPAH) defines a network of countywide
surface roadways comprising freeways, transportation corridors, and five main arterial highway
classifications. The Orange County MPAH is intended to support and serve existing and General
Plan adopted land uses in both incorporated and unincorporated areas of the County. The arterial
system is designed to serve as part of a balanced transportation system (autos, rail, transit, trucks,
buses, bicycles, pedestrians). The arterial system provides for both through movement and
collector functions. Principal, major and primary arterial highways are intended to accommodate
intra-regional traffic and complement both the federal and state highway system and the local
street network. Secondary arterials and collector arterials serve a collector function, which
funnel traffic from local streets to the principal, major and primary arterial system.
As congestion continues to increase on the federal and state highway system and as construction
activity commences on the federal and state highway system, more drivers are utilizing the
arterial system as alternative routes, particularly those arterials paralleling freeways, or those
arterials serving the same trip destination as the freeways. Consequently, some of these arterials
are becoming increasingly congested in the City of Mission Viejo. This situation is of special
concern on those arterials which provide access to the freeway system.
Mission Viejo General Plan
The Growth Management Element is closely related to the goals, policies plans and programs
outlined in other Mission Viejo General Plan elements. The Land Use Element, for example,
contains policies to ensure the proper timing of infrastructure in relation to anticipated demand,
and requires new development to contribute to its fair share of necessary public services and
facilities.
The Circulation Element ensures efficiencies of roadways by identifying levels of service
standards for arterial streets; requiring the conduct of traffic impact analyses for new
development; and promoting transportation demand strategies to reduce congestion.
Table GM-1 outlines adopted policies from other Mission Viejo General Plan elements which
relate to the provisions and implementation of the Growth Management Element.
                                                    4
                                                                         GROWTH MANAGEMENT ELEMENT
                                                                                         February 2, 2004

California Environmental Quality Act Law and Guidelines
The California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) was adopted by the State legislature in
response to a public mandate, calling for thorough environmental analysis of projects that might
adversely affect the environment. The provisions of the law, project review procedure, and
subsequent analysis are described in the CEQA Law and Guidelines. The CEQA Guidelines are
found in Title 14 of the California Code of Regulations, commencing at Section 15000. As
identified in the Growth Management Plan, the environmental process is a key mechanism in
identifying transportation impacts and ensuring appropriate mitigation to any impacted facilities.
Related Agencies’ Plans and Programs
Other adopted plans and programs which relate to growth management include:
 County Master Plan of Arterial Highways, administered by OCTA;
 Foothill Circulation Phasing Program, administered by the County of Orange;
 Foothill, San Joaquin Hills, and Eastern Transportation Corridors, administered by the
    Transportation Corridor Agencies; and,
 Orange County Congestion Management Program, administered by OCTA.
                                                5
                                                                      GROWTH MANAGEMENT ELEMENT
                                                                                      February 2, 2004

SCOPE AND CONTENT OF ELEMENT
______________________________________________________________________________
The Growth Management Element is organized into two main sections: The Growth
Management Goals and Policies, and the Growth Management Plan. The goals encompass five
key issue areas to plan and provide for traffic improvements in the City, in concert with orderly
growth and development both within and outside the jurisdictional boundaries of the City.
Policies are identified for each goal. These policies establish direction to achieve the stated
goals.
Recognizing that the goals and policies are general in nature, the Growth Management Plan then
discusses and illustrates the framework of actions and mechanisms that can be employed to
execute the stated goals and policies.
                                                 6
                                                                      GROWTH MANAGEMENT ELEMENT
                                                                                     February 2, 2004
__________________________________________________________________
        GROWTH MANAGEMENT ELEMENT GOALS AND POLICIES
______________________________________________________________________________
This section contains five goals and their associated policies to achieve responsible growth that
recognizes the availability and capacity of the existing and planned transportation infrastructure
system.
TRANSPORTATION CAPACITY
______________________________________________________________________________
A well-planned transportation system facilitates the movement of people, products, and vehicles
and provides safe and convenient access to the community and surrounding areas. The City of
Mission Viejo has analyzed citywide circulation needs in conjunction with the adoption of its
General Plan land use and circulation elements, and has identified levels of service standards for
its arterial streets. To maintain these levels of service standards, the City requires development
projects to conduct project-specific traffic assessments to determine the impacts of the project’s
additional trips upon the existing and planned circulation system; and, identify appropriate
mitigation to achieve additional roadway capacity that would manage congestion and maintain
desirable levels of service. Further, the requirement to analyze the impacts of land use decisions
upon the local and regional transportation systems and to mitigate identified impacts achieves
provisions of the statewide Congestion Management Program and the Orange County Measure M
Growth Management Program.
GOAL 1:           Manage traffic congestion to maintain city-established levels of service
                 standards.
Policy 1.1:      Establish a Level of Service (LOS) standard of LOS “D” or better at arterial
                 intersections under the sole control of the City of Mission Viejo. Along Crown
                 Valley Parkway and El Toro Road—roadways on the adopted Congestion
                 Management Program Highway System–establish a Level of Service (LOS)
                 standard of LOS “E” for Crown Valley Parkway and El Toro Road arterial
                 intersections.
Policy 1.2:      Require applicable development projects to evaluate potential traffic impacts upon
                 the circulation system and upon established levels of service standards, both
                 within and outside the city’s jurisdictional boundaries, in accordance with the
                 traffic impact analysis procedures established by the Orange County Congestion
                 Management Program and Measure M Growth Management Program provisions.
                                                  7
                                                                        GROWTH MANAGEMENT ELEMENT
                                                                                         February 2, 2004

Policy 1.3:     Participate in Measure M Growth Management Area (GMA) multi-jurisdictional
                planning forums to identify existing and projected land uses and necessary
                transportation improvements supporting each jurisdiction’s General Plan
                development at the GMA level.
Policy 1.4:     Annually adopt and implement a Seven Year Capital Improvement Program to
                plan for transportation capacity improvements and programs.
Policy 1.5:     Promote traffic reduction strategies for new development through the City’s
                Transportation Demand Management (TDM) regulations.
DEVELOPMENT MITIGATION, PHASING AND MONITORING
______________________________________________________________________________
To conduct responsible land use and transportation planning, the City of Mission Viejo
recognizes that a local jurisdiction must understand how the additional traffic generated by new
development will impact transportation levels of service within and outside the jurisdiction’s
boundaries.
Through this assessment, a local jurisdiction can subsequently identify circulation improvements
that are necessary to accommodate the increased traffic and maintain the Levels of Service goals
established in the Growth Management Element.
As capacity improvement needs are identified, the City shall then ensure that new development
pay its fair share contribution towards the identified transportation improvements. This forms
the basis of Development Mitigation, as required by the Measure M Growth Management
Program.
The Measure M Growth Management Program further requires that local jurisdictions ensure that
transportation infrastructure is added as development proceeds, so that circulation improvements
are in balance with traffic demand. This requirement is known as Development Phasing.
Development Phasing requirements apply strictly to those roadway improvements that are under
the sole control of a city. Any roadway improvements located outside the city, that are identified
as necessary to accommodate new development within a city, are not subject to phasing
requirements.
An annual assessment of the status of improvements delivery comprises the Development
Monitoring requirements of Measure M.
These three Measure M requirements: Development Mitigation, Development Phasing, and
Development Monitoring, are integrated in the following goals and policies of the Growth
Management Element:
                                                  8
                                                                      GROWTH MANAGEMENT ELEMENT
                                                                                      February 2, 2004

GOAL 2:         Maintain levels of service standards on city roadways by requiring new
                development to pay its fair share towards circulation improvements needed
                to accommodate project traffic (Development Mitigation).
Policy 2.1:     Require new development to identify transportation improvements necessary to
                maintain adopted levels of service standards resulting from the additional traffic
                generated from new development.
Policy 2.2:     Require new development to pay its fair share contribution towards transportation
                improvements, including payment of fees towards adopted transportation fee
                programs, fair-share costs for transportation improvements located in neighboring
                jurisdictions, and fair-share costs for transportation improvements necessary to
                accommodate the buildout of the City’s General Plan.
Policy 2.3:     Require new development to construct those transportation improvements
                necessary to maintain adopted levels of service standards at project buildout, for
                transportation improvements located in the City of Mission Viejo.
Policy 2.4:     Require that any development contributing measurable impacts to intersections on
                the Measure M Deficient Intersection list and all projects contributing
                cumulatively or individually, 10% or more of the traffic using an intersection, to
                be assessed a mitigation fee determined by the City and locally administered as
                part of the Capital Improvement Program.
Policy 2.5:     Require that Measure M sales tax revenues shall not be used to replace private
                developer funding which has been committed for any project or normal
                subdivision obligations.
GOAL 3:         Phase new development to the timing of transportation infrastructure
                necessary to accommodate project traffic, to maintain city-established levels
                of service standards on city transportation facilities impacted by new
                development (Development Phasing).
Policy 3.1:     Require new development to be phased in concert with any required transportation
                improvements that are necessary to accommodate the traffic generated by new
                development.
To achieve this policy, utilize mechanisms such as conditions of approval, environmental
mitigation measures, the city’s capital improvement program and development agreement
provisions, to allow for the timely coordination and delivery of transportation improvements that
are needed to maintain city levels of service standards.
Intersections under the jurisdiction of another city, the County, the state, or those included on a
Deficient Intersection List adopted by the City of Mission Viejo, shall be exempt from this
timing requirement.
                                                  9
                                                                       GROWTH MANAGEMENT ELEMENT
                                                                                        February 2, 2004

Policy 3.2:     Monitor the status and the implementation of phased circulation improvements
                that have been conditioned upon development projects, to ensure that roadway
                capacity provision is being provided in concert with development (Development
                Monitoring).
TRAFFIC IMPACTS GENERATED FROM DEVELOPMENT OUTSIDE THE CITY
______________________________________________________________________________
In Year 2003, the City of Mission Viejo is 98% built-out. However, arterial roadways in the City
continue to serve as regional access points to freeways and tollroad facilities, due to the limited
number of east-west arterials that access the freeway system. The impacts of development
outside the City, which use transportation facilities within the city, are significant. City arterials
built to their master-planned configuration are becoming constrained with more traffic demand.
Active participation in the review of development projects proposed in adjacent jurisdictions and
review of proposed Master Plan of Arterial Highway amendments allow the City of Mission
Viejo to understand how outlying development could impact the city’s circulation system.
Through such reviews, the City of Mission Viejo can identify mitigation measures or funding
contributions which are needed to improve the levels of service of city streets and intersections
that are projected to be impacted by new development, land use changes, or MPAH amendments
proposed in neighboring jurisdictions.
For these reasons, the following goal and policies are established.
Goal 4:         Ensure that impacts to City of Mission Viejo streets and intersections caused
                by traffic generated from land use changes, new development, or MPAH
                amendments proposed in neighboring jurisdictions, are mitigated to allow
                the City to maintain its Levels of Service standards.
Policy 4.1:     Monitor proposed development projects and land use changes in neighboring
                jurisdictions and ensure that transportation-related impacts to City of Mission
                Viejo roadways are mitigated to the extent feasible.
Policy 4.2:     Monitor amendments to the Orange County Master Plan of Arterial Highways that
                are proposed by neighboring jurisdictions, to ensure that any impacts to City of
                Mission Viejo roadways resulting from any changes/deletions to the MPAH, are
                analyzed.
Policy 4.3:     Participate in GMA 9 and GMA 10 Inter-Jurisdictional Planning Forums to
                discuss developments with multi-jurisdictional transportation impacts.
                                                  10
                                                                         GROWTH MANAGEMENT ELEMENT
                                                                                         February 2, 2004

AREA WIDE TRAFFIC CONGESTION
The state Congestion Management Program and the Orange County Measure M Growth
Management Program require that local development decisions consider the effects of
development upon affected jurisdictions as well as upon the local and regional transportation
infrastructure. In Orange County, a cooperative framework for local jurisdictions to address
areawide and regional land use and transportation concerns has been established. Geographic
boundaries, known as Growth Management Areas (GMAs), have been adopted to facilitate
multi-jurisdictional transportation needs and funding strategies, to allow Orange County
jurisdictions to implement their respective General Plan land use elements while recognizing
how the implementation of their respective General Plan land uses will impact circulation
network capacities within the GMAs. In Orange County, the boundaries of eleven GMAs have
been established, focusing on multi-jurisdictional, high volume planning areas. These GMAs are
illustrated in Figure GM-1. The City of Mission Viejo is located in two GMAs: GMA 9 and
GMA 10.
GOAL 5:         Participate with neighboring jurisdictions to address areawide and regional
                traffic congestion issues.
Policy 5.1:     Participate in inter-jurisdictional planning forums within GMA 9 and GMA 10 to
                cooperatively:
 Address cumulative traffic impacts at the areawide and regional levels;
 Coordinate identification and funding of areawide and regional transportation improvements;
    and,
 Adopt and implement a fee for areawide traffic impact mitigation at the GMA-level,
to address the cumulative impacts of GMA-level General Plan development on the regional
transportation system.
Policy 5.2:     Adopt a seven-year City capital improvement program, in conformance with the
                provisions of Measure M Growth Management Program and the Congestion
                Management Program, for the purpose of identifying planned circulation
                improvements that will improve capacity needs of those segments of the Orange
                County MPAH and Congestion Management Program Highway System that are
                located in the City. Said 7-Year CIP shall include areawide transportation
                improvements approved at the GMA-level which the City shall serve as the Lead
                Agency for implementation.
Policy 5.3:     Adopt a two-year City capital improvement program that budgets funding for city
                capital improvement projects. Said two-year CIP shall include areawide
                                                   11
                                                                        GROWTH MANAGEMENT ELEMENT
                                                                                      February 2, 2004

               transportation improvements approved at the GMA-level which the City shall
               serve as the Lead Agency for implementation.
Policy 5.4:    Pursue outside funding opportunities through countywide, state and federal
               funding programs to supplement transportation funding needs for areawide
               transportation improvements which the City shall serve as the Lead Agency for
               implementation.
JOBS / HOUSING BALANCE
The quality of life for residents not only depends on the physical setting and social amenities
afforded to individuals and families while at home, but also the convenience and availability of
adequate job opportunities to support their home lifestyle. Increasing the availability of local
employment opportunities consistent with local labor skills affords residents with realistic
alternatives to extended job commuting patterns and enhances their quality of life within the
community.
GOAL 6:        Recognizing the constraints of existing physical development, strive towards
               achieving balanced land uses in residential, non-residential and public land
               uses.
Policy 6.1:    Continue to strive towards achieving a balance of land uses.
Policy 6.2:    Continue to provide employment opportunities within the City to allow residents
               living in the community to be able to work within the community.
                                               12
                                                                      GROWTH MANAGEMENT ELEMENT
                                                                                    February 2, 2004

     ______________________________________________________________________________
                               RELATED GOALS AND POLICIES
     ______________________________________________________________________________
     The goals and policies contained in this Element serve as a framework for the City’s
     implementation of growth management provisions that are required by the Measure M Growth
     Management Program. The goals and policies contained in this Element also interface with
     policies from other General Plan elements, especially the Land Use Element and the Circulation
     Element. Recognizing that the Growth Management Element’s goals and policies must be
     achieved while maintaining internal consistency among the other elements of the General Plan, it
     is noted that the Element does not replace or supersede any of the other General Plan elements.
     The Element serves to provide a structure to comprehensively address growth management
     policies that are contained in this Element, as well as those supporting goals and policies in other
     General Plan elements. Other elements containing policies that serve to support the aims
     expressed in this Element are identified in Table GM-1: Growth Management Policies by
     Element.
                                                  TABLE GM-1
                         GROWTH MANAGEMENT POLICIES BY ELEMENT
                                                      POLICIES BY ELEMENT
  ISSUE -AREA       Land   Housing      Circulation      Conservation Public    Noise   Public           Economic
                     Use                                 /Open Space   Safety          Facilities      Development
Transportation     2.1,    4.1        1.1, 1.6, 1.7,     1.13         8.7                             2.1 – 2.4
Capacity           2.2                1.12, 1.13, 1.15,
                                      1.17, 3.3 – 3.8,
                                      4.1 – 4.7, 5.2,
                                      5.4 – 5.7, 7.2
Development        2.2 –   4.1
Mitigation,        2.7,               1.6, 1.7, 1.12,                                                 2.2, 2.3
Phasing and        2.13,              1.13
Monitoring
                   2.16
Traffic Impacts
Generated from                        1.17,
Development                           2.1 – 2.5
Outside the City
Area-wide Traffic                                                                                     2.3, 2.4
Congestion         2.13,              2.1 – 2.5
                   2.16
Jobs / Housing     1.1,                                                                               3.0, 3.4, 3.6,
Balance                                                                                               3.11, 3.12
                   1.3
                                                         14
                                                                              GROWTH MANAGEMENT ELEMENT
                                                                                                February 2, 2004

__________________________________________________________________
                        THE GROWTH MANAGEMENT PLAN
______________________________________________________________________________
This section of the Growth Management Element includes an identification and discussion of the
implementation programs by which the City can achieve its goals for growth management.
GROWTH MANAGEMENT ELEMENT AND PLAN FRAMEWORK
The Measure M Growth Management Program requires that each Orange County jurisdiction:
 Implement a Development Mitigation Program that ensures that new development pay its fair
    share of transportation costs associated with that development, including participation in
    adopted transportation fee programs;
 Implement a Development Phasing and Monitoring Program that provides mechanisms by
    which required transportation improvements are coordinated with anticipated new
    development; and further, to annually report the status of delivery of required transportation
    improvements;
 Adopt transportation demand management provisions that are applied to new nonresidential
    development, which has been achieved through the City of Mission Viejo Development
    Code; Chapter 9.24;
 Annually participate in inter-jurisdictional planning forums to address areawide
    transportation needs and adopt a priority list of transportation improvements for funding
    consideration; and,
 Promote a balance of housing opportunities and jobs opportunities to enable residents in the
    City to be able to work in the City, thereby minimizing extended job commuting patterns.
Achievement of coordinated land use development and transportation infrastructure provision
requires a complementary commitment of actions. To execute these actions, the Measure M
Growth Management Program emphasizes the use of existing processes and mechanisms,
wherever possible, to eliminate duplication of effort.
The City of Mission Viejo implements a breadth of actions to execute the policies contained in
the Growth Management Element. These implementation programs include city processes,
actions and regulations, in addition to areawide processes and programs established by other
agencies. To describe the relationship between each stated General Plan goal and related
                                                 15
                                                                      GROWTH MANAGEMENT ELEMENT
                                                                                       February 2, 2004

policies, and link them with the corresponding implementation programs that exist to achieve the
stated goals and policies, Table GM-2 is established.
Table GM-2 comprises the framework of the City’s implementation of growth management
provisions. Table GM-2 provides a correlation between each Growth Management goal and
policy and identifies and discusses their applicable implementation actions. This table also
identifies the objectives of conducting these implementation programs, in pursuing growth
management considerations in land use and MPAH planning processes.
The Growth Management Plan also recognizes that new or amended implementation programs
will continue to be developed, either by the City or by outside agencies. Thus, the Growth
Management Plan serves as an evolving template of the City’s growth management efforts.
                                                16
                                                                    GROWTH MANAGEMENT ELEMENT
                                                                                     February 2, 2004

                 TABLE GM-2: GROWTH MANAGEMENT ELEMENT AND PLAN FRAMEWORK FOR IMPLEMENTATION
              Issue Area:                        Growth Management Element (GME)                           Programs That                      Objectives of Programs that
     Transportation Capacity                       Policies – To Support Achievement                          Implement                         Implement GME Policies
                                                           of the General Plan Goal                         GME Policies
TRANSPORTATION CAPACITY:                    Policy 1.1: Establish a Level of Service (LOS) standard of    City Development    City Development Review/Environmental Review:
Preface:                                    LOS “D” or better at arterial intersections under the sole    Review Process      Permits an evaluation of transportation impacts in conjunction
A well-planned transportation system        control of the City of Mission Viejo. Along Crown Valley                          with the project’s environmental determination, and
facilitates the movement of people,         Parkway and El Toro Road—roadways on the adopted              City Environmental  identification of potential transportation improvements necessary
products, and vehicles and provides safe    Congestion Management Program Highway System–                 Review Process      to maintain city-adopted levels of service standards that are
and convenient access to the community      establish a Level of Service (LOS) standard of LOS “E”                            imposed through conditions of approval and/or environmental
and surrounding areas. The City of          for Crown Valley Parkway and El Toro Road arterial            City Development    mitigation measures. Actions include:
Mission Viejo has analyzed citywide         intersections.                                                Code TDM
circulation needs in conjunction with the                                                                 regulations         •Determination of traffic study requirements
adoption of its General Plan land use       Policy 1.2: Require applicable development projects to                            •Identification of recommended traffic improvements
and circulation elements, and has           evaluate potential traffic impacts upon the circulation       GMA Inter-          •Imposition of traffic improvements through conditions of
identified levels of service standards for  system and upon established levels of service standards,      Jurisdictional      approval and/or environmental mitigation measures
its arterial streets. To maintain these     both within and outside the city’s jurisdictional boundaries, Planning Forums     •Assessment and imposition of TDM provisions
levels of service standards, the City       in accordance with the traffic impact analysis procedures                         •Transmittal of projects to OCTA for input on transit impacts and
requires development projects to            established by the Orange County Congestion                   City 2-Year Capital opportunities.
conduct        project-specific     traffic Management Program and Measure M Growth                       Improvement
assessments to: determine the impacts       Management Program provisions.                                Program Budget      City TDM regulations (Development Code; Chapter 9.24):
of the project’s additional trips upon the                                                                                    Permits implementation of project-specific, facilities-based
existing and planned circulation system;    Policy 1.3: Participate in Measure M Growth Management        Public Works        improvements on new development to promote and encourage
and, identify appropriate mitigation to     Area (GMA) multi-jurisdictional planning forums to            Department 7-Year   the use of alternatives to the single-occupant vehicle, such as
achieve additional roadway capacity         identify existing and projected land uses and necessary       CIP                 ridesharing, public transit, walking and biking. Imposed as
that would manage congestion and            transportation improvements supporting each jurisdiction’s                        conditions of approval.
maintain desirable levels of service.       General Plan development at the GMA level.
Further, the requirement to analyze the                                                                                       GMA Inter-Jurisdictional Planning Forums:
impacts of land use decisions upon the      Policy 1.4: Annually adopt and implement a Seven Year                             The City of Mission Viejo participates in two inter-jurisdictional
local and regional transportation           Capital Improvement Program to plan for transportation                            planning forums: GMA 9 and GMA 10. Technical and policy
systems and to mitigate identified          capacity improvements and programs.                                               representatives from jurisdictions in each GMA meet annually to
impacts achieves provisions of the                                                                                            address multi-jurisdictional transportation issues and recommend
statewide Congestion Management             Policy 1.5: Promote traffic reduction strategies for new                          funding for areawide transportation improvements, with a
Program and the Orange County               development through the City’s Transportation Demand                              designated Lead Agency. Awarded projects are integrated into a
Measure M Growth Management                 Management (TDM) regulations.                                                     City’s Capital Improvement Program.
Program.
                                                                                                                              City Capital Improvement Programs:
GOAL 1: Manage traffic congestion                                                                                             Implements an adopted two-year budget and a seven-year
to maintain city-established levels of                                                                                        planning horizon of transportation-related, capital improvements
service standards.                                                                                                            that identify city-administered improvement projects and funding
                                                                                                                              needs to improve traffic conditions and assist in achieving the
                                                                                                                              City’s levels of service objectives.

                              GROWTH MANAGEMENT ELEMENT AND PLAN FRAMEWORK FOR IMPLEMENTATION
              Issue Area:                         Growth Management Element (GME)                               Programs That                          Objectives of Programs
     Development Mitigation,                       Policies – To Support Achievement                     Implement GME Policies                    that Implement GME Policies
     Phasing and Monitoring                               of the General Plan Goal
DEVELOPMENT MITIGATION:                     Policy 2.1:       Require new development to identify      City Development Review Process      City Development Review/Environmental
Preface:                                    transportation improvements necessary to maintain                                               Review:
To conduct responsible land use and         adopted levels of service standards resulting from the     City Environmental Review Process    Provides the mechanism for ensuring that new
transportation planning, the City of        additional traffic generated from new development.                                              development will contribute to the cost of
Mission Viejo recognizes that a local                                                                  City Master Plan of Roadways         roadway improvements needed to serve that
jurisdiction must understand how the        Policy 2.2: Require new development to pay its fair share                                       development. Based upon project traffic study,
additional traffic generated by new         contribution towards transportation improvements,          Adopted City and Areawide Fee        city to require the implementation of appropriate
development will impact transportation      including payment of fees towards adopted transportation   Programs:                            mitigation measures/conditions of approval to
levels of service within and outside the    fee programs, fair-share costs for transportation          •Foothill Circulation Phasing        ensure that new development pays its fair share of
jurisdiction’s boundaries.                  improvements located in neighboring jurisdictions, and     Program                              identified transportation improvement costs, to
                                            fair-share costs for transportation improvements necessary •Major Thoroughfare and Bridge       achieve the purpose of the Measure M
Through this assessment, a local            to accommodate the buildout of the City’s General Plan.    Fee Program for the San Joaquin      Development Mitigation requirement and to
jurisdiction can subsequently identify                                                                 Hills Transportation Corridor        maintain levels of service on the City Master Plan
circulation improvements that are           Policy 2.3: Require new development to construct those     (SJHTC)                              of Roadways.
necessary to accommodate the increased      transportation improvements necessary to maintain          •Major Thoroughfare and Bridge
traffic and maintain the Levels of          adopted levels of service standards upon project buildout, Fee Program for the Foothill/Eastern Adopted Fee Programs:
Service goals established in the Growth     for transportation improvements located in the City of     Transportation Corridor (F/ETC)      City, county, and areawide fee programs adopted
Management Element.                         Mission Viejo.                                             •Crown Valley Parkway Corridor       by said agencies use the collected fees from new
                                                                                                       Fee Program                          development to fund specific transportation
As capacity improvement needs are           Policy 2.4: Require that any development contributing      •El Toro Road Fee Program            improvements. The Development Review and
identified, the City shall then ensure that measurable impacts to intersections on the Measure M       •Moulton Parkway/Laguna Niguel       Environmental Review process identifies the fee
new development pay its fair share          Deficient Intersection list and all projects contributing  Road Fee Program                     programs applicable to new development, and
contribution towards the identified         cumulatively or individually, 10% or more of the traffic   •Santiago Canyon Road Fee            conditions new development to pay fees towards
transportation improvements.          This  using an intersection, to be assessed a mitigation fee     Program                              the appropriate fee program. City fee program
forms the basis of Development              determined by the City and locally administered as part of                                      projects are administered through the City’s
Mitigation, as required by the Measure      the Capital Improvement Program.                           GMA Inter-Jurisdictional Planning    Capital Improvement Program.
M Growth Management Program.                                                                           Forums:
                                            Policy 2.5: Require that Measure M sales tax revenues      •adopted the SJHTC fee program as    Traffic Improvement/Public Facilities
GOAL 2: Maintain levels of service          shall not be used to replace private developer funding     the minimally acceptable impact fee  Development Agreement:
standards on city roadways by               which has been committed for any project or normal         levels for development within GMA    Legally binding agreement between a project
requiring new development to pay its        subdivision obligations.                                   9 and GMA 10                         applicant and the city that can also determine a
fair share towards circulation                                                                                                              project’s contribution towards transportation
improvements             needed          to                                                            City 2-Year Capital Improvement      improvements.
accommodate           project       traffic                                                            Program Budget/
(Development Mitigation).                                                                              Public Works Department 7-Year       Traffic Count Program:
                                                                                                       CIP                                  Maintains the City’s citywide annual traffic count
                                                                                                                                            program to ensure that current data is available for
                                                                                                       Traffic Improvement/Public           use in the planning and analysis of the City’s
                                                                                                       Facilities Development Agreements    roadway system, and that levels of service on the
                                                                                                                                            city’s roadways is monitored.
                                                                                                       City Traffic Count Program

                              GROWTH MANAGEMENT ELEMENT AND PLAN FRAMEWORK FOR IMPLEMENTATION
   Issue Area: - Development                     Growth Management Element (GME)                              Programs That                    Objectives of Program
        Mitigation, Phasing                        Policies – To Support Achievement                    Implement GME Policies            that Implement GME Policies
           and Monitoring                                 of the General Plan Goal
DEVELOPMENT PHASING AND                     Policy 3.1: Require new development to be phased in        City Development Review    City Development Review/Environmental Review:
MONITORING                                  concert with any required transportation improvements that Process                    Through the imposition of conditions of approval
Preface:                                    are necessary to accommodate the traffic generated by new                             and mitigation measures, the City’s development
The Measure M Growth Management             development.                                               City Environmental Review  and environmental review processes provide the
Program further requires that local                                                                    Process                    mechanism to impose Development Phasing by
jurisdictions ensure that transportation    Utilize mechanisms such as conditions of approval,                                    conditioning the issuance of building or grading
infrastructure is added as development      environmental mitigation measures, the City’s capital      City Measure M Growth      permits such that the completion of any required
proceeds,       so     that     circulation improvement program and development agreement              Management Program Annual  roadway improvements are coordinated with
improvements are in balance with traffic    provisions, to allow for the timely coordination and       Submittal                  development entitlement.
demand. This requirement is known as        delivery of transportation improvements that are needed to
Development Phasing. Development            maintain City levels of service standards.                 City Congestion Management The phasing requirement applies only to those
Phasing requirements apply strictly to                                                                 Program Biennial Submittal transportation facilities and improvements over
those roadway improvements that are         Intersections under the jurisdiction of another city, the                             which the city has sole control. The Measure M
under the sole control of a city. Any       County, the state, or those included on a Deficient                                   Growth Management Program recognizes that the
roadway improvements located outside        Intersection List adopted by the City of Mission Viejo,                               application of development phasing is not
the city, that are identified as necessary  shall be exempt from this timing requirement.                                         appropriate to the timing of transportation
to accommodate new development                                                                                                    improvements that are under the control of another
within a city, are not subject to phasing   Policy 3.2: Monitor the status and the implementation of                              entity, such as a freeway ramp modification
requirements.                               phased circulation improvements that have been                                        construction conducted by Caltrans, or a roadway
                                            conditioned upon development projects, to ensure that                                 improvement being administered by a neighboring
An annual assessment of the status of       roadway capacity provision is being provided in concert                               jurisdiction. In those situations, the payment of
transportation improvements delivery        with development (Development Monitoring)                                             applicable fair-share contributions will satisfy the
comprises the Development Monitoring                                                                                              Development Mitigation/Phasing requirements.
requirements of Measure M.
                                                                                                                                  Development Monitoring:
GOAL 3: Phase new development to                                                                                                  The monitoring of roadway improvements
the     timing      of      transportation                                                                                        implementation is achieved through several
infrastructure         necessary         to                                                                                       programs:
accommodate project traffic, to
maintain city-established levels of                                                                                               •The City’s Measure M Growth Management
service       standards        on      city                                                                                       Program Annual Submittal, and the City’s Biennial
transportation facilities impacted by                                                                                             Congestion Management Program submittal. These
new      development         (Development                                                                                         submittals include an inventory/monitoring of all
Phasing)                                                                                                                          development projects with Measure M GMP-
                                                                                                                                  required traffic studies, which have been conditioned
                                                                                                                                  for transportation improvements, and identifies the
                                                                                                                                  status of those improvements delivery.
                                                                                                                                  •Mitigation Monitoring program requirements for
                                                                                                                                  environmental mitigation measures, as imposed by
                                                                                                                                  the California Environmental Quality Act and
                                                                                                                                  implemented in conjunction with the City’s
                                                                                                                                  environmental review process.

                             GROWTH MANAGEMENT ELEMENT AND PLAN FRAMEWORK FOR IMPLEMENTATION
   Issue Area: - Traffic Impacts                   Growth Management Element (GME)                             Programs That                    Objectives of Programs
   Generated from Development                         Policies To Support Achievement                    Implement GME Policies             that Implement GME Policies
            Outside the City                                of the General Plan Goal
TRAFFIC IMPACTS GENERATED                      Policy 4.1: Monitor proposed development projects and    City Environmental Review   City Environmental Review Process:
FROM DEVELOPMENT OUTSIDE THE                   land use changes in neighboring jurisdictions and ensure Process                     Continued review and comment on CEQA
CITY                                           that transportation-related impacts to City of Mission                               environmental      determinations    and    technical
Preface:                                       Viejo roadways are mitigated to the extent feasible.     OCTA MPAH Cooperative Study documents for development proposals, land use
In Year 2003, the City of Mission Viejo is                                                              Process                     changes and MPAH network changes in neighboring
98% built-out.           However, arterial     Policy 4.2: Monitor amendments to the Orange County                                  jurisdictions, to achieve an identification of
roadways in the City continue to serve as      Master Plan of Arterial Highways that are proposed by    GMA Inter-Jurisdictional    recommended conditions of approval/mitigation
regional access points to freeways and         neighboring jurisdictions, to ensure that any impacts to Planning Forums             measures for improvements to city streets impacted
tollroad facilities, due to the limited        City of Mission Viejo roadways resulting from any                                    by proposed development and MPAH network
number of east-west arterials that access      changes/deletions to the MPAH, are analyzed.                                         changes, and mitigation measures and/or conditions
the freeway system. The impacts of                                                                                                  of approval in conjunction with the City’s CEQA
development outside the City, which use        Policy 4.3: Participate in GMA 9 and GMA 10 Inter-                                   response and public input to issued environmental
transportation facilities within the city, are Jurisdictional Planning Forums to discuss developments                               documents.
significant. City arterials built to their     with multi-jurisdictional transportation impacts.
master-planned         configuration       are                                                                                      OCTA MPAH Cooperative Study Process:
becoming constrained with more traffic                                                                                              Continued participation in any OCTA-sponsored
demand.                                                                                                                             MPAH Cooperative Study forum that is convened
Active participation in the review of                                                                                               with affected local jurisdictions and agencies upon
development projects proposed in adjacent                                                                                           local jurisdiction submittal of a proposed MPAH
jurisdictions, and review of proposed                                                                                               amendment. The cooperative study process includes
MPAH amendments allows the City of                                                                                                  preparation of a traffic study to analyze the MPAH
Mission Viejo to understand how outlying                                                                                            amendment’s impact on regional traffic circulation,
development could impact the city’s                                                                                                 and OCTA board approval. City participation
circulation system. Through such review,                                                                                            achieves an identification of local issues and
the City of Mission Viejo can identify                                                                                              concerns on proposed MPAH amendments, and
mitigation      measures      or     funding                                                                                        identification of alternate circulation options and
contributions which are needed to improve                                                                                           mitigation.
the levels of service of city streets and
intersections that are projected to be                                                                                              GMA Inter-Jurisdictional Planning Forums:
impacted by new development, land use                                                                                               Continued participation in regional planning forums
changes, or MPAH amendments proposed                                                                                                including the Measure M Growth Management Area
in neighboring jurisdictions.                                                                                                       Inter-Jurisdictional Forums for GMA 9 and 10, to
For these reasons, the following goal and                                                                                           ensure that city comments on development projects
policies are established.                                                                                                           with multi-jurisdictional transportation impacts are
Goal 4: Ensure that impacts to City of                                                                                              discussed,       and      areawide     transportation
Mission Viejo streets and intersections                                                                                             improvements are identified.
caused by traffic generated from land
use changes, new development, or
MPAH amendment proposals in
neighboring jurisdictions, are mitigated
to allow the City to maintain its Levels
of Service standards.

                             GROWTH MANAGEMENT ELEMENT AND PLAN FRAMEWORK FOR IMPLEMENTATION
              Issue Area:                      Growth Management Element (GME)                                Programs That                    Objectives of Programs that
  Areawide Traffic Congestion                    Policies - To Support Achievement                     Implement GME Policies                     Implement GME Policies
                                                         of the General Plan Goal
AREAWIDE TRAFFIC                          Policy 5.1: Participate in inter-jurisdictional planning   GMA Inter-Jurisdictional Planning  GMA Inter-Jurisdictional Planning Forums:
CONGESTION                                forums within GMA 9 and GMA 10 to cooperatively:           Forums:                            Annually, 3.2 percent of Measure M net sales tax
Preface:                                                                                             •Annual GMA adoption of a 5-year   revenues will be allocated to the GMA program
The state Congestion Management           • address cumulative traffic impacts at the areawide and   Transportation Capital Improvement and distributed to each of the eleven Orange
Program and the Orange County             regional levels;                                           Program and Priority List, for     County GMAs.
Measure M Growth Management                                                                          funding consideration under
Program require that local development    • coordinate identification and funding of areawide and    Measure M GMA funding              Through the GMA-level adoption of a
decisions consider the effects of         regional transportation improvements; and,                 allocations, to address cumulative 5-year Transportation Capital Improvement
development upon affected jurisdictions                                                              regional traffic impacts of        Program and Priority List, eligible candidate
as well as upon the local and regional    • adopt and implement a fee for areawide traffic impact    development.                       projects can be approved for funding
transportation infrastructure. In Orange  mitigation at the GMA-level,                               •adoption of the SJHTC fee         consideration to address areawide transportation
County, a cooperative framework for                                                                  program as the minimally           deficiencies or needs. Candidate transportation
local jurisdictions to address areawide   to address the cumulative impacts of GMA-level General     acceptable impact fee level for    projects are assigned a sponsoring agency (e.g.,
and regional land use and transportation  Plan development on the regional transportation system.    development within GMA 9 and       city or County within the GMA) to manage the
concerns has been established.                                                                       GMA 10.                            funding project. Candidate projects must benefit
                                          Policy 5.2: Adopt a seven-year City capital improvement                                       the GMA as a whole, or at minimum, more than
Geographic boundaries, known as           program, in conformance with the provisions of Measure     City Public Works Department 7-    one jurisdiction. Emphasis is also placed on
Growth Management Areas (GMAs),           M Growth Management Program and the Congestion             Year CIP                           projects that address existing deficiencies.
have been adopted to facilitate multi-    Management Program, for the purpose of identifying         City 2-Year Capital Improvement
jurisdictional transportation needs and   planned circulation improvements that will improve         Program Budget                     The GMA’s elected officials approve the
funding strategies, to allow Orange       capacity needs of those segments of the Orange County                                         transportation project list by resolution, prior to
County jurisdictions to implement their   MPAH and Congestion Management Program Highway             Grant Funding Programs:            submitting it to OCTA for funding consideration
respective General Plan land use          System that are located in the City. Said 7-Year CIP shall •OCTA CTFP Freeway/Arterial        through the Measure M funding program process.
elements while recognizing how the        include areawide transportation improvements approved at   Competitive Funding Programs:      The City of Mission Viejo has regularly been the
implementation of their respective        the GMA-level which the City shall serve as the Lead       Federal and Local funds            lead agency for GMA transportation projects.
General Plan land uses will impact        Agency for implementation.                                 •State funding programs
circulation network capacities within the                                                                                               City Public Works Department 7-Year CIP
GMAs.        In Orange County, the        Policy 5.3: Adopt a two-year City capital improvement                                         City 2-Year Capital Improvement Program
boundaries of eleven GMAs have been       program that budgets funding for city capital improvement                                     Budget
established,     focusing    on    multi- projects. Said two-year CIP shall include areawide                                            Seven-year planning tool and two-year funding
jurisdictional, high volume planning      transportation improvements approved at the GMA-level                                         budget to implement capital improvement plans
areas. These GMAs are illustrated in      which the City shall serve as the Lead Agency for                                             and projects that serve areawide transportation
Figure GM-1. The City of Mission          implementation.                                                                               benefit. GMA-funded transportation projects for
Viejo is located in two GMAs: GMA 9                                                                                                     which the City serves as the Lead Agency, are
and GMA 10.                               Policy 5.4: Pursue outside funding opportunities through                                      included.
                                          countywide, state and federal funding programs to
GOAL 5:              Participate with     supplement transportation funding needs for areawide                                          Grant Funding Programs:
neighboring jurisdictions to address      transportation improvements which the City shall serve as                                     Competitive funding programs at the county, state
areawide       and     regional   traffic the Lead Agency for implementation.                                                           and federal levels to secure outside funding for
congestion issues.                                                                                                                      areawide transportation plans and projects.

                             GROWTH MANAGEMENT ELEMENT AND PLAN FRAMEWORK FOR IMPLEMENTATION
              Issue Area:                       Growth Management Element (GME)                               Programs That                     Objectives of Programs that
      Jobs/Housing Balance                        Policies – To Support Achievement                     Implement GME Policies                    Implement GME Policies
                                                         of the General Plan Goal
JOBS/HOUSING BALANCE:                      Policy 6.1: Continue to strive towards achieving a balance City Development Process          City Development Process
Preface:                                   of land uses.                                                                                Approval of land use development consistent with
The quality of life for residents not only                                                            Orange County Projections Process the City’s Land Use Element continues to achieve a
depends on the physical setting and        Policy 6.2: Continue to provide employment opportunities                                     balanced distribution of land uses throughout the
social amenities afforded to individuals   within the City to allow residents living in the community SCAG Regional Transportation Plan City and achieves a broad range of housing and
and families while at home, but also the   to be able to work within the community.                   Process                           business opportunities.
convenience and          availability of
adequate job opportunities to support                                                                                                   Orange County Projections Process
their home lifestyle. Increasing the                                                                                                    SCAG Regional Transportation Plan Process
availability of local employment                                                                                                        The City actively participates in the Orange County
opportunities consistent with local labor                                                                                               Projections (OCP)          and SCAG Regional
skills affords residents with realistic                                                                                                 Transportation Plan regional projections processes,
alternatives to extended job commuting                                                                                                  whereby population, households and employment
patterns and enhances their quality of                                                                                                  information for the city is developed and adopted in
life within the community.                                                                                                              five-year forecasts for a 30-year horizon period for
                                                                                                                                        transportation and planning purposes.
GOAL 6:
Recognizing the constraints of                                                                                                          Through these processes, the City monitors an
existing physical development, strive                                                                                                   existing (base year) relationship between jobs and
towards achieving balanced land uses                                                                                                    households, and forecasts a projection of jobs and
in residential, non-residential and                                                                                                     households in future years. According to State
public land uses.                                                                                                                       employment statistics and the U.S. Census, in Year
                                                                                                                                        2000, the City had 1.04 jobs to 1.0 households,
                                                                                                                                        which represents a respected balance of
                                                                                                                                        nonresidential to residential land uses, as compared
                                                                                                                                        to a countywide relationship of 1.9 jobs to 1.0
                                                                                                                                        households.

HOUSING ELEMENT
  CITY OF MISSION VIEJO
         ADOPTED
       MARCH 4, 2013

                                                                  Contents
1. Introduction to the Housing Element ........................................................................................................ 1
         1.1     Purpose of the Housing Element ......................................................................................... 1
         1.2     Scope and Content of the Element ...................................................................................... 1
         1.3     Citizen Participation ............................................................................................................ 4
2. Housing Needs Assessment....................................................................................................................... 5
         2.1     Population Characteristics ................................................................................................... 5
         2.2     Household Characteristics ................................................................................................... 7
         2.3     Employment ...................................................................................................................... 11
         2.4     Housing Stock Characteristics .......................................................................................... 14
         2.5     Special Needs .................................................................................................................... 18
         2.6     Assisted Housing at Risk of Conversion ........................................................................... 25
         2.7     Future Growth Needs ........................................................................................................ 26
3. Resources and Opportunities ................................................................................................................... 29
         3.1     Land Resources ................................................................................................................. 29
         3.2     Financial and Administrative Resources ........................................................................... 30
         3.3     Energy Conservation Opportunities .................................................................................. 31
4. Housing Constraints ................................................................................................................................ 33
         4.1     Governmental Constraints ................................................................................................. 33
         4.2     Non-Governmental Constraints......................................................................................... 44
5. Housing Element Goals and Policies ...................................................................................................... 49
         5.1     Housing Opportunities ...................................................................................................... 49
         5.2     Maintenance and Preservation .......................................................................................... 49
         5.3     Housing Services ............................................................................................................... 50
         5.4     Environmental Sensitivity ................................................................................................. 51
         5.5     Fair Housing ...................................................................................................................... 51
         5.6     Preservation of At-Risk Housing Units ............................................................................. 51
         5.7     Related Goals and Policies ................................................................................................ 54
6. Housing Plan ........................................................................................................................................... 55
APPENDICES
A.       Evaluation of the Prior Housing Element
B.       Residential Land Inventory
                                                                         iii                                                      HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                                                                                              March 4, 2013
                                             List of Tables
Table H-1 State Housing Element Requirements............................................................................................ 2
Table H-2 Population Trends, 1990-2012 Mission Viejo vs. Orange County ................................................ 5
Table H-3 Age Distribution – Mission Viejo vs. Orange County ................................................................... 6
Table H-4 Race/Ethnicity Mission Viejo vs. Orange County ......................................................................... 7
Table H-5 Household Composition – Mission Viejo vs. Orange County ....................................................... 7
Table H-6 Household Tenure and Vacancy – Mission Viejo vs. Orange County .......................................... 8
Table H-7 Overcrowding – Mission Viejo vs. Orange County ....................................................................... 9
Table H-8 Median Household Income – Orange County and Selected Cities .............................................. 10
Table H-9 Overpayment by Income Category – Mission Viejo ................................................................... 10
Table H-10 Labor Force – Mission Viejo vs. Orange County ...................................................................... 11
Table H-11 Employment by Occupation – Mission Viejo ............................................................................ 12
Table H-12 2008-2018 Industry Employment Projections – Orange County ............................................... 13
Table H-13 Job Location for Mission Viejo Residents ................................................................................. 14
Table H-14 Housing by Type, 2000-2012 – Mission Viejo vs. Orange County ........................................... 15
Table H-15 Age of Housing Stock by Tenure – Mission Viejo vs. Orange County ..................................... 16
Table H-16 Income Categories and Affordable Housing Costs – Orange County ....................................... 17
Table H-17 Housing Sales Prices 2012 – Mission Viejo .............................................................................. 17
Table H-18 Persons with Disabilities by Age Group – Mission Viejo ......................................................... 19
Table H-19 Elderly Households by Tenure – Mission Viejo ........................................................................ 21
Table H-20 Household Size by Tenure – Mission Viejo .............................................................................. 22
Table H-21 Household Type by Tenure – Mission Viejo ............................................................................. 22
Table H-22 Emergency Shelters Serving Mission Viejo .............................................................................. 24
Table H-23 Transitional/Supportive Housing Facilities Serving Mission Viejo .......................................... 25
Table H-24 Assisted Housing Developments – Mission Viejo ..................................................................... 26
Table H-25 Regional Housing Growth Needs - Mission Viejo .................................................................... 27
Table H-26 Land Inventory Summary – City of Mission Viejo ................................................................... 29
Table H-27 Residential Land Use Categories – Mission Viejo General Plan ............................................... 33
Table H-28 Residential Development Standards .......................................................................................... 34
Table H-29 Permitted Residential Development by Zoning District ............................................................ 36
Table H-30 Residential Parking Requirements ............................................................................................. 40
Table H-31 Planning and Development Fees ................................................................................................ 43
Table H-32 Housing Policies and Related Programs .................................................................................... 52
Table H-33 Housing Policies by Element ..................................................................................................... 54
Table H-34 Quantified Objectives (2013-2021) – City of Mission Viejo..................................................... 65
Table H-35 Housing Program Summary ....................................................................................................... 66
                                                        iv                                                       HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                                                                             March 4, 2013

                   1 . Int rodu ct ion to th e Hou sing Ele men t
In 1965, the area known today as the City of Mission Viejo was ranch land, consisting of rolling hills and
grazing cattle. A year later the ground was broken for the first homes in this newly approved planned
community in county unincorporated territory. In 1988, the Mission Viejo planned community was
incorporated. Forty-six years later the City of Mission Viejo is almost completely built out, with a
balanced provision of housing to jobs. The California Department of Finance estimated that the total
number of dwelling units in the City was 34,254 with a population of 94,196 on January 1, 2012. The
California State University, Fullerton Center for Demographic Research estimated the City’s employment
base at approximately 37,310 jobs as of 2010 (OCP-2010 Modified).
Unlike the other elements of the General Plan, state law explicitly requires that the Housing Element be
updated on an eight-year cycle linked to the Regional Transportation Plan (Government Code §65588).
This Housing Element covers the 2013-2021 planning period. The goals and policies of the 2013-2021
Housing Element carry forward much from the previous element, with refinements and new programs
where necessary to address changed circumstances and new state laws. The housing development strategy
and housing programs reflect the City’s experience gained from previous efforts in the improvement,
preservation and development of affordable housing. Nonetheless, the City’s built-out status, in
accordance with the master plan prepared by the Mission Viejo Company, continues to affect the City’s
ability to accommodate the housing needs of all economic segments of the community.
1.1      Purpose of the Housing Element
The Land Use Element is concerned with housing in a spatial context, while the Housing Element
identifies housing policies and programs aimed at meeting the identified housing needs of the City's
current and anticipated future population. This Housing Element builds upon goals and policies that are
primarily concerned with where new housing is to be located and at what density it will be constructed.
Other concerns of the Housing Element include the identification of strategies and programs that focus on
1) housing affordability, 2) rehabilitation of substandard housing, 3) meeting the demand for new housing,
4) the conservation of the current housing stock, 5) providing equal opportunity to residents, and
6) preserving affordable units. This Housing Element addresses and complies with state housing element
requirements that have been established by the legislature.
The State Legislature continues to declare that a severe shortage of affordable housing exists, especially
for persons and families of low and moderate income. The Housing Element is the primary document in
which a city identifies the measures taken to encourage the development of affordable housing. This
document and its review by the California Department of Housing and Community Development are the
primary means by which the state influences local governments to be responsive to the affordable housing
shortage.
1.2      Scope and Content of the Element
The Housing Element summarizes the City’s existing and projected housing conditions and needs,
providing the basis for policies and programs to address those needs. Specific housing programs that will
implement the goals and policies are identified in the section entitled Housing Plan (Chapter 6) that
follows the Goals and Policies.
The California Legislature recognizes the important role of local general plans, and housing elements in
particular, in implementing statewide housing goals, which call for the provision of decent and sound
                                                      1                                HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                                               March 4, 2013

housing for all persons. In addition, the importance of continuing efforts toward providing housing that is
affordable to all income groups is stressed. The major concerns of the Legislature with regard to the
preparation of housing elements are included in the California Government Code, which states:
             Local governments should recognize their responsibility in contributing to the attainment of
              the State's housing goals;
             Cities and counties should prepare and implement housing elements coordinated with State
              and Federal efforts in achieving the State's housing goal;
             Each local jurisdiction should participate in determining the necessary efforts required to
              attain the State's housing goals;
             Each local government should cooperate with other local governments in addressing regional
              housing needs.
The State Department of Housing and Community Development is also very specific regarding the scope
and content of housing elements prepared by cities and counties. Table H-1 summarizes state Housing
Element requirements and identifies the applicable sections of the Mission Viejo Housing Element where
these requirements are addressed.
                                                      Table H-1
                                      State Housing Element Requirements
                 Required Housing Element Component                                         Reference
A.   Housing Needs Assessment and Inventory of Resources and                Govt. Code §65583(a)
     Constraints
1.   Analysis of population and employment trends in Mission Viejo in       Chapter 2 Housing Needs Assessment –
     relation to regional trends.                                           Population Characteristics & Employment
2.   Documentation of projections and quantification of Mission Viejo's     Chapter 2 Housing Needs Assessment
     existing and projected housing needs for all income levels.
3.   Analysis and documentation of Mission Viejo’s housing
     characteristics including the following:
     a. level of housing cost compared to ability to pay;                   Chapter 2 Housing Needs Assessment –
                                                                            Housing Stock Characteristics
     b.    overcrowding; and                                                Chapter 2 Housing Needs Assessment –
                                                                            Household Characteristics
     c.    housing stock condition.                                         Chapter 2 Housing Needs Assessment –
                                                                            Housing Stock Characteristics
4.   An inventory of land suitable for residential development including    Chapter 3 Resources and Opportunities –
     vacant sites and sites having redevelopment potential and an           Land Resources; Appendix B –
     analysis of the relationship of zoning, public facilities and services Residential Land Inventory
     to these sites.
5.   Analysis of existing and potential governmental constraints upon       Chapter 4 Housing Constraints –
     the maintenance, improvement, or development of housing for all        Governmental Constraints
     income levels.
6.   Analysis of existing and potential non-governmental and market         Chapter 4 Housing Constraints – Non-
     constraints upon maintenance, improvement, or development of           Governmental Constraints
     housing for all income levels.
7.   Analysis of special housing needs: developmentally disabled,           Housing Needs Assessment –Special
     elderly, large families, female-headed households, and homeless.       Needs
                                                             2                                  HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                                                        March 4, 2013

                  Required Housing Element Component                                      Reference
8.   Analysis of opportunities for energy conservation with respect to     Chapter 3 Resources and Opportunities –
     residential development.                                              Energy Conservation Opportunities
9.   Analysis of existing assisted housing developments that are eligible
     to change from low-income housing uses during the next ten years
     including:
     a.    listing of each development by project name and address, the    Chapter 2 Housing Needs Assessment –
           type of governmental assistance received, the earliest possible Assisted Housing at Risk of Conversion
           date of change from low-income use and the total number of
           elderly and nonelderly units that could be lost from the
           locality's low-income housing stock in each year during the
           10-year period;
     b.    cost analysis for replacement housing;                          Not applicable
     c.    identify public and private non-profit corporations which have  Not applicable
           legal and managerial capacity to acquire and manage these
           housing developments; and
     d.    identify and consider the use of all federal, state, and local  Not applicable
           financing and subsidy programs which can be used to
           preserve, for lower income households, the assisted housing
           developments.
B.   Goals and Policies                                                    Govt. Code §65583(b)
1.   Identification of Mission Viejo’s community goals relative to         Chapter 5 Housing Element Goals and
     maintenance, improvement, and development of housing.                 Policies
2.   Quantified objectives and policies relative to the maintenance,       Chapter 6 Housing Plan
     improvement, and development of housing in Mission Viejo.
C.   Implementation Program                                                Govt. Code §65583(c)
      An implementation program should do the following:
1.   Identify adequate sites which will be made available through          Chapter 6 Housing Plan
     appropriate action with required public services and facilities for a
     variety of housing types for all income levels;
2.   Program to assist in the development of adequate housing to meet      Chapter 6 Housing Plan
     the needs of low- and moderate-income households;
3.   Identify and, when appropriate and possible, remove governmental      Chapter 6 Housing Plan
     constraints to the maintenance, improvement, and development of
     housing in Mission Viejo;
4.   Conserve and improve the condition of the existing housing stock      Chapter 6 Housing Plan
     in Mission Viejo;
5.   Promote housing opportunities for all persons regardless of race,     Chapter 6 Housing Plan
     religion, sex, marital status, ancestry, national origin or color;
6.   Preserve for lower income households the assisted housing             Chapter 6 Housing Plan
     developments identified as being at-risk; and
7.   Identify the agencies and official responsible for the                Chapter 6 Housing Plan
     implementation of the various actions and the means by which
     consistency will be achieved with other general plan elements and
     community goals.
Appendix A of this Housing Element contains an evaluation of the 2008-2014 Housing Element goals,
policies, programs and quantified objectives compared with the actual results. Details are provided to
explain the differences between the objectives and the results.
                                                             3                                 HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                                                       March 4, 2013

1.3      Citizen Participation
This document builds on and reflects the direct and indirect public participation rendered in the
formulation of Mission Viejo’s first General Plan in 1990, including the housing goals and policies. As
part of the 1990 General Plan program, the public had the opportunity to participate at 19 General Plan
Advisory Committee meetings, to answer a Community Attitude Survey (sent to 5,000 residents), to
participate at a Saturday open house workshop, and to view the draft documents at City Hall and the
library.
In 2007 the City amended the General Plan, the Housing Element, and the Zoning Code to identify and
designate additional sites for high-density multi-family housing. The 2007 update included extensive
public participation, including a joint workshop of the City Council and the Planning and Transportation
Commission and four subsequent public hearings conducted by the Planning and Transportation
Commission and the City Council. As part of the 2013 update of the City’s Housing Element, citizens
were given a variety of opportunities to submit written comments and public testimony at two public
workshops held during the morning and evening of June 7, 2012. Approximately 10 persons attended
these workshops. Issues raised included the capacity of infrastructure to support housing growth, the
likelihood of meeting the identified housing needs, the status of City RFPs for affordable housing, the
schedule for the update process, and questions regarding the experiences of other cities with voter
referendums. Questions were also raised as to whether there would be opportunities for green building,
solar energy and community gardens.
Prior to adoption of the Housing Element, public hearings were held by the Planning and Transportation
Commission and the City Council on February 11,2013 and March 4, 2013 respectively. Notices of the
hearings were published in the Saddleback Valley News and posted at City Hall, the Mission Viejo
Library, the Norman P. Murray Community and Senior Center, and the California Employment
Development Department (located at 23456 Madero, Suite 150, Mission Viejo). In addition, non-profit
groups, churches, community groups, and public service groups active in the community received notices
for the Housing Element public hearings. Copies of the public hearing draft of the Housing Element were
distributed to interested agencies and individuals; copies were available for review and for purchase at
City Hall. A copy of the draft Housing Element was made available at the Mission Viejo Library and on
the City website.
                                                    4                                HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                                            March 4, 2013

                               2 . H ousing N eeds A ss ess men t
Mission Viejo lies in southern Orange County, approximately midway between Los Angeles and San
Diego. The city is economically diverse and provides a range of employment, lifestyle, and housing
opportunities. Much of Mission Viejo’s growth took place in the 1970s and 1980s prior to its
incorporation in 1988. Rapid growth continued between 1990 and 2000. Since incorporation, Mission
Viejo has grown from a population of approximately 72,800 to about 94,200 residents in 2012. Mission
Viejo is approximately 17.4 square miles in area and is bounded by Lake Forest to the northwest, Rancho
Santa Margarita to the north and east, Laguna Hills and Laguna Niguel to the west, San Juan Capistrano to
the south, and unincorporated Orange County to the east. The population is relatively affluent with a
median annual household income of nearly $96,000 (see Table H-8). The Census Bureau reported that
Mission Viejo's median household income was 29% greater than that of Orange County as a whole during
the 2006-2010 period.
This chapter examines general population and household characteristics and trends, such as age, race and
ethnicity, employment, household composition and size, household income, and special needs.
Characteristics of the existing housing stock (e.g., number of units and type, tenure, age and condition,
costs) are also addressed. Finally, the City’s projected housing growth needs based on the 2014-2021
Regional Housing Needs Assessment (RHNA) are examined.
The Housing Needs Assessment utilizes the most recent data from the U.S. Census Bureau, California
Department of Finance (DOF), California Employment Development Department (EDD), Southern
California Association of Governments (SCAG) and other relevant sources. Supplemental data was
obtained through field surveys or from private vendors. In addition, the City’s Consolidated Plan provides
useful information for this update of the Housing Element.
2.1      Population Characteristics
         1.   Population Growth Trends
Mission Viejo was incorporated in 1988 with a population of 72,820. From 1990 to 2000 the city
experienced robust growth of approximately 30% to a population of 93,102. In 1992 the City annexed the
662-acre Community Service Area 12, known as the Aegean Hills neighborhood, with approximately
6,600 residents. From 2000 to 2012 the city experienced modest growth of approximately 1% to an
estimated population of 94,196 (see Table H-2). The city’s estimated population as of January 1, 2012
represented approximately 3.1% of the county’s total population of 3,055,792.
                                                          Table H-2
                                            Population Trends, 1990-2012
                                          Mission Viejo vs. Orange County
                                                                                   Growth    Growth
                                          1990             2000            2012   1990-2000 2000-2012
             Mission Viejo              72,820            93,102          94,196    27.9%     1.2%
             Orange County            2,410,556         2,846,289       3,055,792   18.1%     7.4%
             Sources: U.S. Census; Calif. Dept. of Finance Table E-5 (2012)
                                                               5                               HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                                                      March 4, 2013

        2.    Age
Housing needs are influenced by the age characteristics of the population. Different age groups require
different accommodations based on lifestyle, family type, income level, and housing preference. Table H-
3 provides a comparison of the city’s and county’s population by age group in 2010. This table shows that
the age distribution of the city’s population is similar to Orange County as a whole with a somewhat
higher percentage of the population in the 40 to 64 age range. The median age of the city’s population
exceeds the county median by approximately six years.
                                                      Table H-3
                                                  Age Distribution –
                                       Mission Viejo vs. Orange County
                                                     Mission Viejo       Orange County
                           Age Group              Persons       %     Persons       %
                       Under 5 years               4,613        5%    191,691       6%
                       5 to 9 years                5,500        6%    198,769       7%
                       10 to 14 years              6,630        7%    210,195       7%
                       15 to 19 years              7,192        8%    227,689       8%
                       20 to 24 years              5,187        6%    213,601       7%
                       25 to 29 years              4,590        5%    215,362       7%
                       30 to 34 years              4,467        5%    198,166       7%
                       35 to 39 years              5,407        6%    213,605       7%
                       40 to 44 years              7,184        8%    225,438       7%
                       45 to 49 years              8,570        9%    230,596       8%
                       50 to 54 years              8,078        9%    213,589       7%
                       55 to 59 years              6,540        7%    175,127       6%
                       60 to 64 years              5,815        6%    146,727       5%
                       65 to 69 years              4,180        4%    107,421       4%
                       70 to 74 years              3,012        3%     80,033       3%
                       75 to 79 years              2,259        2%     63,133       2%
                       80 to 84 years              1,890        2%     49,570       2%
                       85 years and over           2,191        2%     49,520       2%
                     Total                        93,305       100%  3,010,232     100%
                     Median age                           42.2                36.2
                     Source: 2010 Census, Table DP-1
        3.    Race and Ethnicity
The racial and ethnic composition of the city differs from the county in that a lower proportion of city
residents are Hispanic/Latino or other racial minorities. Approximately 69% of city residents are non-
Hispanic white, contrasted with 44% for the county as a whole. The percentage of Hispanics residing in
the city, at 17%, is approximately half that of the county. Asians, at 9%, represent the largest non-
Hispanic minority (Table H-4).
                                                           6                            HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                                              March 4, 2013

                                                      Table H-4
                                                    Race/Ethnicity
                                           Mission Viejo vs. Orange County
                                                            Mission Viejo           Orange County
                         Racial/Ethnic Group            Persons        %         Persons           %
                Not Hispanic or Latino                   77,428       83%       1,997,259         66%
                 -White                                  64,276       69%       1,328,499         44%
                 -Black or African American               1,129       1%          44,000          1%
                 -American Indian/Alaska Native            176        0%           6,216          0%
                 -Asian                                   8,312       9%         532,477          18%
                  -Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander        146        0%           8,357          0%
                  -Other races or 2+ races                3,389       4%          77,710          3%
                Hispanic or Latino (any race)            15,877       17%       1,012,973         34%
                Total                                    93,305      100%       3,010,232        100%
                Source: 2010 Census, Table DP-1
2.2    Household Characteristics
       1.      Household Composition and Size
Household characteristics are important indicators of the type and size of housing needed in a city. The
Census defines a “household” as all persons occupying a housing unit, which may include single persons
                                                      Table H-5
                                                Household Composition –
                                           Mission Viejo vs. Orange County
                                                                Mission Viejo               Orange County
                         Household Type                    Households        %         Households        %
       Family households:                                    25,065         75%          708,491        71%
          Husband-wife family                                20,792         63%          538,268        54%
            With own children under 18 years                  8,971         27%          258,719        26%
          Male householder, no wife present                   1,306         4%            54,615        6%
            With own children under 18 years                   586          2%            22,972        2%
          Female householder, no husband present              2,967         9%           115,608        12%
            With own children under 18 years                  1,307         4%            53,896        5%
       Nonfamily households:                                  8,143         25%          284,290        29%
            Householder living alone                          6,314         19%          207,849        21%
       Households with individuals under 18 years            11,767         35%          375,387        38%
       Households with individuals 65 years and
                                                              9,335         28%          252,420        25%
       over
       Total households                                      33,208        100%          992,781       100%
       Average household size                                       2.78                          2.99
       Source: 2010 Census, Table DP-1
                                                           7                                       HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                                                          March 4, 2013

living alone, families related through marriage or blood, or unrelated persons sharing a single unit.
Persons in group quarters such as dormitories, retirement or convalescent homes, or other group living
situations are included in population totals, but are not considered households.
Table H-5 provides a comparison of households by type for the city and Orange County as a whole.
Family households comprised approximately 75% of all households in the city, somewhat higher than the
county with 71%. In general, household composition in the city is similar to that of the County although
there is a higher proportion of traditional husband/wife families in the city as compared to the county as a
whole (63% city vs. 54% countywide). The city’s average household size (i.e., the average number of
persons in a household) of 2.78 is slightly lower than Orange County as a whole (2.99).
           2.    Housing Tenure and Vacancy
Housing tenure (owner vs. renter) is an important indicator of the housing market. Communities need an
adequate supply of units available both for rent and for sale in order to accommodate a range of
households with varying income, family size and composition, and lifestyle. Table H-6 provides a
comparison of an estimate of the number of owner-occupied and renter-occupied units in the city in 2010
as compared to the county as a whole1. This table reveals that the level of homeownership for the city
(76%) is substantially higher than for the county as a whole (56%). The vacancy rate in Mission Viejo was
estimated to be 3% compared to 5% for the county as a whole.
                                                      Table H-6
                                          Household Tenure and Vacancy –
                                          Mission Viejo vs. Orange County
                                                                       Mission Viejo              Orange County
                            Housing Type                             Units          %            Units            %
  Occupied housing units                                               33,208      97%            992,781        95%
      Owner-occupied housing units                                     25,859      76%            588,313        56%
      Average household size of owner-occupied units                     2.80                        2.98
      Renter-occupied housing units                                     7,349      21%            404,468        39%
      Average household size of renter-occupied units                    2.72                        3.00
  Vacant housing units                                                  1,020      3%              56,126        5%
      For rent                                                             381     1%              25,254        2%
      Rented, not occupied                                                  17    0.0%              1,327       0.1%
      For sale only                                                        232     1%               8,434        1%
      Sold, not occupied                                                    69    0.2%              2,096       0.2%
      For seasonal, recreational, or occasional use                        123     0%              10,806        1%
      All other vacants                                                    198     1%               8,209        1%
  Homeowner vacancy rate (%)                                               0.9                         1.4
  Rental vacancy rate (%)                                                  4.9                         5.9
  Total housing units                                                  34,228     100%          1,048,907       100%
  Source: 2010 Census, Table DP-1
1
  The 2010 Census housing unit count for Mission Viejo is under review and may undergo revision as part of the U.S.
    Census Bureau’s Count Question Resolution process.
                                                           8                                       HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                                                            March 4, 2013

        3.   Overcrowding
Overcrowding is often closely related to household income and the cost of housing. The U.S. Census
Bureau considers a household to be overcrowded when there is more than one person per room, excluding
bathrooms and kitchens, with severe overcrowding when there are more than 1.5 occupants per room.
Table H-7 summarizes overcrowding for the City of Mission Viejo and Orange County as a whole.
                                                    Table H-7
                                                Overcrowding –
                                     Mission Viejo vs. Orange County
                                                       Mission Viejo   Orange County
                    Occupants per Room               Units        %   Units       %
               Owner occupied units                   26,816    100%  599,032   100%
                 1.01 to 1.50                            258      1%   18,297    3%
                 1.51 to 2.00                             68      0%    4,962    1%
                 2.01 or more                              0     0.0%   1,527   0.3%
               Renter occupied units                   6,783    100%  385,471   100%
                 1.01 to 1.50                            457      7%   38,874    10%
                 1.51 to 2.00                             71      1%   18,709    5%
                 2.01 or more                             27      0%    7,508    2%
               Source: Census 2006-2010 ACS, Table B25014
This table shows that overcrowding was more prevalent among renters than for owner-occupied units.
Approximately 8% of the city’s renter-occupied households were overcrowded compared to only1% of
owner-occupants.
        4.   Household Income and Overpayment
Household income is a primary factor affecting housing needs in a community. According to the U.S.
Census, the median household income in Mission Viejo during 2006-2010 was $95,878, approximately
29% higher than the Orange County median income of $74,344 (Table H-8). Median income in Mission
Viejo was comparable to most of the adjacent cities.
                                                        9                           HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                                          March 4, 2013

                                                          Table H-8
                                              Median Household Income –
                                          Orange County and Selected Cities
                                                                    Median         % of County
                                                                   Household          Median
                                        Jurisdiction                Income            Income
                               Mission Viejo                        $95,878            129%
                               Laguna Niguel                        $97,018            130%
                               Rancho Santa Margarita               $99,722            134%
                               Laguna Beach                         $98,634            133%
                               Lake Forest                          $91,040            122%
                               Dana Point                           $80,609            108%
                               San Juan Capistrano                  $76,686            103%
                               Orange County                        $74,344            100%
                               California                           $60,883             82%
                               Source: U.S. Census, 2006-2010 ACS, Table DP-3
According to state housing policy, overpaying occurs when housing costs exceed 30% of gross household
income. Table H-9 displays estimates for overpayment during 2005-2009 by income category. According
to the U.S. Census, 65% of all lower-income owner households and 91% of all lower-income renter
households in Mission Viejo were overpaying for housing. The incidence of overpayment was
substantially lower for households in the moderate- and above-moderate-income categories. Extremely
low-income owners appeared to suffer the greatest cost burden, with over 90% of both owners and renters
in this category overpaying for housing.
                                                          Table H-9
                                         Overpayment by Income Category –
                                                        Mission Viejo
                                                                     Owners                          Renters
                      Income Category                          Households     Percent        Households     Percent
       Extremely low households                                        710                             465
         Households overpaying                                         665       93.7%                 440     94.6%
       Very low households                                           2,320                           1,295
         Households overpaying                                       1,435       61.9%               1,185     91.5%
       Low households                                                3,230                           1,860
         Households overpaying                                       1,955       60.5%               1,670     89.8%
       Subtotal: All lower-income households                         6,260                           3,620
         Households overpaying                                       4,055       64.8%               3,295     91.0%
       Moderate households                                           5,370                           1,355
         Households overpaying                                       3,180       59.2%                 575     42.4%
       Above moderate households                                    14,980                           1,880
         Households overpaying                                       3,295       22.0%                  90      4.8%
       Source: U.S. Dept. of Housing and Urban Development, CHAS, based on the 2005-2009 ACS. Table 15.
Although homeowners enjoy income and property tax deductions and other benefits that help to
compensate for high housing costs, lower-income homeowners may need to defer maintenance or repairs
                                                               10                                       HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                                                              March 4, 2013

due to limited funds, which can lead to deterioration. For lower-income renters, severe cost burden can
require families to double up resulting in overcrowding and related problems. The federal Section 8
Housing Choice Voucher program is one of the largest sources of assistance for lower-income renters.
Unfortunately, funding levels for this program do not match the level of need, and long waiting lists are
the norm. Programs to facilitate the production of new affordable rental units can help to alleviate
overpayment (see Chapter 5 for a discussion of City programs to encourage and facilitate the development
of additional housing for lower-income residents).
2.3      Employment
Employment is an important factor affecting housing needs within a community. The jobs available in
each employment sector and the wages for these jobs affect the type and size of housing residents can
afford.
         1.    Current Employment
Current employment and projected job growth have a significant influence on housing needs during this
planning period. Table H-10 shows that the city had a workforce of 50,341 persons, or 68% of the
working-age population, as reported by the Census Bureau. This table shows that the characteristics of the
city’s population are nearly identical to those countywide, With over two-thirds of those aged 16 and over
in the labor force during 2006-2010.
                                                       Table H-10
                                                     Labor Force –
                                        Mission Viejo vs. Orange County
                                                           Mission Viejo    Orange County
                        Labor Force Status              Persons       %  Persons       %
                 Population 16 years and over             73,894    100% 2,315,782   100%
                  In labor force                          50,341     68% 1,559,264    67%
                     Civilian labor force                 50,280     68% 1,556,696    67%
                       Employed                           47,222     64% 1,442,008    62%
                       Unemployed                          3,058      4%   114,688    5%
                     Armed Forces                              61     0%     2,568    0%
                  Not in labor force                      23,553     32%   756,518    33%
                 Source: Census 2006-2010 ACS, Table DP3
During 2006-2010, approximately 49% of the city’s working residents were employed in management
and professional occupations (Table H-11). A significant percentage of workers (29%) were employed in
sales and office related occupations. A relatively low percentage of workers (12%) were employed in
service related occupations such as waiters, waitresses and beauticians. Blue collar occupations such as
machine operators, assemblers, farming, transportation, handlers and laborers constituted approximately
11% of the workforce.
                                                            11                           HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                                               March 4, 2013

                                                       Table H-11
                                           Employment by Occupation –
                                                      Mission Viejo
                                                                                Mission Viejo
                                           Occupation                        Persons       %
             Civilian employed population 16 years and over                    47,222    100%
                Management, business, science, and arts occupations            23,111     49%
                Service occupations                                             5,571     12%
                Sales and office occupations                                   13,672     29%
                Natural resources, construction, and maintenance occupations    2,677      6%
                Production, transportation, and material moving occupations     2,191      5%
             Source: U.S. Census 2006-2010 ACS, Table DP3
        2.    Projected Job Growth
Future housing needs are affected by the number and type of new jobs created during this planning period.
Table H-12 shows projected job growth by occupation for the Santa Ana-Anaheim-Irvine MSA (Orange
County) for the period 2008-2018. Total employment in Orange County is expected to grow by 8.4%
during this 10-year period. The overall growth is expected to add 135,500 new jobs and bring the total
employment in Orange County to approximately 1.75 million by 2018.
                                                           12                             HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                                                March 4, 2013

                                                                 Table H-12
                                       2008-2018 Industry Employment Projections –
                                                              Orange County
                                                                                          Annual Average                     Employment
 NAICS                                                                                       Employment                         Change
 Code             Industry Title                                                         2008             2018            Jobs         Percent
                  Total Employment                                                     1,620,600        1,756,100        135,500              8.4
                  Self Employment (A)                                                    124,300           127,800           3,500            2.8
                  Unpaid Family Workers (B)                                                 1,200             1,300            100            8.3
                  Private Household Workers (C)                                             8,900           13,000           4,100           46.1
                  Total Farm                                                                4,600             4,600               0           0.0
                  Total Nonfarm                                                        1,481,600        1,609,400        127,800              8.6
 1133,21            Mining and Logging                                                        600               600               0           0.0
 23                 Construction                                                          91,200            99,500           8,300            9.1
 31-33              Manufacturing                                                        174,100           168,000          -6,100           -3.5
 22,42-49          Trade, Transportation, and Utilities                                  271,600           292,800         21,200             7.8
 42                 Wholesale Trade                                                       86,700            92,000           5,300            6.1
 44-45              Retail Trade                                                         155,600           168,700         13,100             8.4
 22,48-49          Transportation, Warehousing, and Utilities                             29,300            32,100           2,800            9.6
 48-49              Transportation and Warehousing                                        25,400            27,300           1,900            7.5
 51                Information                                                            30,100            29,800            -300           -1.0
 52-53             Financial Activities                                                  113,100           118,100           5,000            4.4
 52                 Finance and Insurance                                                 76,100            80,500           4,400            5.8
 53                Real Estate and Rental and Leasing                                     37,000            37,600             600            1.6
 54-56             Professional and Business Services                                    266,600           300,100         33,500            12.6
 55                 Management of Companies and Enterprises                               26,100            27,000             900            3.4
 56                 Admin/Support and Waste Mgmt & Remediation                           124,500           136,400         11,900             9.6
 61-62             Education Svcs, Health Care, and Social Assistance                    150,700           183,900         33,200            22.0
 61                 Educational Services (Private)                                        23,600            27,400           3,800           16.1
 62                 Health Care and Social Assistance                                    127,100           156,500         29,400            23.1
 71-72             Leisure and Hospitality                                               176,400           195,900         19,500            11.1
 71                 Arts, Entertainment, and Recreation                                   36,800            40,500           3,700           10.1
 72                 Accommodation and Food Services                                      139,700           155,400         15,700            11.2
 81                Other Svcs (excludes Private Household Workers)                        46,500            49,600           3,100            6.7
                   Government                                                            160,800           171,100         10,300             6.4
                    Federal Government                                                    11,700            11,600            -100           -0.9
                    State and Local Government                                           149,000           159,500         10,500             7.0
                    State Government                                                      28,000            31,500           3,500           12.5
                    Local Government                                                     121,000           128,000           7,000            5.8
 Source: California Employment Development Department, March 2009 Benchmark
 Industry detail may not add up to totals due to independent rounding
 (A) Self-Employed persons work for profit or fees in their own business, profession, trade, or farm. Only the unincorporated self-employed are
 included in this category. The estimated and projected employment numbers include all workers who are primarily self-employed and wage and
 salary workers who hold a secondary job as a self-employed worker.
 (B) Unpaid family workers are those persons who work without pay for 15 or more hours per week on a farm or in a business operated by a
 member of the household to whom they are related by birth or marriage.
 (C) Private Household Workers are employed as domestic workers whose primary activities are to maintain the household.
 Industry employment is based on the Quarterly Census of Employment and Wages (QCEW) program.
According to the U.S. Census Bureau, about 91% of employed Mission Viejo residents worked in Orange
County, and approximately 25% of all workers were employed within the city limits (Table H-13).
                                                                      13                                               HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                                                                                  March 4, 2013

                                                    Table H-13
                                Job Location for Mission Viejo Residents
                                              Job Location                 %
                             Worked in state of residence                 99.40%
                                 Worked in county of residence            91.10%
                                    Worked in place of residence          24.80%
                                 Worked outside county of residence        8.40%
                             Worked outside state of residence             0.60%
                             Source: Census 2006-2010 ACS, Table S0801
2.4      Housing Stock Characteristics
This section presents an evaluation of the characteristics of the community’s housing stock and helps in
identifying and prioritizing needs. The factors evaluated include the number and type of housing units,
recent growth trends, age and condition, tenure, vacancy, housing costs, affordability, and assisted
affordable units at-risk of loss due to conversion to market-rate. A housing unit is defined as a house,
apartment, mobile home, or group of rooms, occupied as separate living quarters, or if vacant, intended for
occupancy as separate living quarters.
         1.   Housing Type and Growth Trends
The housing stock in Mission Viejo is comprised mostly of single-family detached homes, which made up
72% of all units in 2012, while multi-family units comprised about 16% of the total. About 12% of units
were reported as single-family attached units (condos). Table H-14 provides a breakdown of the housing
stock by type along with growth trends for the city compared to the county as a whole for the period 2000
- 2012. Compared to the entire county, the city has a significantly higher proportion of single-family
detached units, which reflects the original land use plan for the Mission Viejo Planned Community.
Between 2000 and 2012, single-family detached homes represented 41% of all units added to the city’s
housing stock while larger multi-family (5+) developments represented 69% of the units added. This rate
of growth varies from the county, which experienced a 55% increase in single-family detached homes and
a 36% increase in multi-family 5+ developments during the same period.
                                                          14                            HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                                              March 4, 2013

                                                                Table H-14
                                                   Housing by Type, 2000-2012 –
                                                Mission Viejo vs. Orange County
                                                         2000                                  2012                               Growth
          Structure Type
                                                Units               %                  Units                 %             Units             %
Mission Viejo
Single-family detached                         24,246              74%                     24,770          72%              524             41%
Single-family attached                          4,021              12%                       4,121         12%              100              8%
Multi-family 2-4 units                          1,117               3%                         924          3%             -193            -15%
Multi-family 5+ units                           3,512              11%                       4,388         13%              876             69%
Mobile homes                                      89              0.3%                           51        0.1%             -38             -3%
Total units                                    32,985             100%                     34,254         100%             1,269           100%
Orange County
Single-family detached                        489,657              51%                    535,361          51%            45,704            55%
Single-family attached                        124,702              13%                    127,669          12%             2,967             4%
Multi-family 2-4 units                         88,804               9%                     91,781           9%             2,977             4%
Multi-family 5+ units                         233,871              24%                    264,026          25%            30,155            36%
Mobile homes                                   32,450               3%                     33,524           3%             1,074             1%
Total units                                   969,484             100%                  1,052,361         100%            82,877           100%
Source: Cal. Dept. of Finance, Table E-5, 2012
Note: The net growth in housing units by type reflects adjustments in units that were incorrectly tabulated in Mission Viejo in the 2000 Census, and
which were subsequently reconciled and reassigned to neighboring municipalities. Also, a correction to the tabulation of mobile home will be
pursued through the 2010 Census Count resolution process, as there are no mobile home parks in the City.
           2.      Housing Age and Conditions
Housing age is often an important indicator of housing condition. Housing units built prior to 1978, before
stringent limits on the amount of lead in paint were imposed, may have interior or exterior building
components coated with lead-based paint. Housing units built before 1970 are the most likely to need
rehabilitation and to have lead-based paint in deteriorated condition. Lead-based paint becomes hazardous
to children under age six and to pregnant women when it peels off walls or is pulverized by windows and
doors opening and closing.
Table H-15 shows the age distribution of the housing stock in Mission Viejo compared to Orange County
as a whole.
                                                                       15                                                 HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                                                                                     March 4, 2013

                                                       Table H-15
                                                Age of Housing Stock –
                                          Mission Viejo vs. Orange County
                                                            Mission Viejo    Orange County
                              Year Built                  Units        %   Units         %
                    Built 2005 or later                        42     0%     21,184     2%
                    Built 2000 to 2004                      1,161     3%     63,957     6%
                    Built 1990 to 1999                      5,396     16%   120,798     12%
                    Built 1980 to 1989                      9,093     26%   167,031     16%
                    Built 1970 to 1979                     14,468     42%   262,455     25%
                    Built 1960 to 1969                      3,774     11%   215,213     21%
                    Built 1950 to 1959                        257     1%    138,061     13%
                    Built 1940 to 1949                        114     0%     26,745     3%
                    Built 1939 or earlier                     136     0%     26,810     3%
                  Total units                              34,441    100% 1,042,254    100%
                  Source: Census 2006-2010 ACS, Table DP-4
Large-scale development in Mission Viejo began in the 1960s; therefore, relatively few housing units are
more than 40 years old. Only about 12% of housing units were constructed prior to 1970. The largest
portion of the city’s housing units (42%) were built during the 1970s and are now more than 30 years old.
According to City Building and Code Enforcement staff, it is estimated that approximately 1% to 2% of
the housing stock (340-680 units) are in need of some type of repair or rehabilitation. .
The goal of the City’s Code Enforcement program is to address housing concerns before they become
serious problems, and staff responds to daily calls from citizens regarding code violations and informs
eligible parties of available programs to assist in correcting problems. The proactive Code Enforcement
program has helped to reduce structural deterioration by identifying problems and directing residents to
available resources to assist with improvements.
         3.    Housing Cost
a.       Housing Affordability Criteria
State law establishes five income categories for purposes of housing programs based on the area (i.e.,
county) median income (“AMI”): extremely-low (30% or less of AMI), very-low (31-50% of AMI), low
(51-80% of AMI), moderate (81-120% of AMI) and above moderate (over 120% of AMI). Housing
affordability is based on the relationship between household income and housing expenses. According to
HUD and the California Department of Housing and Community Development2, housing is considered
“affordable” if the monthly payment is no more than 30% of a household’s gross income. In some areas
(such as Orange County), these income limits may be increased to adjust for high housing costs.
Table H-16 shows affordable rent levels and estimated affordable purchase prices for housing in Mission
Viejo (and Orange County)3 by income category. Based on state-adopted standards for a 4-person family,
the maximum affordable monthly rent for extremely-low-income households is $723, while the maximum
2
   HCD memo of 2/1/2012
3  Affordable rent and purchase prices are based on county median income.
                                                              16                           HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                                                 March 4, 2013

affordable rent for very-low-income households is $1,204. The maximum affordable rent for low-income
households is $1,926, while the maximum for moderate-income households is $2,559.
Maximum purchase prices are more difficult to determine due to variations in mortgage interest rates and
qualifying procedures, down payments, special tax assessments, homeowner association fees, property
insurance rates, etc. With this caveat, the maximum home purchase price by income category shown in
Table H-16 are estimates based on typical conditions. Affordable purchase prices have only been
estimated for moderate- and above-moderate-income households since those in the lower-income
categories typically have a much more difficult time qualifying for a mortgage.
                                                        Table H-16
                            Income Categories and Affordable Housing Costs –
                                                      Orange County
                  2012 County Median Income =                      Income          Affordable     Affordable
                               $85,300                              Limits            Rent        Price (est.)
              Extremely Low (<30%)                                 $28,900            $723             --
              Very Low (31-50%)                                    $48,150           $1,204            --
              Low (51-80%)                                         $77,050           $1,926            --
              Moderate (81-120%)                                  $102,350           $2,559         $400,000
              Above moderate (120%+)                             >$102,350           >$2,559      >$400,000
              Assumptions:
               -Based on a family of 4
               -30% of gross income for rent or Principal/Interest/Taxes/Insurance
               -10% down payment, 4.5% interest, 1.25% taxes & insurance, $200 HOA dues
              Source: Cal. HCD; J.H. Douglas & Associates
b.      For-Sale Housing
Housing sales price statistics in Mission Viejo during 2012 (Table H-17) show that median single-family
home prices were in the range of $449,000 to $515,000 while median condo prices ranged between
$189,000 and $329,000 depending on zip code..
                                                        Table H-17
                                             Housing Sales Prices 2012 –
                                                       Mission Viejo
                                                          Single-Family                Condo
                                 Zip Code             Sales        Median       Sales     Median
                                   92691               230          $449,000      89       $189,000
                                   92692               268          $515,000      95       $329,000
                           Source: DQ News, 6/2012
Based on the estimated affordable purchase prices shown in Table H-16, very few for-sale single-family
detached units are affordable to lower- or moderate-income residents, although condos may provide
affordable ownership opportunities, particularly under the current favorable market conditions. It is
recognized, however, that large public subsidies would be required to reduce sales prices of new housing
                                                               17                                        HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                                                               March 4, 2013

units to a level that is affordable to lower-income buyers. These statistics illustrate why affordable housing
programs often emphasize rental rather than for-sale housing.
c.        Rental Housing
As described previously in the discussion of income and overpayment (Table H-9), the majority of renters
in Mission Viejo fall within the lower-income categories. As a result, trends in rental rates have a major
impact on these residents. According to the apartment research firm RealFacts4, rents in Orange County
reached an all-time high in 2012 with a countywide average of $1,604. In the wake of the financial crisis
of 2008-2009 average rents in Orange County declined from $1,603 in 2008 to $1,473 in early 2010, but
growing demand has allowed the market to fully recover those temporary losses. Real estate professionals
expect rents to continue rising in the near future as growing demand exceeds the pace of new apartment
construction.
When market rents are compared to the amount lower-income households can afford to pay (Table H-16),
it is clear that very-low- and extremely-low-income households have a difficult time finding housing
without overpaying. The gap between current average rent and affordable rent for 4-person families at the
very-low-income level is about $400 per month, while the gap at the extremely-low-income level is $881
per month. However, at the low-income and moderate-income levels, households are much more likely to
find affordable rentals.
2.5       Special Needs
Certain groups have greater difficulty in finding decent, affordable housing due to special circumstances.
Such circumstances may be related to one’s employment and income, family characteristics, disability, or
other conditions. As a result, some Mission Viejo residents may experience a higher prevalence of
overpayment, overcrowding, or other housing problems.
State Housing Element law defines “special needs” groups to include persons with disabilities (including
developmental disabilities), the elderly, large households, female-headed households with children,
homeless people, and farm workers. This section contains a discussion of the housing needs facing each of
these groups.
          1.     Persons with Disabilities
The most recent available Census data found that approximately 4,653 people between 16 and 64 years of
age, or 8% of the working age population, reported a work-related disability (see Table H-18). Of those
aged 65 and over, 2,222 (22%) reported some form of physical disability. Reported disabilities that
hindered the ability to go outside the home represented 4% of working age persons and 19% of the
elderly. Housing opportunities for the handicapped can be maximized through housing assistance
programs and providing universal design features such as widened doorways, ramps, lowered countertops,
single-level units and ground floor units.
4
  OC Apartment Rents Hit Record High, OC Register, 7/23/2012 (http://lansner.ocregister.com/2012/07/18/o-c-apartment-
    rents-hit-record-high/164715/)
                                                        18                                        HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                                                          March 4, 2013

                                                             Table H-18
                                     Persons with Disabilities by Age Group –
                                                           Mission Viejo
                                     Disability by Age                                  Disabilities           Percent
                   Age 5 to 15 - total persons*                                           16,130
                     With a sensory disability                                                76                  0.5%
                     With a physical disability                                              153                  0.9%
                     With a mental disability                                                524                  3.2%
                     With a self-care disability                                              75                  0.5%
                   Age 16 to 64 - total persons*                                          60,405
                     With a sensory disability                                               787                  1.3%
                     With a physical disability                                            1,927                  3.2%
                     With a mental disability                                              1,024                  1.7%
                     With a self-care disability                                             404                  0.7%
                     With a go-outside-the-home disability                                 2,199                  3.6%
                     With an employment disability                                         4,653                  7.7%
                   Age 65 and over - total persons*                                       10,139
                     With a sensory disability                                             1,058                 10.4%
                     With a physical disability                                            2,222                 21.9%
                     With a mental disability                                              1,099                 10.8%
                     With a self-care disability                                             984                  9.7%
                     With a go-outside-the-home disability                                 1,958                 19.3%
                   Source: 2000 Census, SF3 Tables P8 and P41 (Note: Neither the 2010 Census nor ACS reported disabilities)
                   *Numbers in shaded rows represent persons, not disabilities. Persons may report more than one disability
Developmentally Disabled
As defined by federal law, “developmental disability” means a severe, chronic disability of an individual
that:
            Is attributable to a mental or physical impairment or combination of mental and physical
             impairments;
            Is manifested before the individual attains age 22;
            Is likely to continue indefinitely;
            Results in substantial functional limitations in three or more of the following areas of major
             life activity: a) self-care; b) receptive and expressive language; c) learning; d) mobility; e)
             self-direction; f) capacity for independent living; or g) economic self-sufficiency;
            Reflects the individual’s need for a combination and sequence of special, interdisciplinary, or
             generic services, individualized supports, or other forms of assistance that are of lifelong or
             extended duration and are individually planned and coordinated.
The U.S. Census Bureau does not record developmental disabilities. According to the U.S. Administration
on Developmental Disabilities, an accepted estimate of the percentage of the population that can be
defined as developmentally disabled is 1.5 percent. Many developmentally disabled persons can live and
work independently within a conventional housing environment. More severely disabled individuals
require a group living environment where supervision is provided. The most severely affected individuals
may require an institutional environment where medical attention and physical therapy are provided.
Because developmental disabilities exist before adulthood, the first issue in supportive housing for the
developmentally disabled is the transition from the person’s living situation as a child to an appropriate
level of independence as an adult.
                                                                     19                                                     HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                                                                                  March 4, 2013

The State Department of Developmental Services (DDS) currently provides community-based services to
approximately 243,000 persons with developmental disabilities and their families through a statewide
system of 21 regional centers, four developmental centers, and two community-based facilities. The
Regional Center of Orange County (RCOC) is one of 21 regional centers in California that provides
point of entry to services for people with developmental disabilities. The RCOC is a private, non-profit
community agency that contracts with local businesses to offer a wide range of services to individuals
with developmental disabilities and their families.
Any resident of Orange County who has a developmental disability that originated before age 18 is
eligible for services. Services are offered to people with developmental disabilities based on Individual
Program Plans and may include: Adult day programs; advocacy; assessment/consultation; behavior
management programs; diagnosis and evaluation; independent living services; infant development
programs; information and referrals; mobility training; prenatal diagnosis; residential care; respite care;
physical and occupational therapy; transportation; consumer, family vendor training; and vocational
training. RCOC also coordinates the state-mandated Early Start program, which provides services for
children under age three who have or are at substantial risk of having a developmental disability.
According to the RCOC February 2010 Facts and Statistics data, the RCOC currently serves
approximately 16,728 individuals.
The mission of the Dayle McIntosh Center is to advance the empowerment, equality, integration and full
participation of people with disabilities in the community. The Center is not a residential program, but
instead promotes the full integration of disabled persons into the community. Dayle McIntosh Center is a
consumer-driven organization serving all disabilities. Its staff and board are composed of over 50% of
people with disabilities. Its two offices service over 500,000 people in Orange County and surrounding
areas with disabilities. The Center’s South County branch is located in Laguna Hills, immediately
adjacent to Mission Viejo.
Vocational Visions (www.vocationalvisions.org), a non-profit organization located in Mission Viejo, has
provided services to local residents with developmental disabilities in partnership with the Saddleback
Valley Unified School District since 1974 when the program began with 30 clients and staff of five. This
organization currently has over 400 clients and a staff of over 100 people.
Vocational Visions has helped thousands of men and women with disabilities obtain employment, further
education and reach both professional and personal goals. Effective treatment increases the level of
functioning for many of these clients, thus maximizing their quality of life vocationally, economically and
socially. Services are provided to qualifying persons at no charge.
Vocational Visions is accredited by the Commission on Accreditation of Rehabilitation Facilities (CARF)
and is the only facility-based program in south Orange County. It offers eight comprehensive programs
including:
        Day Training Activity Program
        Health Related Services Program
        Emeritus Program
        Adult Development Program
        Work Activity Program
        Vocational Rehabilitation Work Activity Program
        Supported Employment
        South County Clubhouse
                                                     20                                  HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                                               March 4, 2013

In addition to these resources, the City responds to the needs of the developmentally disabled population
through programs that facilitate new affordable housing development, preservation of existing low- and
moderate-income housing, and equal housing opportunity.
        2.     Elderly
According to the Census Bureau, one-quarter of owner households and 16% of renter households in
Mission Viejo reported a householder age 65 or older (Table H-19). Many elderly persons are dependent
on fixed incomes and/or have disabilities, as seen in Table H-18. Elderly homeowners may be physically
unable to maintain their home or cope with living alone. The housing needs of this group can be addressed
through smaller units, second units on lots with existing homes, shared living facilities (such as board and
care homes), congregate housing and housing assistance programs. In addition, homes occupied by
“empty-nester” seniors represent a significant supply of potential move-up housing for younger families if
suitable alternative living arrangements can be found for these seniors.
                                                       Table H-19
                                          Elderly Households by Tenure –
                                                      Mission Viejo
                                                          Owner                Renter
                      Householder Age            Households          %  Households      %
                      Under 65 years                  20,170        75%      5,691     84%
                      65 to 74 years                    3,426       13%        404     6%
                      75 to 84 years                    2,448       9%         391     6%
                      85 years and over                   772       3%         297     4%
                    Total Households                  26,816       100%      6,783    100%
                    Source: U.S. Census 2006-2010 ACS, Table B25007
        3.     Large Households
Household size is an indicator of need for large units. Large households are defined as those with five or
more members. The Census Bureau reported that approximately 53% of owner households and 62% of
renter households in Mission Viejo have only one or two members. About 10% of owner households and
about 9% of renter households had five or more members. (Table H-20). This distribution indicates that
the need for large units with four or more bedrooms is expected to be significantly less than for smaller
units.
                                                              21                           HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                                                 March 4, 2013

                                                          Table H-20
                                                Household Size by Tenure –
                                                         Mission Viejo
                                                             Owner                  Renter
                          Householder Age           Households          %    Households      %
                       1 person                            5,156       19%        2,073     31%
                       2 persons                           9,048       34%        2,102     31%
                       3 persons                           4,480       17%        1,164     17%
                       4 persons                           5,369       20%          794     12%
                       5 persons                           1,931       7%           372     5%
                       6 persons                             564       2%           216     3%
                       7 persons or more                     268       1%            62     1%
                       Total Households                  26,816       100%        6,783    100%
                       Source: U.S. Census 2006-2010 ACS, Table B25009
         4.      Female-Headed Households
The Census Bureau estimated that 7% of owner households and 13% of renter households in the city were
headed by a female (Table H-21). While female-headed households represent a relatively small portion of
all households, they may have difficulty finding affordable housing due to difficulties juggling
employment and child care responsibilities. Many of the assistance programs described in Chapter 6 will
help to address the needs of this group.
                                                          Table H-21
                                               Household Type by Tenure –
                                                         Mission Viejo
                                                                      Owner                    Renter
                      Household Type                        Households       %        Households        %
       Married couple family                                       18,102   68%              2,600     38%
       Male householder, no wife present                              665    2%                427     6%
       Female householder, no husband present                       1,769    7%                899     13%
       Non-family households                                        6,280   23%              2,857     42%
       Total Households                                            26,816   100%             6,783    100%
       Source: U.S. Census 2006-2010 ACS, Table B11012
         5.      Farm Workers
Farm workers are traditionally defined as persons whose primary income is from seasonal agricultural
work. Historically Orange County’s economy was linked to agriculture. While there are still active
farming areas on the Irvine Ranch and some other areas, shifts in the local economy to technology,
production and service-oriented sectors have significantly curtailed agricultural activities within the
county. Today, Orange County is a mostly developed urban/suburban region with a strong local economy
that is not tied to an agricultural base.
                                                                 22                               HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                                                        March 4, 2013

The U.S. Census5 reported that 209 persons living in Mission Viejo were employed in agricultural
occupations. This total includes all occupations, including profession and managerial categories.. The
nearest major agricultural areas to the City of Mission Viejo are the Irvine Ranch, approximately 5 miles
to the northwest, and Rancho Mission Viejo to the southeast. Since there are no agricultural operations
within Mission Viejo, the need for permanent farmworker housing is of less concern than in other areas
where large-scale agricultural operations exist. The needs of agricultural workers who are permanent
residents are addressed through a variety of affordable housing programs that serve the needs of all lower-
income persons and are not restricted only to farmworkers.
         6.     Homeless Persons
Throughout the country, homelessness is a serious problem. Factors contributing to homelessness include:
the general lack of emergency shelters and transitional housing, housing affordable to lower-income
persons; an increasing number of persons whose incomes fall below the poverty level; reductions in public
assistance for the poor; and the de-institutionalization of the mentally ill.
To estimate the number of homeless in the city an analysis of existing studies/estimates was utilized and
different organizations and agencies were consulted. The County of Orange Housing and Community
Services Department undertakes a biannual “Point-in-Time” survey of the homeless population as part of
its application for homeless assistance grant funds to HUD. The most recent Point-in-Time survey,
conducted in January 2011, estimated that there were approximately 6,939 homeless persons at the time of
the survey, of which 2,667 were sheltered and 4,272 were unsheltered6. While the 2011 survey did not
estimate the total homeless population by jurisdiction, the survey did ask respondents where they lived
just prior to becoming homeless. Of the 610 survey respondents, 3 (0.49%) reported Mission Viejo as
their last city of residence.
By the very nature of homelessness, it is difficult to determine the location of homeless persons. Based on
field observations, the City’s Police Department estimates that there are approximately 10 homeless
individuals at any given time in Mission Viejo. Regardless of what methodology is used for estimating the
location of the homeless, this is a regional issue and the City will continue to work cooperatively with the
County and other agencies to address it from a regional perspective.
Senate Bill (SB) 2 of 2007 requires that jurisdictions quantify the need for emergency shelter and
determine whether existing facilities are adequate to serve the need. An emergency shelter is defined as
“housing with minimal supportive services for homeless persons that is limited to occupancy of six
months or less by a homeless person. No individual or household may be denied emergency shelter
because of an inability to pay.” If adequate existing facilities are not available, the law requires
jurisdictions to identify areas where new facilities are permitted “by-right” (i.e., without requiring
discretionary approval such as a use permit). A jurisdiction could also satisfy its shelter needs through a
multi-jurisdictional agreement with up to two adjacent communities to develop at least one year-round
shelter within two years of the beginning of the planning period. As noted in Chapter 4, in 2009 the City
adopted an emergency shelter ordinance in compliance with SB 2.
5
  2006-2010 ACS, Table S2405
6
  2011 Orange County Homeless Census and Survey Comprehensive Report, Applied Survey Research, 2011
                                                      23                                    HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                                                    March 4, 2013

Inventory of Emergency Shelters and Transitional Housing Facilities
Local facilities that are available to serve the needs of homeless persons and families in Mission Viejo are
discussed below.
             Emergency Shelters – Emergency shelters are generally geared toward providing immediate
              housing to persons without shelter. Stays in emergency shelters are typically limited to a short
              period of time (1 to 90 days). Several service agencies located near Mission Viejo provide
              emergency shelter and services for the homeless in south Orange County. These shelters and
              services are identified in Table H-22. The number of beds listed represents total shelter
              capacity – none of the shelter beds are restricted for persons from Mission Viejo. Based on
              this data, there are approximately 130 emergency shelter beds available to serve homeless
              persons who may be in Mission Viejo.
                                                          Table H-22
                                    Emergency Shelters Serving Mission Viejo
                                                No. of                                             % of Beds/Services for
      Shelter Name             Location1         Beds                           Services            Chronic Homeless
 CSP Youth Shelter         Laguna Beach             6       Emergency housing, support and family            0%
                                                            reunification services
 Cold Weather Shelter2     Laguna Beach            40       Emergency housing during winter months         100%
 Friendship Shelter        Laguna Beach             3       Emergency housing and support services         100%
 Gilchrist House           San Clemente            10       Emergency housing and supportive                20%
                                                            services for women and children
 Human Options             Irvine                  40       Emergency housing and support services          15%
                                                            for victims of domestic violence
 Laura’s House             San Clemente            30       Emergency housing and support services          15%
                                                            for victims of domestic violence
 Source: County of Orange Housing and Community Services Department
 1. Location may be administrative office and not location of shelter facility.
 2. Beds only available during winter months
             Transitional/Supportive Housing – Transitional and supportive housing is an important
              component for assisting homeless individuals and families to become self-sufficient. Two
              transitional/supportive housing facilities are located in Mission Viejo (Table H-23). The
              number of beds listed represents total shelter capacity – none of the shelter beds are restricted
              for persons from Mission Viejo. Based on this data, there are approximately 185 transitional
              housing beds available to serve residents of the city. City land use regulations permit
              transitional and supportive housing as a residential use subject to the same regulations and
              procedures that apply to other residential units of the same type in the same zone in
              conformance with state law.
                                                                 24                                 HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                                                             March 4, 2013

                                                        Table H-23
                      Transitional/Supportive Housing Facilities Serving Mission Viejo
                                                No. of                                                % of Beds/Services
     Shelter Name              Location          Beds                       Services                 for Chronic Homeless
 Families Forward         Irvine                  13       Transitional housing and supportive               10%
                                                           services for families
 Friendship Shelter       Laguna Beach            26       Transitional housing and supportive               30%
                                                           services for single adults
 Henderson House          San Clemente            24       Transitional housing for single adults            30%
                                                           recovering from substance addiction
 Hope’s House             Aliso Viejo             10       Transitional housing and supportive               30%
                                                           services for women with infants
 Gilchrist House          San Clemente            16       Transitional housing and supportive               25%
                                                           services for women and children
 Kathy’s House            San Juan Capistrano     12       Transitional housing & support services           25%
                                                           for victims of domestic violence
 Laura’s House            San Clemente             8       Transitional housing and support services         15%
                                                           for victims of domestic violence
 South County             Laguna Hills &       56 to 73    Transitional housing (17 housing units) &         25%
 Community Outreach       Mission Viejo                    support services for families (5 units in
                                                           Mission Viejo)
 Toby’s House             Capistrano Beach &      15       Transitional housing for pregnant women           0%
                          Mission Viejo                    and infants
 Source: County of Orange Housing and Community Services Department
2.6        Assisted Housing at Risk of Conversion
This section identifies all residential projects in the city that are under an affordability restriction, along
with those housing projects that are at risk of losing their low-income affordability restrictions within the
ten-year period 2013-2023. This information is also used in establishing quantified objectives for units
that can be conserved during this planning period. The inventory of assisted units includes all units that
have been assisted under any federal, state, local and/or other program.
State law requires local governments to analyze the potential of housing developments with affordability
assistance to convert to market rate housing. There are currently six projects with 369 affordable units in
Mission Viejo (Table H-24). During the next 10 years, none of these units will be eligible to convert from
low-income housing uses due to termination of subsidy contracts, mortgage prepayment, or expiration of
restrictions on use. As noted in this table and in Appendix B, three new projects that include affordable
units have also been approved recently but have not yet been completed. According to the Southern
California Association of Governments and the California Housing Partnership there are no other state- or
federally-assisted at-risk units in Mission Viejo.7
7 SCAG, 6/2011
                                                             25                                       HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                                                             March 4, 2013

                                                       Table H-24
                             Assisted Housing Developments – Mission Viejo
                                                                           Affordable     Household
      Project Name        Type of Public Assistance Total Units              Units          Type          Expiration Date
 Alicia Viejo             Section 8                           120              24          Families            2028
 Avalon                   Mortgage Revenue Bonds              166            34 VL         Families            2037
 Park Ridge Apartments    Mortgage Revenue Bonds              250            50 VL         Families            2028
 Heritage Villas          Mortgage Revenue Bonds              143            58 VL         Families            2053
                                                                            12 Low
                                                                            73 Mod
 Arroyo Vista             Mortgage Revenue Bonds              156            16 VL         Families            2049
                                                                            60 Low
 Sycamore Lane            Section 8                           208              42                            No limit
 Source: OC Housing & Community Services Dept. and City of Mission Viejo Community Development Dept., 2012
2.7       Future Growth Needs
          1.    Overview of the Regional Housing Needs Assessment
The Regional Housing Needs Assessment (RHNA) is a key tool for local governments to plan for
anticipated growth. The RHNA quantifies the anticipated need for housing for the 7-3/4-year period from
January 2014 to October 2021. Communities then determine how they will address this need through the
process of updating the Housing Element of their General Plans.
The current RHNA was adopted by the Southern California Association of Governments (SCAG) in
2012. The future need for new housing was determined primarily by the forecasted growth in households
in a community. Each new household, created by a child moving out of a parent's home, by a family
moving to a community for employment, and so forth, creates the need for a housing unit. The housing
need for new households was then adjusted to maintain a desirable level of vacancy to promote housing
choice and mobility. An adjustment was also made to account for units expected to be lost due to
demolition, natural disaster, or conversion to non-housing uses. These factors – household growth,
vacancy need, and replacement need – determined the region’s total construction need. Total housing need
was then distributed among four income categories on the basis of the current household income
distribution. The growth forecast used to develop the RHNA relied upon the most recent available
demographic data from the Census Bureau and the California Department of Finance, and is consistent
with the Regional Transportation Plan and Sustainable Communities Strategy, as required by state law.
After the total housing need was determined for the SCAG region, RHNA allocations to individual
jurisdictions were developed by SCAG based on local input and the state-mandated methodology. The
distribution of housing need by income category for each jurisdiction was adjusted to avoid an over-
concentration of lower-income households in any community.
          2.    2014-2021 Mission Viejo Growth Needs
In 2012 SCAG, adopted the final RHNA growth needs for each of the region’s cities and county
unincorporated areas. The total housing growth need for the City of Mission Viejo during the 2014-2021
planning period is 177 units. This total is distributed by income category as shown in Table H-25.
                                                            26                                         HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                                                              March 4, 2013

                                              Table H-25
                            Regional Housing Growth Needs - Mission Viejo
                   Extremely        Very
                      Low           Low     Low     Moderate     Above Mod      Total
                       21            21      29         33           73          177
                      12%           12%     16%        19%          41%        100.0%
                  Source: SCAG 2012
It should be noted that SCAG did not identify growth needs for the extremely-low-income category in the
adopted RHNA. As provided in Assembly Bill (AB) 2634 of 2006, jurisdictions may determine their
extremely-low-income need as one-half the need in the very-low category. A discussion of the City’s net
remaining growth need is provided in the land inventory section of Chapter 3.
                                                  27                                  HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                                            March 4, 2013

This page intentionally left blank.
                                    28 HOUSING ELEMENT
                                             March 4, 2013
                              3 . R esou rc es a nd O ppo rtunit i es
A variety of resources are available for the development, rehabilitation, and preservation of housing in the
City of Mission Viejo. This section provides an overview of the land resources and adequate sites
necessary to address the City’s regional housing needs allocation for the projection period of January 1,
2014 to October 1, 2021, as adopted by the Southern California Association of Governments in 2012 (see
Table H-25). This section also describes the financial and administrative resources available to support the
provision of affordable housing, as well as opportunities for energy conservation, which can lower utility
costs and increase housing affordability.
3.1     Land Resources
Section 65583(a)(3) of the Government Code requires Housing Elements to contain an “inventory of land
suitable for residential development, including vacant sites and sites having potential for redevelopment,
and an analysis of the relationship of zoning and public facilities and services to these sites.” A detailed
inventory of residential development sites is provided in Appendix B. The results of this analysis are
summarized in Table H-26, below. The table shows that the City’s land inventory for potential residential
development is more than sufficient to accommodate the RHNA in all income categories for this
projection period.
                                                      Table H-26
                                             Land Inventory Summary –
                                                 City of Mission Viejo
                                                                            Income Category
                                                                  VL/L           Mod        Above
                 Vacant sites (see Appendix B)                     405             16        636
                 Potential second units                              4
                 Total                                             409             16        636
                 RHNA (2014-2021)                                   71             33         73
                 Adequate sites?                                   Yes           Yes*        Yes
                 Source: City of Mission Viejo Community Development Dept., 2012
                 *Reflects excess VL/L sites
A discussion of public facilities and infrastructure needed to serve future development is contained in
Section IV.B, Non-Governmental Constraints. There are currently no known service limitations that
would preclude the level of development described in the RHNA, although developers will be required to
pay fees or construct public improvements prior to or concurrent with development. Additionally, while
some of the RHNA sites have environmental constraints such as steep slopes or geotechnical issues, the
level of development described in the RHNA reflects anticipated development yield given feasible
methods for addressing such constraints combined with the development potential of the unconstrained
land.
                                                            29                                   HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                                                       March 4, 2013

3.2    Financial and Administrative Resources
       1.    State and Federal Resources
Community Development Block Grant Program (CDBG)
     Federal funding for housing programs is available through the Department of Housing and Urban
     Development (HUD). The City’s use of federal funds is described in the 2010-2014 Consolidated
     Plan. As an Entitlement City, Mission Viejo participates in the Community Development Block
     Grant (CDBG) program. CDBG funds are used by the City to fund its Housing Rehabilitation
     Program (see Local Resources).
     CDBG funds may also be used to provide public services (including labor, supplies and material),
     provided that the public service meets a national objective of the CDBG program. The amount of
     CDBG funds obligated within a program year to support public service activities cannot exceed
     15% of the City’s total allocation. Several organizations operating service programs have been
     supported with City CDBG funds. These programs include childcare services, senior-housing
     services, legal services, disabled services, homeless prevention services, and support services to
     abused and neglected children. Unfortunately, the amount of CDBG funding has declined in recent
     years, and future grants are dependent on the federal budgeting process.
     The City does not currently participate in other HUD programs such as HOME, Emergency Shelter
     Grant (ESG) or Housing Opportunities for Persons with AIDS (HOPWA).
Section 8 Rental Assistance
     The City of Mission Viejo contracts with the Orange County Housing Authority, which administers
     the Section 8 Voucher Program. The Housing Assistance Payments Program assists low-income,
     elderly and disabled households by paying the difference between 30% of an eligible household's
     income and the actual cost of renting a unit. Approximately 280 tenant-based Section 8 vouchers are
     used in the City. The City facilitates use of the Section 8 program within its jurisdiction by
     encouraging apartment owners to list available rental units with the County Housing Authority for
     potential occupancy by tenants receiving Section 8 certificates.
Low-Income Housing Tax Credit Program
     The Low-Income Housing Tax Credit Program was created by the Tax Reform Act of 1986 to
     provide an alternate method of funding low-and moderate-income housing. Each state receives a tax
     credit, based upon population, toward funding housing that meets program guidelines. The tax
     credits are then used to leverage private capital into new construction or acquisition and
     rehabilitation of affordable housing. Limitations on projects funded under the Tax Credit programs
     include minimum requirements that a certain percentage of units remain rent-restricted, based upon
     median income, for a term of 15 years.
       2.    Local Resources
Mission Viejo Community Development Agency Set-Aside Funds
     The Mission Viejo Community Development Agency (CDA) Project Area was adopted in 1992. On
     February 1, 2012 all redevelopment agencies were dissolved by the State Legislature pursuant to
     Assembly Bill (AB) 1x26, and the City became the “Successor Agency” to the CDA. In 2011 the
     City established the Mission Viejo Housing Authority (MVHA) to be the Housing Successor to the
     CDA. All housing assets, including encumbered funds in the former CDA’s Low and Moderate
                                                    30                               HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                                            March 4, 2013

      Income Housing Fund, were transferred to the MVHA. At this time, the future disposition of
      low/mod set-aside funds is uncertain.
Mission Viejo Housing Rehabilitation Program
      The Mission Viejo Housing Rehabilitation Program provides technical and financial assistance to
      qualifying low-income households who are owner/occupants of single-family residential properties
      in the City of Mission Viejo. The program is currently funded with the Community Development
      Agency Housing Set-aside Fund and CDBG funds. The program’s objectives are to correct
      nonconforming uses, remedy code violations, and generally repair and improve deteriorating
      properties in an effort to provide decent housing and a suitable living environment for persons and
      families of low and moderate income. Financial assistance is provided in the form of a grant or
      deferred payment loan. Single-family rehabilitation grants in amounts up to $5,000 are available to
      qualifying property owners to correct existing local and/or state code violations and finance eligible
      exterior improvements to residential properties. The City offers deferred payment loans to eligible
      property owners in amounts up to $25,000 with combined loan and grants not to exceed $30,000.
Residential Mortgage Revenue Bonds
      The City has authorized participation in two County-administered Residential Mortgage Revenue
      Bond Program to increase the supply of affordable housing in the County - the Multi-Family
      Housing Revenue Bond Program and the Single-Family Residential Mortgage Revenue Bond
      Program. Under these programs, tax-exempt bonds are issued to provide funds for construction and
      mortgage loans to encourage developers to provide both rental and for-sale housing affordable to
      lower-income families and individuals.
3.3      Energy Conservation Opportunities
As residential energy costs rise, the subsequent increasing utility costs reduce the affordability of housing.
Although the City is fully developed, new infill development and rehabilitation activities are occurring,
allowing the City to directly affect energy use within its jurisdiction.
The City has many opportunities to directly affect energy use and conservation. In addition to required
compliance with the Building Code and Title 24 of the California Energy Code and California Green
Building Standards Code relating to energy conservation, the City sets forth goals and policies which
encourage the conservation of non-renewable resources in concert with the use of alternative energy
sources to increase energy self-sufficiency. In a large part, energy savings and utility bill reductions can be
realized through the following energy design standards:
            Glazing – Glazing on south facing exterior walls allows for winter sunrays to warm the
             structure. Avoidance of this technique on the west side of the unit prevents afternoon sunrays
             from overheating the unit.
            Landscaping – Strategically placed vegetation reduces the amount of direct sunlight on the
             windows. The incorporation of deciduous trees in the landscaping plans along the southern
             area of units reduces summer sunrays, while allowing penetration of winter sunrays to warm
             the units.
            Building Design – The implementation of roof overhangs above southerly facing windows
             shield the structure from solar rays during the summer months.
                                                      31                                   HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                                                   March 4, 2013

               Cooling/Heating Systems – The use of attic ventilation systems reduces attic temperatures
                during the summer months. Solar heating systems for swimming pool facilities save on
                energy costs. Natural gas is conserved with the use of flow restrictors on all hot water faucets
                and showerheads.
               Weatherizing Techniques – Weatherization techniques such as insulation, caulking, and
                weather stripping can reduce energy use for air-conditioning up to 55% and for heating as
                much as 40%. Weatherization measures seal a dwelling unit to guard against heat gain in the
                summer and prevent heat loss in the winter.
               Efficient Use of Appliances – Each household contains different mixture of appliances.
                Regardless of the mix of appliances present, appliances can be used in ways that increase their
                energy efficiency. Unnecessary appliances can be eliminated; proper maintenance and use of
                stove, oven, clothes dryer, clothes washer, dishwasher, and refrigerator can also reduce energy
                consumption. New appliance purchases can be made on the basis of efficiency ratings.
The City has also adopted a Green Building Program that offers incentives such as expedited processing
and fee waivers when project proponents agree to incorporate environmentally sensitive and energy
efficient construction techniques into their projects. Details regarding this program are posted on the
City’s website8.
In 2008, the City Council also adopted a permanent fee waiver for the installation of solar and other
energy-saving equipment. Details regarding this program are also found on the City’s website9. The fee
waiver program applies to all building permits for solar photovoltaic, solar thermal systems, tankless
water heaters, windows and/or doors containing glass, high-efficiency heating, ventilation and air
conditioning (HVAC) systems. Expedited plan review and same-day inspection also accompany the fee
waiver program. In addition, in 2008, the City adopted a Solar Energy Education Program to complement
its existing Green Building Program. The City also actively promotes and markets energy conservation
and education in the community.
The City will also continue to actively pursue grant and funding opportunities associated with federal
and state Energy Efficiency and Conservation Block Grant programs.
In 2012 the City established the Improve Don’t Move program, which provided fee waivers for home
improvements, including energy-saving modifications.
8
    http://cityofmissionviejo.org/DepartmentPage.aspx?id=1966
9
    http://cityofmissionviejo.org/DepartmentPage.aspx?id=3064
                                                          32                                HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                                                    March 4, 2013

                                                  4 . H ousing Const raint s
This section of the Housing Element provides an analysis of existing and potential constraints upon the
maintenance, improvement, or development of housing for all income levels. Governmental and
nongovernmental constraints are considered in the analysis. This analysis will help focus the goals,
policies and programs in the most efficient and effective manner. As noted in previous housing elements,
Mission Viejo was developed as a planned community under a development agreement which limited the
City’s ability to modify development standards covered under the agreement. The development agreement
expired in 2001 and the City has full control over land use and zoning. The legacy of the of master plan is
still significant, however, as the City was built-out in accordance with the original vision established by
the Mission Viejo Company.
4.1       Governmental Constraints
The intent of local government regulations is to protect public health and safety and ensure a decent
quality of life for the residents. However, such regulations may add to the cost of housing. State law
requires that the Housing Element address and, where appropriate and legally possible, demonstrate local
efforts to remove governmental constraints to the maintenance, improvement and development of housing
for all income levels and for special housing needs. Potential governmental constraints identified by state
housing law include land use controls, fees and other exactions required of developers, site improvements,
building codes and their enforcement, and local processing and permit procedures.
          1.        Land Use Plans and Regulations
a.        General Plan
Each city and county in California must prepare a comprehensive, long-term General Plan to guide its
future. The land use element of the General Plan establishes the basic land uses and density of
development within the various areas of the city. Under state law, the General Plan elements must be
internally consistent and the City’s zoning must be consistent with the General Plan. Thus, the land use
plan must provide suitable locations and densities to implement the policies of the Housing Element.
The Mission Viejo General Plan Land Use Element provides for four residential land use designations, as
shown in Table H-27.
                                                                 Table H-27
                                                   Residential Land Use Categories –
                                                         Mission Viejo General Plan
                                        Maximum
           Designation                    Density*                                       Description
      Residential 3.5                         3.5          Low density detached and attached single family dwellings.
      Residential 6.5                         6.5          Low to medium density detached and attached single-family dwellings
                                                           (duplexes, condominiums, and townhomes).
      Residential 14                         14.0          Medium and higher density detached and attached single family
                                                           dwellings and multi-family apartments.
      Residential 30                         30.0          High density single family attached and multi-family dwelling units.
      Source: City of Mission Viejo General Plan.
      *Density expressed in dwelling units per gross acre.
                                                                       33                                       HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                                                                        March 4, 2013

In addition, the General Plan contains two mixed-use designations which allow residential development:
Commercial Neighborhood/Community Facility/Residential 14 and Office Professional/Residential
30/Business Park. These mixed-use designations allow any use category to exist individually on a site, or
to be combined with one or both of the other categories in a mixed-use project.
The City of Mission Viejo General Plan is not considered to be a constraint to the goals and policies of the
Housing Element as the City’s zoning is consistent with the General Plan and adequate sites with
appropriate densities have been identified and zoned to facilitate construction commensurate with the
City’s fair share of new housing units during the planning period (see Section 3 – Resources and
Opportunities beginning on page 29).
b.       Zoning Designations
The City regulates the type, location, density, and scale of residential development through the Develop-
ment Code, a part of the City’s Municipal Code. The Development Code, which contains the City’s
zoning regulations, serves to implement the General Plan and is designed to protect and promote the
health, safety, and general welfare of residents. The Development Code also helps to preserve the
character and integrity of existing neighborhoods. The Development Code sets forth residential
development standards for each zoning district.
The five zoning districts that allow residential units as a permitted use are as follows:
      RPD 3.5              Residential Planned Development 3.5
      RPD 6.5              Residential Planned Development 6.5
      RPD 14               Residential Planned Development 14
      RPD 30               Residential Planned Development 30
      RPD 30A              Residential Planned Development By-Right (Affordable)
A summary of the residential development standards for these zoning districts is provided in Table H-28.
These development standards continue to be viewed as reasonably necessary to protect the public health,
safety and welfare and maintain the quality of life, and are not considered to be constraints on the
development of housing.
                                                             Table H-28
                                           Residential Development Standards
                                                                           Zoning District Designations
                         Development                                                                              RPD 30
                           Standard                           RPD 3.5         RPD 6.5            RPD 14          RPD 30A
        Maximum Density (du/ac)1                                 3.5            6.5                 14.0            30.0
        Minimum Lot Area (sq. ft.)                              5,000          5,000               5,000           5,000
        Minimum Front Yard (ft.)                                  20             20                  30              30
        Minimum Side Yard (ft.)                                    5             5                   10              15
        Minimum Rear Yard (ft.)                                   10             10                  30              30
        Maximum Lot Coverage (%)                                  60             60                  50              50
        Maximum Building Height (ft.)                            352            352                 352              352
        Source: City of Mission Viejo Zoning Ordinance
        1. Density expressed in dwelling units per gross acre.
        2. 35 feet or two stories whichever is less. In the RPD 30 and RPD 30A District, this provision may be modified by the
           Planning and Transportation Commission as part of a Planned Development Permit application up to a maximum
           height of 45 feet or 3-stories.
                                                                   34                                          HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                                                                        March 4, 2013

The City’s Development Code was adopted in October 1998 and has been reviewed and amended over
time to ensure that it remains current and consistent with state law, and that it continues to facilitate
development. Amendments to the Development Code included updates for reasonable accommodation,
density bonus, emergency shelters, and development and parking standards for second units. City staff
meets regularly with housing developers and routinely engages in discussion regarding the City
Development Code standards. The City’s Development Code also allows for a minor exception process to
allow adjustments to the Code of up to 15% for setbacks, height, parcel dimensions and modifications of
up to 30% for on-site circulation and parking. These provisions address special hardship circumstances
and help facilitate development while avoiding the administrative requirements of seeking a variance. The
City’s standards are not generally seen as an obstacle to affordable housing development. Several
affordable housing development projects have been approved in recent years, and some have been granted
a density bonus or modification to development standards such as building height in order to enhance
project feasibility. In addition, the Heritage Villas affordable senior project was approved with one
parking space per unit based on a study analyzing parking need at similar projects.
As stated in the Development Code, the standards listed above shall apply unless modified by a Planned
Development Permit issued by the Planning and Transportation Commission. The Planned Development
Permit process allows nontraditional or unique site plan design if found appropriate by the Planning and
Transportation Commission. The development standards were analyzed to ensure that the maximum
housing densities for a zone could be attained. Results from the analysis indicated that the maximum
densities could be achieved.
Densities range from 3.5 dwelling units per gross acre in the RPD 3.5 District to a maximum of 30.0 units
per gross acre in the RPD 30 District. In addition, state law allows a potential density bonus of up to 35%.
Three additional zoning districts, the Commercial Community District (CC) District, Commercial
Highway District (CH) and the Office/Professional District (OP) allow congregate care/senior housing
when combined with the Senior Housing Overlay Zone (SH). All senior housing developments are subject
to a conditional use permit.
A summary of the residential development permitted by the City’s Zoning Ordinance is provided in Table
H-29.
The Development Code provides for a variety of housing types including single-family homes, multi-
family (both rental and condominiums), manufactured housing, mobile homes, and second units. Low-
income housing can be accommodated in all residential districts. Second units, which are a tool in
facilitating affordable housing, are permitted by-right in any residential zone with an existing single-
family home.
                                                      35                                  HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                                                 March 4, 2013

                                                              Table H-29
                              Permitted Residential Development by Zoning District
                                                         RPD      RPD       RPD        RPD        RPD
             Housing Type Permitted                       3.5      6.5       14         30         30A        CC        CH        OP
 Residential Uses
 Single-Family Detached                                   PD       PD        PD         PD           P
 Single-Family Attached                                   PD       PD        PD         PD           P
 Multi-Family Dwellings                                                      PD         PD           P
 Condominium                                                       PD        PD         PD           P
 Manufactured Housing                                     PD       PD        PD         PD           P
 Mobile Home Parks                                        PD       PD        PD         PD          PD
 Second Units                                              P        P         P          P
 Special Needs Housing
 Emergency Shelters3                                                                     C           C
 Transitional Housing3                                                                   C           C
 Residential Care Facilities (6 or fewer persons)3         P        P         P          P           P
 Residential Care Facilities (7 or more persons)3                             C          C           C
 Congregate Care/Senior Housing                                              C1         C1                     C2        C2       C2
 Single Room Occupancy                                                                                                             C
 Source: Mission Viejo Development Code P = Permitted PD = Planned Development Permit                  C = Conditional Use Permit
 1. Congregate Care/Senior Citizen Housing is subject to the development standards set forth in §9.10.020 of the Development Code.
 2. Use is allowed only when combined with the Senior Housing Overlay Zone (SH).
 3. Use is permitted in accordance with existing state law.
The RPD 30A District, adopted in 2007, was created to provide suitable zoning for parcels A, B and C
identified in the Housing Plan as potential sites for affordable housing. The district permits residential
development “by-right” in accordance with housing element law and waives the need for any type of
discretionary permit. The RPD 30A District also contains affordability criteria that require a percentage of
the units within parcels A, B and C to be affordable to low- or very low-income households. The
percentage of residential units in parcels A, B, and C required to be affordable are as follows:
       Parcel A – 15% (minimum and maximum)
       Parcel B – 15% (minimum)
       Parcel C – 20% (minimum)
The RPD 30A District, which applies to the above three parcels (also identified in the inventory of vacant
sites), is more than sufficient to accommodate the RHNA for this planning period.
c.         Special Needs Housing
Persons with special needs include those in residential care facilities, persons with disabilities, the elderly,
farm workers, persons needing emergency shelter or transitional living arrangements, and single room
occupancy units. The City’s provisions for these housing types are discussed below.
               Residential Care Facilities – Residential care facilities refer to any family home, group
                home, or rehabilitation facility that provides non-medical care to persons in need of personal
                services, protection, supervision, assistance, guidance, or training essential for daily living.
                Section 9.01.050 (129) of Mission Viejo Development Code defines the term “residential care
                facility” as “a family home or group care facility for 24-hour non-medical care of persons in
                need of personal services, supervision or assistance for sustaining the activities of daily living
                                                                  36                                             HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                                                                          March 4, 2013

  or for protection” However, the Code does not explicitly identify residential care facilities as a
  permitted use in any of the residential zones. Under state law, residential care facilities that
  serve six or fewer persons are classified as a residential use and must be permitted by-right in
  all residential districts in the City of Mission Viejo. Facilities serving more than six persons
  are conditionally permitted in the RPD 14 and RPD 30 Districts by conditional use permit.
  These requirements are consistent with state law and do not pose a significant constraint on
  the establishment of such facilities.
 Housing for Persons with Disabilities – Both the federal Fair Housing Act and the
  California Fair Employment and Housing Act impose an affirmative duty on local
  governments to make reasonable accommodations (i.e. modifications or exceptions) in their
  zoning laws and other land use regulations when such accommodations may be necessary to
  afford disabled persons an equal opportunity to use and enjoy a dwelling. The Building Codes
  adopted by the City of Mission Viejo incorporate accessibility standards contained in Title 24
  of the California Administrative Code. Additionally, in 2003 the City adopted a reasonable
  accommodation ordinance pursuant to SB 520 (Municipal Code Section 9.60). The purpose of
  the ordinance is to provide reasonable accommodation in the application of zoning and
  building laws, and policies and procedures for persons with disabilities seeking fair access to
  housing. Any person seeking reasonable accommodation because of a disability may file an
  application with the Director of Community Development. There is no fee required. The
  Director shall review the application for completeness within 5 days of receipt, and shall make
  a determination on the request within 30 days of receipt of a complete application. In making
  a determination about the reasonableness of a requested accommodation, the following factors
  shall be considered:
         (a) Whether the accommodation is reasonable considering the nature of the
         applicant’s disability, the surrounding land uses, and the rule, standard, policy, or
         practice from which relief is sought;
         (b) Whether the accommodation is necessary to afford the applicant equal
         opportunity to enjoy and use a specific dwelling in the City;
         (c) Whether the accommodation will have only incidental economic or monetary
         benefits to the applicant, and whether the primary purpose of the accommodation is
         to assist with real estate speculation or excess profit taking;
         (d) Whether the accommodation will create a substantial adverse impact on
         surrounding land uses, or a public nuisance, that cannot be reasonably mitigated;
         (e) Whether the accommodation is reasonably feasible considering the physical
         attributes of the property and structures;
         (f) Whether there are alternative accommodations which may provide an
         equivalent level of benefit to the applicant, while minimizing adverse impacts on
         surrounding land uses and lessening the financial and/or administrative burden on the
         City;
         (g) Whether the requested accommodation would impose an undue financial or
         administrative burden on the City; and
         (h)   Whether the requested accommodation would constitute a fundamental
                                            37                                 HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                                      March 4, 2013

         alteration of the zoning or building laws, policies or procedures of the City.
  Definition of “family” – Municipal Code Sec. 9.01.050 defines “Family” as “One or more
  persons related or unrelated, living together as a single nonprofit housekeeping unit, as
  distinguished from a group occupying a boarding or lodging house, hotel, club, or similar
  dwelling for group use. A family shall include domestic servants employed by the family but
  shall not include a fraternal, religious, social, or business group.” This definition is
  consistent with state law.
  Concentration requirements – care facilities or group homes are not subject to any minimum
  spacing requirements
  Site planning requirements – no special site planning requirements are applied to care
  facilities or group homes that are not applicable to other residential uses in the same zone.
  Also, as noted above, modifications to zoning and building regulations may be granted under
  the City’s Reasonable Accommodation Ordinance.
  Parking requirements – modified parking requirements may be reviewed and approved under
  the Reasonable Accommodation Ordinance.
  Compliance with building codes and the provisions of the federal Americans with Disabilities
  Act (ADA) could have the potential to increase the cost of housing production and can also
  impact the viability of rehabilitation of older properties required to be brought up to current
  code standards. However, these regulations provide minimum standards that must be
  complied with in order to ensure the development of safe and accessible housing.
 Farm Worker Housing – As discussed in Subsection 2.55 (beginning on page 22), the City
  of Mission Viejo is not located within a major agricultural area and has no significant need for
  permanent on-site farm worker housing. The City’s overall efforts to provide and maintain
  affordable housing opportunities will help to support any agricultural workers that reside in
  Mission Viejo.
 Housing for the Elderly – Many seniors in Mission Viejo reside in state-licensed care
  facilities with six or fewer residents, which are permitted by-right. Congregate Care/Senior
  Housing is permitted in the RPD 14 and RPD 30 Districts subject to a conditional use permit.
  Congregate Care/Senior Housing is also permitted in CC, CH, and OP Districts when
  combined with the Senior Housing Overlay Zone (SH). The Zoning Code provides special
  standards for senior citizen housing developments within the RPD 14 and RPD 30 Districts
  and also within the Senior Housing Overlay Zone. These standards are designed to ensure that
  proposed facilities meet the physical and social needs of senior citizens. A density bonus may
  be utilized for Senior Housing projects within the RPD 14 and RPD 30 Districts. The
  requirement for a conditional use permit is reasonable to ensure compliance with the senior
  housing standards and not considered to be a constraint to the development of senior housing.
 Emergency Shelters and Transitional/Supportive Housing – Emergency shelters are
  facilities that provide a safe alternative to acute homelessness either in a shelter facility, or
  through the use of motel vouchers. Emergency shelter is short-term, usually for 30 days or
  less. Transitional housing is longer-term housing, typically up to two years. Transitional
  housing requires that the resident participate in a structured program to work toward
  established goals so that they can move on to permanent housing. Residents are often
  provided with an array of supportive services to assist them in meeting goals.
                                           38                                 HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                                      March 4, 2013

            Senate Bill 2 of 2007 requires that unless adequate shelter facilities are available to meet a
            jurisdiction’s needs, emergency shelters must be allowed by-right (i.e., without discretionary
            review such as a conditional use permit) in at least one zoning district, but may include
            specific development standards. In 2009 the Development Code was amended to allow
            emergency shelters by-right in the Business Park district. Sites within this zone are located
            within walking distance of shopping, medical, civic offices, employment and public
            transportation. The Business Park zone encompasses more than 165 acres and there are
            currently some vacant parcels and buildings in these zones that could accommodate shelters.
            Development standards are appropriate to facilitate emergency shelters, and are summarized
            as follows:
                 Setbacks: 25 ft. front/25 ft. rear/15 ft. side
                 Height: 35 ft. maximum
                 Floor Area Ratio: 1.0 maximum
                 Maximum beds: 10
                 Parking: 1 space per 250 square feet of gross floor area
                 Intake/waiting area: 500 square feet
                 Management plan and on-site supervision/security required
                 Minimum separation from another emergency shelter: 250 feet
                 Maximum length of stay: 180 days
            Transitional housing is defined in Section 50675.2(h) of the Health and Safety Code as
            follows:
                 "Transitional housing" and "transitional housing development" means buildings
                 configured as rental housing developments, but operated under program requirements that
                 call for the termination of assistance and recirculation of the assisted unit to another
                 eligible program recipient at some predetermined future point in time, which shall be no
                 less than six months.
            Supportive housing is defined in Section 50675.14(b)(2) of the Health and Safety Code as
            follows:
                 "Supportive housing" means housing with no limit on length of stay, that is occupied by
                 the target population, and that is linked to onsite or offsite services that assist the
                 supportive housing resident in retaining the housing, improving his or her health status,
                 and maximizing his or her ability to live and, when possible, work in the community.
            City regulations permit transitional and supportive housing subject to the same standards and
            procedures as other residential uses of the same type in the same zone in conformance with
            SB 2.
           Single Room Occupancy – Single room occupancy facilities are small studio-type units and
            are allowed by conditional use permit in the OP District. Development standards for these
            uses are no more restrictive than for other uses allowed in these districts.
d.      Off-Street Parking Requirements
The City’s parking requirements are also governed by the City’s Municipal Code and its application to
residential uses vary by residential type. Single-family attached and detached dwellings require two
covered parking spaces per unit. Multi-family dwellings require 1.5 parking spaces for studio and 1-
                                                      39                                 HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                                               March 4, 2013

bedroom units, 2 spaces for 2-bedroom units, and 2.5 spaces for 3 or more bedroom units. Senior projects
require one covered parking space for each dwelling unit for the exclusive use of the senior residents and
one uncovered parking space for each dwelling unit for employee and guest use. The parking
requirements are summarized in Table H-30.
                                                          Table H-30
                                           Residential Parking Requirements
                  Dwelling Type                                         Minimum Parking Space Required
 Single-Family Dwellings                            2 covered spaces within an enclosed garage
 Planned unit developments, including single-       2 covered spaces within an enclosed garage
 family dwellings and condominiums
 Apartment Development
        Studio and one bedroom                      1.5 covered
        Two Bedrooms                                2 covered
        Three or more bedrooms                      2 covered and
                                                    0.5 uncovered
        Guest Parking*                              1 guest space for every 3 units, unless Planning and Transportation
                                                    Commission applies another guest parking requirement pursuant to a
                                                    Planned Development Permit.
 Mobile Home Parks                                  2 covered spaces within an enclosed garage.
 Second Units                                       1 parking space per unit or per bedroom, whichever is greater, covered or
                                                    uncovered
 Source: Mission Viejo Development Code Section 9.25.020
 *Guest parking requirements may be adjusted by Planning and Transportation Commission pursuant to a Planned Development Permit or
 other discretionary action.
The required parking is typical for most cities in Orange County and is not considered to be a constraint
on the production of affordable housing. It is widely accepted that seniors and low-income households
have fewer cars on average than higher-income households.10 The City of Mission Viejo Planning and
Transportation Commission has the ability to grant reduced parking for senior housing and other
affordable housing projects through the conditional use permit process. In addition, state density bonus
law establishes parking standards for qualifying affordable developments that pre-empts local parking
requirements for density bonus projects.
e.         Second Units
In response to state-mandated requirements and local needs, the City of Mission Viejo allows for the
development of second dwelling units by-right (i.e., no discretionary approval required) in any residential
district with an existing single-family residence on site. Minimum development standards for second units
include:
                Maximum floor area 640 square feet
                Minimum parcel size 9,000 square feet
10
    Comparative data to support reduced parking need for low-income and senior housing is available from the Non-Profit
    Housing Association of Northern California website at
    http://www.nonprofithousing.org/actioncenter/toolbox/parking/data.html. Additional resources include Parking
    Requirements Guide for Affordable Housing Developers provided by the Southern California Association of Non-Profit
    Housing http://www.scanph.org and Parking Standards, Davidson and Dolnick, American Planning Association
    Planning Advisory Service, Report Number 510/511.
                                                                40                                          HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                                                                    March 4, 2013

             Minimum parcel width 80 feet
             Minimum buildable pad size 7,200 square feet
             One additional (covered or uncovered) parking space required
             Applicant must be an owner-occupant of the main dwelling unit
Second units serve to augment resources for senior housing, or other low- and moderate-income segments
of the population. The development standards are reasonable to ensure neighborhood compatibility, and
do not present an unreasonable constraint to development. Three second units were approved by the City
between 2006 and 2011. Based on this record, the City’s second unit development standards are not
considered to present any unreasonable constraints. Because second units are limited to a maximum of
640 square feet, they would be expected to rent within the very-low- or low-income category.
f.       Density Bonus
Under current state density bonus law (Government Code §65915-65918 as amended by SB 1818 of
2004), cities and counties must provide a density increase up to 35% over the otherwise maximum
allowable residential density under the Municipal Code and the Land Use Element of the General Plan (or
bonuses of equivalent financial value) when builders agree to construct housing developments with units
affordable to low- or moderate-income households. In 2009 the Municipal Code was amended to reflect
current law, and in 2011 the Watermarke project was approved with a 20% density bonus and building
height modification for their 256-unit apartment project on Site B.
g.       Mobile Homes/Manufactured Housing
The manufacturing of homes in a factory is typically less costly than the construction of individual homes
on-site thereby lowering overall housing costs. State law precludes local governments from prohibiting
the installation of mobile homes on permanent foundations on single-family lots. State law also declares a
mobile home park to be a permitted land use on any land planned and zoned for residential use, and
prohibits requiring the average density in a new mobile home park to be less than that permitted by the
Municipal Code. A city or county may, however, require use permits for mobile home parks. Although
there are no mobile home parks in the City of Mission Viejo, manufactured housing is allowed in all
residential zones as a permitted use provided the installation complies with the site development standards
for the applicable zoning district.
h.       Condominium Conversions
The Municipal Code permits the conversion of apartment projects to condominiums provided all the
requirements of the Subdivision Map Act are met (Municipal Code §9.72.025[a][10]).
i.       Building Codes and Their Enforcement
State law prohibits the imposition of building standards that are not necessitated by local geographic,
climatic or topographic conditions and requires that local governments making changes or modifications
in building standards must report such changes to the Department of Housing and Community
Development and file an expressed finding that the change is needed.
The City’s building codes are based upon the California Building, Plumbing, Mechanical, Electrical and
Fire Codes. These are considered to be the minimum necessary to protect the public's health, safety and
welfare. No additional regulations have been adopted by the City beyond the minimum requirements of
the State Codes. Thus, the City’s building codes and their enforcement are determined to not impose a
housing constraint that would unnecessarily add to housing costs.
                                                    41                                   HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                                               March 4, 2013

        2.    Local Processing and Permit Procedures
State Planning and Zoning Law provides permit processing requirements for residential development.
Within the framework of state requirements, the City has structured its development review process in
order to minimize the time required to obtain permits while ensuring that projects receive careful review.
a.      Residential Permit Processing
There are three levels of review authority in Mission Viejo, listed from lowest to highest authority: (1)
Director of Community Development, (2) Planning and Transportation Commission, and (3) City
Council. The Director has the final approval authority for Certificates of Occupancy, Minor
Modifications, Minor Exceptions, Lot Line/Boundary Adjustments and Planned Development Permits
involving no more than one unit. The Commission has the power to grant final approval for Variances,
Planned Development Permits for residential permits encompassing two or more units, Conditional Use
Permits, Architectural Review Permits, Tentative Tract and Parcel Maps. The Council has final
determination for Specific Plans, General Plan Amendments, Zoning Map Amendments, Development
Code Amendments, and Development Agreements.
Processing times vary and depend on the size and complexity of the project. Projects approved by the
Community Development Director typically require 2 to 3 months to process while projects approved by
the Planning and Transportation Commission typically require 3 to 6 months to process. All project
approvals are final unless appealed. Projects approved by the City Council typically require 6 to 12
months to process.
Certain steps of the development process are required by State rather than local laws. The State has
defined processing deadlines to limit the amount of time needed for review of required reports and
projects. In an effort to provide an efficient permit processing system, the City has implemented the
following time and cost saving developmental processes:
           Prepared permit processing guidelines to assist residential builders in applying for
            development permits for single-family residences, multi-family residential developments and
            subdivisions.
           Located all City divisions involved in permitting process in one central location.
           Developed “early consultation” pre-application process to identify issues as soon as possible
            and reduce processing time. No fee is required for this service.
           Allowed processing fees to be reduced, postponed or supplemented with housing funds for
            affordable projects meeting City priorities.
           Provided a GIS application on the City’s website with land use information and links to
            important planning documents such as General Plan and Zoning Ordinance.
           Encouraged concurrent processing of applications.
           Assigned a point-person and liaison to facilitate communication and timely inter-agencies
            review of development projects.
           Established electronic plan check review services and on-line access to permit forms and
            applications.
These processes help to ensure that the development review process does not act as a constraint to housing
development.
                                                    42                                  HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                                               March 4, 2013

Residential projects in Mission Viejo generally receive concurrent processing of various development
applications (e.g., subdivision and zoning approvals), thereby significantly reducing review time and
minimizing related holding costs.
b.      Environmental Review
Environmental review is required for all development projects under the California Environmental Quality
Act (CEQA). Today, the City is nearly built-out, and there are no significant areas in the City left to
develop (see Land Inventory discussion in Chapter 3). Most infill residential projects in Mission Viejo are
either Categorically Exempt or require only an Initial Study and Negative Declaration. A Negative
Declaration typically takes four to six weeks to prepare, depending on complexity of the project and
required technical studies, followed by a state-mandated public review period. Categorically Exempt
developments require a minimal amount of time which does not add to the length of the development
process. As a result, environmental review does not pose a significant constraint to housing development.
c.      Site Improvements, Development Fees and Other Exactions
State law limits fees charged for development permit processing to the reasonable cost of providing the
service for which the fee is charged. Various fees and assessments are charged by the City and other
public agencies to cover the costs of processing permit applications and providing services and facilities
such as schools, parks and infrastructure. Almost all of these fees are assessed through a pro rata share
system, based on the magnitude of the project's impact or on the extent of the benefit that will be derived.
Table H-31 provides a listing of fees the City of Mission Viejo charges for new residential development.
                                                          Table H-31
                                           Planning and Development Fees
                                     Fee Category                                   Fee or Deposit Amount*
            Planning and Application Fees
            Pre-Application Review                                                               None
            Parcel Map                                                                          $3,900
            Tentative Tract Map                                                                 $3,900
            Vesting Tentative Tract Map                                                         $3,900
            Planned Development Permit (Community Development                                   $2,500
            Director Approval)
            Planned Development Permit (Planning and                                            $4,200
            Transportation Commission Approval)
            Conditional Use Permit                                                              $2,500
            Specific Plan                                                                  $5,000 Deposit
            General Plan Amendment                                                         $5,000 Deposit
            Development Agreement                                                          $5,000 Deposit
            Zone Change                                                                    $5,000 Deposit
            Environmental
            Initial Study/Negative Declaration (review & preparation)                           $1,500
            Environmental Impact Report (review)2                                         $10,000 Deposit
            Source: City of Mission Viejo Community Development Department, 2012
            *Items with deposits are based on actual processing costs which may exceed initial deposit amount.
The City evaluates the actual cost of processing the development permits when revising its fee schedule.
The most recent revisions to the fee schedule were adopted in May 2011.
                                                                43                                           HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                                                                   March 4, 2013
After the passage of Proposition 13 and its limitation on local governments’ property tax revenues, cities
and counties have faced increasing difficulty in providing public services and facilities to serve their
residents. One of the main consequences of Proposition 13 has been the shift in funding of new
infrastructure from general tax revenues to development impact fees and improvement requirements on
land developers. The City requires developers to provide on-site and off-site improvements necessary to
serve their projects. Such improvements may include water, sewer and other utility extensions, street
construction and traffic control device installation that are reasonably related to the project. Dedication of
land or in-lieu fees may also be required of a project for rights-of-way, transit facilities, recreational
facilities and school sites, consistent with the Subdivision Map Act.
The City’s Capital Improvement Program (CIP) contains a schedule of public improvements including
streets, bridges and other public works projects to facilitate the continued build-out of the City’s General
Plan. The CIP helps to ensure that construction of public improvements is coordinated with private
development.
Although development fees and improvement requirements can impact the cost of housing, the City of
Mission Viejo strives to keep such fees to a minimum and actively pursues other sources of revenue to
fund public improvements that are coordinated with private development.
4.2      Non-Governmental Constraints
California Government Code §65583(5) requires an analysis of potential and actual nongovernmental
constraints upon the maintenance, improvement, or development of housing for all income levels
including the availability of financing, the price of land, and the cost of construction. This analysis is
provided below. There are numerous factors that affect the development of new housing and the
maintenance of existing units for all income levels. Mission Viejo shares many of the same constraints
that challenge the typical Southern California community, such as market conditions, land and building
costs, infrastructure requirements and environmental considerations.
         1.    Market Constraints
The high cost of renting or buying adequate housing is the primary ongoing constraint to providing
affordable housing in the City of Mission Viejo. High construction costs, labor costs, land costs and
market financing constraints all contribute to increases in the price of housing.
a.       Construction Costs
Construction cost is affected by the price of materials, labor, development standards and general market
conditions. The City has no influence over materials and labor costs, and the building codes and
development standards in Mission Viejo are not substantially different than most other cities in Orange
County. Construction costs for materials and labor have increased at a higher pace than the general rate of
inflation according to the Construction Industry Research Board.
b.       Land Costs
Land represents one of the most significant components of the cost of new housing. Land values fluctuate
with market conditions, and the current downturn in the housing market has caused a moderation in land
appreciation.
                                                      44                                  HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                                                  March 4, 2013

Even with the recession, the high price of land throughout Orange County poses a significant challenge to
market rate development of lower-income housing. Per-unit land cost is directly affected by density –
higher density allows the cost to be spread across more units, reducing the total price. The City
Development Code allows up to 30 units per acre in the RPD 30 District, which helps to reduce per-unit
land cost.
c.      Cost and Availability of Financing
The recent crisis in the mortgage industry has affected the availability of real estate loans, although the
long-term effects are unpredictable. As a result of the widespread decline in real estate values, there has
been a significant rise in foreclosure rates, and changes in mortgage underwriting standards have had a
greater impact on low-income families than other segments of the community. This issue is national in
scope, however, and cities have no ability to address the problem. As a result, historically low interest
rates have allowed some homebuyers to obtain very favorable mortgage terms, but many families who do
not have superior credit ratings are unable to qualify for a mortgage.
        2.    Environmental Constraints
Portions of Mission Viejo are exposed to a variety of environmental hazards and resources that may
constrain the development of lower priced residential units. Although these constraints are primarily
physical and hazard related, they are also related to the conservation of the City's natural resources.
Although some of the sites identified in the land inventory (Appendix B) have environmental constraints,
such as steep slopes or geotechnical issues, feasible methods exist to address such constraints. These
environmental constraints, when fully mitigated and combined with the development potential of the
unconstrained land, would not preclude the assumed level of development.
a.      Flood Hazards
The Public Safety Element identifies those areas in the City that are subject to periodic flooding based on
Flood Insurance Rate Maps prepared for the area. These areas include Arroyo Trabuco and Tijeras
Canyon in the eastern portion of the city, Oso Creek in the central, Aliso Creek along the northwest
boundary, and the area along the Orange County Transportation Authority (OCTA) and Metrolink
Railroad Line (formerly Atchison, Topeka & Santa Fe) from Alicia Parkway south of the Oso
Parkway/Interstate 5 interchange. General Plan policies require specific mitigation measures for
development within these flood-prone areas.
b.      Seismic Hazards
Like the entire Southern California region, the City of Mission Viejo is located within an area of high
seismic activity. Movement of the San Andreas, San Jacinto, Elsinore-Whittier, and Newport-Inglewood
faults generates the primary seismic activity in the City. Although the inactive Capistrano fault crosses
through the City, it poses little or no threat to the region. Potential seismic hazards include ground
ruptures, ground shaking, liquefaction, landslides, and seiches. Of these five, the City of Mission Viejo is
more susceptible to ground shaking, liquefaction, and seiches in the event of an earthquake. The entire
City can be expected to experience ground shaking during the occurrence of an earthquake along the
region's four major faults. Soils susceptible to potential liquefaction within the City are located along
Arroyo Trabuco and other major streams. Seiche damage potential is greatest along Lake Mission Viejo,
Upper Oso Reservoir, and El Toro Reservoir. The Public Safety Element sets forth policies to address
these seismic hazards in Mission Viejo.
                                                     45                                  HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                                                March 4, 2013

c.       Hazardous Materials
Hazardous materials can be classified into four basic categories: toxins, flammables, irritants, and
explosives. Because of their widespread use, it is assumed that each type of hazardous material is
transported through, used, or stored to some degree within Mission Viejo. The transportation of hazardous
materials to and from sites poses potential risks of upset. The major transportation routes within the study
area include the San Diego Freeway, the arterial roadways serving the commercial areas, and the OCTA
and Metrolink Railroad Line along the western margin. The potential threats posed by transportation
accidents involving hazardous material include explosion, physical contact by emergency response
personnel, exposure to large segments of the population via airborne exposure, or release into drinking
water sources. Further recommendations, restrictions, and safety precautions are outlined in the Public
Safety Element.
d.       Urban/Wildland Fires
Urban fires have the potential to result in personal injury or loss of life, and damage or destruction of
structures at high monetary costs. Certain urban development scenarios pose more difficult fire protection
problems. These scenarios include multi-story, wood frame, high-density apartment development; multi-
story office buildings; large continuous developed areas with combustible roof materials; residential
developments in outlying hillside areas with limited fire flows; and uses storing, handling, and using
hazardous materials on-site.
The Orange County Fire Authority (OCFA) is responsible for providing fire protection services to
Mission Viejo. The City of Mission Viejo and OCFA worked with residents to identify a framework for
addressing future losses due to wildfires in and around the City. The California Department of Forestry
and Fire Protection identified and mapped several hazard areas based on weather, topography, vegetation,
probable ember travel, and fire history and required the City to adopt these zones and apply regulations to
address the hazard. While there was general agreement that these areas were “at risk”, there was also
recognition that much had been done by the City and residents to mitigate that risk. There was also a
shared concern with unintended consequences of adopting these maps, including the potential for
decreased home values and increases in insurance rates. As a result, in July 2012, the City Council
rejected the maps and all Very High, High, and Moderate Fire Hazard Severity Zones. In order to meet
State requirements for map rejection and to continue to focus on the mitigation measures that will improve
community safety, a “Special Fire Protection Area” was created. The Special Fire Protection Area Map
provides both residents and City staff with a tool to improve community safety by: 1) making the
information available to residents so they can take action to protect their homes and families from wildfire
through OCFA’s Ready, Set, Go program; 2) guiding future planning decisions within the City; 3)
focusing OCFA fire prevention efforts through vegetation management and public education; and 4)
defining geographical areas in which specific wildfire construction standards contained within City
building codes can be applied to new home construction projects.
e.       Natural Resources
In addition to seismic hazards, floodplains, and hazardous materials, areas with significant plant and
animal species are present in Mission Viejo. Areas of high sensitivity contain threatened or endangered
plant or animal species as determined by State or Federal laws.
The area with the highest sensitivity in Mission Viejo is the Arroyo Trabuco because of its significance as
a prime bird nesting/foraging habitat and major wildlife movement corridor. Other highly sensitive areas
include the waterfowl habitat near Oso Reservoir; the riparian habitat for birds and other wildlife in
Tijeras Canyon; the prime bird of prey foraging/wintering habitats along the ridgelines of Tijeras Canyon
and O'Neill Regional Park; and the undisturbed bird of prey foraging/wintering area in Plano Trabuco.
The City of Mission Viejo protects these highly sensitive areas through its development review
                                                     46                                 HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                                                March 4, 2013

procedures. Development standards will necessarily be more stringent in these sensitive areas to minimize
potential adverse impacts to natural resources.
         3.    Infrastructure Constraints
Adequate infrastructure and public services are necessary to accommodate future residential development.
The following sections discuss the availability of water, sewer, solid waste, and educational services to
accommodate additional growth in Mission Viejo.
a.       Wastewater
Sewage collection and treatment in Mission Viejo is provided by the Santa Margarita Water District
(SMWD), the Moulton-Niguel Water District (MNWD), and the El Toro Water District (ETWD). Both
the Santa Margarita and Moulton-Niguel Water Districts operate water reclamation plants that provide
reclaimed water for use on greenbelts and golf courses located in the City. Most of the sewage generated
in Mission Viejo is treated at the South East Regional Reclamation Authority (SERRA) treatment facility
in Dana Point. Sewer infrastructure improvements are typically installed in conjunction with new
developments and sewer lines are extended as necessary. Sewage treatment capacity is available to serve
the City’s remaining developable area, and therefore does not constrain development. None of the
identified land inventory sites have wastewater service limitations that would preclude the level of
development described in Appendix B, Land Inventory Summary.
b.       Water
Water for City residents is supplied by the SMWD, which serves the eastern portion of the City, the
MNWD, which serves the western portion of the City, and the ETWD, which serves the western area
formerly in Community Service Area 12. The three districts treat and distribute water purchased from the
Metropolitan Water District, which imports water from northern California and the Colorado River. As
with sewer lines, water transmission, pumping, and storage facilities are expanded as necessary to
accommodate future growth. Domestic water supply is not expected to limit development during the
planning period. None of the identified land inventory sites have water service limitations that would
preclude the level of development described in Appendix B, Land Inventory Summary.
c.       Storm Water Drainage
The City maintains a Master Drainage Plan which identifies existing facilities and deficiencies and
outlines a program to correct known problem areas. The Orange County Flood Control District (OCFCD)
is responsible for the regional flood control system and maintains several facilities within Mission Viejo.
The City works closely with OCFCD to identify improvements needed to accommodate proposed
development projects. Development proposals are reviewed for consistency with approved development
plans and with the Master Drainage Plan. With these existing facilities and review procedures in place, the
City’s flood control system is not expected to limit development during the planning period. None of the
sites identified in the land inventory have storm water drainage limitations that would preclude the level of
development described in Appendix B, Land Inventory Summary.
d.       Fair Housing
Under state law, it is illegal for real estate lending institutions to discriminate against entire neighborhoods
in lending practices because of the physical or economic conditions in the area (“redlining”). In
monitoring new construction sales, re-sales of existing homes, and permits for remodeling, it would not
appear that redlining is practiced in any area of the city.
                                                        47                                   HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                                                     March 4, 2013

State law also prohibits discrimination in the development process or in real property transactions, and it is
the City’s policy to uphold the law in this regard. The City also provides financial support to the Fair
Housing Foundation through its CDBG program and is an active participant in fair housing activities.
                                                     48                                  HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                                                March 4, 2013

                     5 . H ousing El eme nt Goals and Poli ci es
This section of the Housing Element contains the goals and policies the City intends to implement to
address a number of important housing-related issues. The following six major issue areas are addressed
by the goals and policies of the Housing Element: 1) ensure that a broad range of housing types are
provided to meet the needs of both existing and future residents; 2) ensure that housing is maintained and
preserved; 3) provide housing support services; 4) ensure housing is sensitive to environmental and social
needs; 5) promote equal housing opportunity; and 6) preserve the affordability of assisted housing units.
Each issue area and the supporting goals and policies are identified and discussed in the following section.
5.1     Housing Opportunities
The City wants to continue to encourage the construction of new housing units that offer a wide range of
housing types to ensure that an adequate supply is available to meet existing and future needs. The
provision of a balanced inventory of housing in terms of unit type (e.g. single-family, multiple-family, etc.),
cost, and style will allow the City to fulfill a variety of housing needs.
GOAL 1:          Expand upon the present range of housing types to meet future needs of
                 residents.
                 Policy 1.1:     Continue to provide a variety of dwelling unit types for all segments the
                                 population.
                 Policy 1.2:     Encourage a variety of public and private efforts in providing affordable
                                 housing opportunities to area residents, particularly for lower income
                                 households, the elderly, large families, the physically impaired, and female
                                 heads of household.
                 Policy 1.3:     Encourage the development of childcare facilities in conjunction with the
                                 development of housing.
                 Policy 1.4:     Continue to provide incentives to assist in the development of affordable
                                 housing, including expeditious permit processing and fee waivers.
                 Policy 1.5:     Where an established percentage of the dwelling units of a project are
                                 devoted to lower income households, provide incentives such as density
                                 bonus, tax-exempt financing, waiver of fees, assistance with development
                                 of on- or off-site improvements, and reductions in minimum parking
                                 requirements.
5.2     Maintenance and Preservation
The goal of housing preservation is to protect the existing quality and investment in housing and to avoid
a degree of physical decline that will require a larger rehabilitation effort to restore quality and value. In
general, the housing stock has been well maintained although most homes are reaching an age where
some rehabilitation is required. It is the City’s intent to pursue efforts to both prevent deterioration and
encourage repairs where necessary.
                                                        49                                HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                                                  March 4, 2013

GOAL 2:          Promote the continued maintenance and enhancement of residential areas.
                 Policy 2.1:      Provide a code enforcement program to ensure continued success in
                                  maintaining the integrity of neighborhood areas.
                 Policy 2.2:      Provide for the continuing maintenance of public open space and
                                  landscaped areas adjacent to residential neighborhoods.
                 Policy 2.3:      Provide rehabilitation loans and grants program to preserve and conserve
                                  the City's housing stock.
                 Policy 2.4:      Provide adequate standards for remodeling and expanding existing
                                  residential units to ensure compliance with State and Uniform Building
                                  Code requirements and to insure compatibility with surrounding residential
                                  development.
                 Policy 2.5:      Monitor the level of existing affordable housing stock in the City.
5.3      Housing Services
In addition to policies designed to increase the availability and adequacy of the City's affordable housing
stock, it is important that services are available to ensure the efficient utilization of the housing stock.
GOAL 3:          Provide support services in meeting the needs of the City's low- and moderate-
                 income residents.
                 Policy 3.1:      Encourage senior citizen independence through the promotion of housing
                                  services related to in-home care, meal programs, and counseling.
                 Policy 3.2:      Encourage development of new housing units designated for elderly or
                                  disabled persons to be in close proximity to public transportation and
                                  community services.
                 Policy 3.3:      Work with area social service providers in addressing the needs of the
                                  homeless population.
                 Policy 3.4:      Support social service providers that operate shared housing programs that
                                  match low- and moderate-income individuals who want to share rental
                                  housing costs for joint living arrangements.
                 Policy 3.5:      Work with housing developers, builders, and non-profit organizations to
                                  develop low- and moderate-income housing.
                 Policy 3.6:      Support Mortgage Revenue Bond Programs aimed at providing housing
                                  opportunities for low- and moderate-income households.
                 Policy 3.7:      The Disaster Aid Fund should be utilized to provide emergency shelter to
                                  victims of natural and man-made disasters.
                                                        50                                    HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                                                     March 4, 2013
5.4      Environmental Sensitivity
It is an on-going concern in the City to ensure that residential growth is sensitive to the environmental and
social needs of the community. Development will be accommodated that is coordinated with available
community resources and infrastructure, and is designed to minimize impacts on the natural environment.
GOAL 4:          Provide for housing that is sensitive to environmental and social needs.
                 Policy 4.1:    Balance future increases in population growth with existing and projected
                                community resources.
                 Policy 4.2:    Evaluate residential proposals within hillside areas in terms of potential
                                impacts to landform and viewsheds.
                 Policy 4.3:    Evaluate residential development proposals in terms of energy
                                conservation measures provided.
                 Policy 4.4:    Ensure compatibility of new residential development with existing
                                development to enhance the city's residential neighborhoods.
5.5      Fair Housing
Housing opportunities in the City must be made available to all persons regardless of age, income, or race.
The City has made a strong and firm commitment that fair housing practices will continue in Mission
Viejo. Ensuring equal opportunity in the housing market is required under State and Federal law.
GOAL 5:          Promote equal housing opportunity.
                 Policy 5.1:    Prohibit discrimination in the sale or rental of housing with regard to race,
                                ethnic background, religion, disability, income, sex, age, and household
                                composition.
                 Policy 5.2:    Continue active support and participation with the Fair Housing
                                Foundation to promote fair housing opportunities.
                 Policy 5.3:    Implement state and federal laws for access and adaptability for the
                                developmentally disabled, and continually adopt updates to City codes to
                                reflect current accessibility requirements.
5.6      Preservation of At-Risk Housing Units
Dwelling units that are affordable to low- and very-low-income households are an important resource to
the community that should be preserved. When affordable housing projects are at-risk of converting to
market rate, the City needs to take special measures to try to preserve those affordable units. During the
next ten years, there are no projects at-risk of converting, however the City will continue to pursue the
following policies to monitor and preserve affordable housing.
GOAL 6:          Preserve housing units affordable to low- and very-low-income households
                 Policy 6.1:    Continue to monitor affordable housing projects to identify units that may
                                be at risk of conversion to market rate.
                                                     51                                   HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                                                  March 4, 2013
                    Policy 6.2:       Contact at-risk housing project owners well in advance of covenant
                                      expiration and discuss options for preserving affordability.
                    Policy 6.3:       Encourage non-profit housing organizations to acquire at-risk housing
                                      projects or purchase market rate apartment units.
                    Policy 6.4:       Preservation of at-risk units shall be a priority for housing funding
                                      resources. Funding reallocation from lower priority programs such as
                                      rehabilitation programs shall be considered when preservation
                                      opportunities are presented.
State housing law encourages the development of action programs to achieve the stated goals and
policies. Table H-32 below provides a correlation between each goal and policy and identifies
implementing programs. The programs are described in Chapter 6, the Housing Plan.
                                                         Table H-32
                                       Housing Policies and Related Programs
                                Policy                                                    Program
GOAL 1: Expand Upon the Present Range of Housing Types to Meet Future Needs of Residents
Policy 1.1: Continue to provide a variety of dwelling unit types for  Land Use Element/Development Code (#5)
all segments of the population.
Policy 1.2: Encourage a variety of public and private efforts in      Affordable Housing Outreach (#9)
providing affordable housing opportunities to area residents,         Density Bonus (#7)
particularly for lower-income households, the elderly, large
                                                                      Mortgage Revenue Bond Financing (#11)
families, the physically impaired, and female-heads of household.
                                                                      Non-Profit Housing Development (#12)
Policy 1.3: Encourage the development of child-care facilities in     Pre-application Review Program (#18)
conjunction with the development of housing.
Policy 1.4: Continue to provide incentives to assist the              Efficient Processing (#14)
development of affordable housing, including expeditious permit       Development Fees (#15)
processing and fee waivers.
Policy 1.5: Where an established percentage of the dwelling units     Density Bonus (#7)
of a project are devoted to lower-income households, provide          Affordable Housing Outreach (#9)
incentives such as density bonus, tax-exempt financing, waiver of
                                                                      Mortgage Revenue Bonding Financing (#11)
fees, assistance with development of on- and off-site
improvements, and reductions in minimum parking requirements.         Development Fees (#15)
GOAL 2: Promote the Continued Maintenance and Enhancement of Residential Areas
Policy 2.1: Utilize the code enforcement division to ensure           Code Enforcement (#3)
continued success in maintaining the integrity of neighborhood
areas.
Policy 2.2: Provide for the continuing maintenance of public open     Median and Slopes Program (operating budget)
space and landscaped areas adjacent to residential neighborhoods.
Policy 2.3: Provide rehabilitation loans and grants program to        CDBG Rehabilitation Loans and Grants(#1)
preserve and conserve the City's housing stock.
Policy 2.4: Provide adequate standards for remodeling and the         Implemented through the Zoning and Building
expansion of existing residential units to insure compliance with      Codes
State and Uniform Building Code requirements and to insure
compatibility with surrounding residential development.
                                                              52                                  HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                                                         March 4, 2013

                                Policy                                                    Program
Policy 2.5: Monitor the level of existing affordable housing stock in  Cooperative effort between the City and
the City.                                                               Saddleback Valley Board of Realtors to monitor
                                                                        housing affordability.
GOAL 3: Provide Support Services in Meeting the Needs of the City's Low- and Moderate-Income
Residents
Policy 3.1: Encourage senior citizen independence through the          Senior Community Service Program
promotion of housing services related to in-home care, meal
programs, and counseling.
Policy 3.2: Encourage development of new housing units designated      Implemented through the General Plan and zoning
for elderly or disabled persons to be in close proximity to public
transportation and community services.
Policy 3.3: Work with area social service providers in addressing the  Emergency Shelters and Transitional Housing (#10)
needs of the homeless population.
                                                                       CDBG Public Service Programs (#17)
Policy 3.4: Support social service providers that operate shared       CDBG Public Service Programs (#17)
housing programs that match low- and moderate-income individuals
who want to share rental housing costs for joint living arrangements.
Policy 3.5: Work with housing developers, builders, and non-profit     Non-Profit Housing Development (#12)
organizations to develop low and moderate income households.
Policy 3.6: Support Mortgage Revenue Bond Programs aimed at            Mortgage Revenue Bond Financing (#11)
providing housing opportunities for low and moderate income
households.
Policy 3.7: The Disaster Aid Fund should be utilized to provide        Emergency Operation Plan (shelter provided by
emergency shelter to victims of natural and manmade disasters.          American Red Cross).
GOAL 4: Provide for Housing which is Sensitive to Environmental and Social Needs
Policy 4.1: Balance future increases in population growth with         Implemented through the Land Use Element,
existing and projected community resources.                             Development Code and CEQA review process
Policy 4.2: Evaluate residential proposals within hillside areas in    Implemented through the Land Use Element,
terms of potential impacts to landform and viewsheds.                   Development Code and CEQA review process
Policy 4.3: Evaluate residential development proposals in terms of     Implemented through the Land Use Element,
energy conservation measures provided.                                  Development Code and CEQA review process
Policy 4.4: Ensure compatibility of new residential development        Implemented through the Land Use Element,
with existing development to enhance the City's residential             Development Code and CEQA review process
neighborhoods.
GOAL 5: Promote Equal Housing Opportunity
Policy 5.1: Prohibit discrimination in the sale or rental of housing       Equal Housing Opportunity Services (#16)
with regard to race, ethnic background, religion, disability, income,
sex, age, and household composition.
Policy 5.2: Continue active support and participation with the Fair        Equal Housing Opportunity Services (#16)
Housing Foundation to promote fair housing opportunities.
Policy 5.3: Implement state and federal laws for access and                Equal Housing Opportunity Services (#16)
adaptability for the developmentally disabled, and continually adopt
updates to City codes to reflect current accessibility requirements.
                                                                53                                HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                                                           March 4, 2013

5.7     Related Goals and Policies
The Land Use Element sets forth the amount and type of residential development permitted under the
General Plan, thereby affecting housing opportunity in Mission Viejo. In addition, the Land Use Element
contains policies directed at maintaining the existing housing stock, as well as ensuring the quality of new
residential development. The Circulation Element contains policies to minimize roadway traffic into
residential neighborhoods and the Noise Element sets forth policies to minimize the level of noise in
neighborhoods. The Conservation/Open Space Element establishes development standards to minimize
the impact of residential development on sensitive resources, such as hillside areas, ecological habitat, and
scenic viewsheds. The Public Safety Element sets forth policies to ensure the safety of the City's housing
stock through such measures as code enforcement, and mitigation of environmental hazard as a condition
to development. The Public Facilities Element sets forth policies and standards to ensure the adequacy of
facilities to serve existing and future residential development. Finally, the Economic Development
Element sets forth a strategy aimed at the attainment of a job/housing balance in Mission Viejo. The
Housing Element and the other Elements of the General Plan have been reviewed to ensure that they are
consistent with one another. In addition, the Development Code and Capital Improvement Program have
been reviewed to ensure consistency. These related documents are consistent with the Housing Element.
Table H-33: Housing Policy by Element depicts General Plan policies in other elements that support the
goals of the Housing Element.
                                                           Table H-33
                                                    Housing Policies by Element
                                                                                     Policies by Element
                                                                    Conservation/                                            Economic         Growth
                                   Land Use         Circulation
                                                                                                              Public
                                                                                       Public
       Issue Area                                                   Open Space         Safety       Noise     Facilities     Development      Management
Housing                     1.4, 2.1          7.1                                               2.1-2.8                    2.1-2.3
Opportunities
Maintenance and             1.3, 3.1,         5.1-5.8,                                          1.1-1.7,
Preservation                3.3, 3.6          7.1                                               3.1-3.3
Housing Services                              4.1-4.6
Environmental Sensitivity   1.6,              6.1-6.3             1.1-1.13,          1.1-1.3,   1.1-1.7,    1.1-1.3,                       1.1.-1.3,
                            2.8, 2.9,                             2.1-2.4            2.1-2.6,   2.1-2.8,    3.1-3.3,                       2.1-2.3,
                            2.16, 3.4,                                               3.1-3.6,   3.1-3.3     4.1-4.2,                       3.1
                            3.10, 4.3                                                5.1-5.4,               5.1-5.6,
                                                                                     6.1-6.7                6.1-6.3,
                                                                                                            7.1-7.4
Fair Housing                1.2,
                            3.9
                                                                                54                                         HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                                                                                 March 4, 2013
                                         6 . H ousing Plan
This section of the Housing Element describes the actions and programs the City will use to implement
adopted goals and policies, and achieve the objectives for housing development, conservation, and
improvement.
Section 2 – Housing Needs Assessment describes the housing needs of the City's current and projected
population, as well as the specific needs resulting from the potential deterioration of older units, lack of
affordable housing for lower-income groups, and special housing needs for certain segments of the City's
population. The goals and policies contained in the Housing Element address the City’s identified housing
needs. These goals and policies are implemented through a series of housing programs.
Mission Viejo’s overall housing program strategy for addressing its housing needs during the 2013-2021
planning period addresses the following issue areas:
            Conserving and improving the condition of the existing stock of affordable housing;
            Providing adequate sites to achieve a variety and diversity of housing;
            Assisting in the development of affordable housing;
            Removing governmental constraints if necessary;
            Promoting equal housing opportunity; and
            Providing social services that support low- and moderate-income residents.
Housing programs include both existing programs currently in use in Mission Viejo and new programs
that have been added to address new circumstances or the City's unmet housing need. This section
provides a description of each housing program and future program goals. The Quantified Objectives
(Table H-34) and Housing Program Summary (Table H-35) at the end of this section summarize the
future goals of each program, along with identifying the program funding source, responsible agency, and
time frame for implementation.
Conserving and Improving Existing Affordable Housing
The State of California has made housing preservation and conservation a high statewide priority. While
the City’s housing stock is in excellent condition, a significant proportion of the City’s housing is nearing
40 years of age, indicating the need for continued maintenance and the potential need for targeted
rehabilitation in the future.
         1.    Housing Rehabilitation Program
The Housing Rehabilitation Program provides technical and financial assistance to qualifying lower-
income households who are owner/occupants of single-family residential properties in the City of Mission
Viejo. The primary funding for the program is the Community Development Block Grant program
(CDBG), under which the City receives funds from HUD. Unfortunately, CDBG funding has been
reduced substantially from approximately $530,000 to $394,000 in the past two years.
The program’s objectives are to correct nonconforming uses, remedy code violations, and generally repair
and improve deteriorating properties in an effort to provide decent housing and a suitable living
environment for persons and families of low and moderate income. Financial assistance is provided in the
form of a grant or deferred payment loan. Single-family rehabilitation grants in amounts up to $10,000 are
available to qualifying property owners to correct existing local and/or state code violations and finance
eligible exterior improvements to residential properties. The City offers deferred payment loans to eligible
                                                      55                                  HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                                                March 4, 2013

property owners in amounts up to $25,000 with combined loan and grant not to exceed $30,000. The
eight-year objective is to advertise availability of loans and grants and provide assistance to 128 units
during the planning period.
The City is committed to maintaining this program as long as it is effective. As part of an on-going effort
to ensure this program meets a current need within the community, the City has added a Paint Program.
The Paint Program allows the City to award a smaller financial grant to a larger number of residents. The
City will continue to monitor its Housing Rehabilitation program and modify it as necessary to ensure it
addresses housing need in the community.
        2.    Home Weatherization Improvements
As residential energy costs continue to rise, increasing utility costs reduce the affordability of housing,
thus aggravating the City's current shortage of affordable units. Southern California Edison (SCE) and San
Diego Gas and Electric (SDG&E) offer a variety of energy conservation services designed to help low-
income households, senior citizens, permanently disabled, and non-English-speaking customers reduce
their energy use. Homeowners or renters may qualify for the following types of weatherization
improvements free of charge: attic insulation, weather stripping, caulking, water heater insulation
blankets, water-saving showerheads, heating/cooling duct insulation, and other types of limited home
repairs which increase energy efficiency. In order to expand utilization of these programs, the City will
provide informational brochures at the public counter and at the Norman P. Murray Community and
Senior Center.
        3.    Code Enforcement
The City adopted a nuisance abatement ordinance in 1989 to codify standards and procedures for abating
property maintenance, building and zoning violations. Potential code violations are identified based on
complaints reported to the City and those observed by code enforcement officers. There are three code
enforcement officers that work with the residents towards amiable solutions. In addition, code
enforcement officers inform property owners of the rehabilitation loan and paint programs. The majority
of code violations in Mission Viejo pertain to property maintenance, and according to the City’s Building
Official, only four substandard residential structures have been identified since the program's inception.
        4.    Section 8 Certificate/Voucher Program
The City of Mission Viejo contracts with the Orange County Housing Authority (OCHA) to administer
the Section 8 Certificate/Voucher Program. The Section 8 rental assistance program extends rental
subsidies to low-income families and elderly that spend more than 30% of their income on rent. The
subsidy represents the difference between the excess of 30% of the monthly income and the allowable rent
determined by the Section 8 program. Most Section 8 subsidies are issued in the form of Housing Choice
Vouchers which allow clients to locate their own housing. Assisted clients will pay no less than 30% of
their adjusted income as their share and are not allowed to pay more than 40% of their adjusted income
towards the total rent.
Due to the high demand for housing vouchers, there is a waiting list for the program. Unless OCHA
receives new funding, they can only issue vouchers to replace persons who leave the program. OCHA
regularly submits applications for additional housing vouchers.
OCHA provides approximately 280 Section 8 Rental Certificates and Vouchers to residents of Mission
Viejo. It is impossible to know whether additional housing vouchers will become available for City
residents during this planning period. However, based on previous allocation levels, the City's goal will be
                                                     56                                   HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                                                 March 4, 2013

to secure an additional five rental subsidies annually. The City will facilitate use of the Section 8 program
in its jurisdiction by encouraging apartment owners to list available rental units with OCHA for potential
occupancy by tenants receiving Section 8 certificates.
Providing Adequate Housing Sites
A key element in satisfying the housing needs of all segments of the community is the provision of
adequate sites for housing of all types, sizes and prices. This is an important function in both zoning and
General Plan land use designations.
         5.     Land Use Element/Development Code
Fundamental to the provision of housing is the zoning and designation of property for residential
purposes. Although the City is nearing buildout, there is enough undeveloped land designated for
residential purposes to adequately meet the City's share of regional housing needs, which has been
identified as 177 new dwelling units during the 2014-2021 RHNA projection period. In addition to
designation of land, the Land Use Element and the Development Code provide for a variety of housing
types to address all economic segments of the community. Allowed density ranges up to 30 dwelling units
per acre, with higher densities achievable through density bonus provisions.
         6.     Inventory of Surplus Public Land
In 2007 one City-owned site was identified and rezoned for high-density housing development. The City
will continue to monitor the availability of surplus land or the possible conversion of facilities. If any land
deemed or declared surplus is identified, an assessment will be made of its suitability for residential
development. Those sites suitable for affordable housing will be forwarded to non-profit developers for
their consideration as to development potential.
         7.     Density Bonus Units
Pursuant to State law, the City offers a density bonus along with regulatory concessions and/or incentives,
if a developer agrees to construct affordable housing or units for qualifying residents (i.e., seniors and
disabled). The density bonus program not only assists with the cost of development but also increases the
housing stock by allowing a density above the Development Code standards. State density bonus law was
amended with the passage of SB 1818, and the City revised the Development Code in 2009 to reflect the
latest amendments. The City will continue to encourage affordable housing developers to take advantage
of this option.
         8.     Second Units
Second units are an affordable housing alternative. A second unit is a separate and complete living space
on the same parcel as existing single- or multi-family units. Because second units can be created more
inexpensively than newly-constructed units, they offer an effective method of expanding the affordable
housing stock. The cost savings come from the utilization of existing infrastructure and land. Second units
can also help people generate additional income from extra living space by allowing them to convert that
space into another unit.
In 2003, in response to state-mandated requirements and local needs, the City of Mission Viejo amended
its zoning code to allow second units by-right and to reduce required parking. The City will continue to
promote the second unit program by providing brochures and/or informational displays at the building
permit counter and other appropriate locations (with PDF versions for website distribution) detailing the
benefits of second units and the process for obtaining approval.
                                                     57                                    HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                                                  March 4, 2013
Assisting in the Development of Affordable Housing
New construction is a major source of housing for prospective homeowners and renters but generally
requires public sector support for the creation of units affordable to lower-income households. The
following programs attempt to address the overall need for the development of affordable housing in
Mission Viejo.
        9.    Affordable Housing Outreach Program
In order to successfully facilitate affordable housing development for lower-income persons and
households, including those with extremely-low-incomes, various incentives and strategies are identified
and specifically targeted to the land inventory sites (Parcels A through C) described in the Land Inventory
Summary (Appendix B). These targeted incentives and strategies are as follows:
           Affordable Housing Outreach. The City will continue to market the parcels to non-profit
            housing developers and provide technical assistance for development review process, and
            coordinate discussions between property owner, non-profit developer, and various
            governmental agencies. The City will also continue to market the incentives and concessions
            to be offered to facilitate development of affordable rental housing for low-income families,
            workers and seniors, including extremely-low-income persons where feasible. The City has
            prepared and circulated a marketing package for the City-owned site, and City staff has had
            numerous meetings and discussions with interested developers and non-profit corporations.
            Staff has also developed an interest matrix identifying which developers and non-profit
            corporations are interested in affordable housing sites to be able to contact them should new
            information or funding become available. To further improve its affordable housing outreach
            efforts, the City of Mission Viejo has become an active participant in the Alliance for Housing
            Our Communities, a coalition of housing and community advocates with the primary goal of
            increasing affordable homes in south Orange County. Other partners include Mission
            Hospital, the Kennedy Commission, some other local cities, and non-profit corporations
            including Mary Erickson Foundation, Dayle McIntosh Center, and OC Human Relations
            Commission. The City hosted and co-sponsored an Orange County Housing Summit meeting
            in spring 2009 to bring different group and decision makers together and help increase
            awareness of the need for affordable housing.
           Development & Parking Incentives and Concessions. The City will provide various incentives
            and concessions for the identified parcels including, but not limited to, a reduction in the
            minimum setback and square footage requirements, and in the ratio of required off-street
            parking spaces, and an increase in the building height limit and maximum lot coverage, to
            promote the financial feasibility of homes affordable to lower income families.
           Funding Program. Due to the recent dissolution of redevelopment agencies statewide, the
            future availability of tax-increment housing set-aside funds is unlikely. However, the City will
            attempt to provide funding assistance using all available housing funds including CDBG
            funds for projects affordable to low-, very-low-, and extremely-low-income persons and
            families (affordable housing) proposed on these and other suitable parcels to encourage such
            development in this planning period. (As noted previously, CDBG funding has been reduced
            substantially in the past two years, however.) This program will also provide advice to
            potential non-profit organizations and developers regarding locating and acquiring additional
            financing. The City will apply or assist in the application of funds for State and Federal
            funding programs such as the Multi-family Housing Program, and California Tax Credit
            Allocation funding.
                                                      58                                HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                                               March 4, 2013

            Development Fees. For affordable housing projects proposed on these parcels, the City will
             provide a fee waiver or subsidy.
            Affordable Housing Education Program. The City will continue to maintain an ongoing
             Affordable Housing Education Program to provide education and facts on affordable housing.
             The aim of the program is to help foster and build support for affordable housing and address
             “Who Needs Affordable Housing?” and “What is Low Income?” The program incorporates
             various formats including printed materials (fact sheets, brochures, and bus shelters ads),
             media outreach, and public forums such as tours of existing affordable developments.
            Remove Governmental Constraints. The City will ensure standards are not excessive and do
             not unnecessarily constrain affordable housing. The City will work with interested developers
             to determine the need and remove or modify standards to facilitate the development of
             affordable housing.
            Right-of-Way Purchase. With the potential widening of Oso Parkway at Parcel B, and to
             facilitate multi-family rental development affordable to lower income families, the City will
             consider purchasing right-of-way from the property owner/developer instead of requiring a
             land dedication as it typically does in such cases. This program commits the City to purchase
             or otherwise mitigate the impact of the right-of-way issue (either on the number of units or
             financial feasibility) to facilitate development in the planning period. (Parcel B Only)
            Land Value Negotiation. As described in Appendix B, Land Inventory Summary, the City
             owns Parcel C and controls the sale of the property. The City will sell the land and shall
             implement a schedule of actions to ensure that suitable and feasible land is made available for
             the development in accordance with the above analysis and implementation section under
             Parcel C.
            Extremely-low-income housing. To the extent feasible, the City will encourage developers to
             include units affordable to extremely-low-income (i.e., those with 30% or less of Area Median
             Income) in affordable housing projects in order to achieve the City’s quantified objective of
             21 ELI units in this planning period (Table H-34). It is recognized that the subsidy required to
             provide units at the ELI level is much greater than for other lower-income groups, and that
             more units can be assisted at the very-low- and low-income levels with a given amount of
             funding.
            Affordable Housing RFP. In 2009 the City circulated a request for proposals (RFP) to
             qualified developers of affordable housing. Based on proposals received, a developer will be
             selected to work cooperatively with the City to pursue an affordable housing development.
             Proposals are currently being reviewed by an ad-hoc committee of the City Council. City
             funds, as described in the Funding Program, will be used to leverage other sources of funding
             such as Low Income Housing Tax Credits or state Multi-Family Housing Program (MHP)
             grant funds.
The City is committed to working with qualified developers and non-profit corporations to ensure high
quality affordable housing for the community. As described above, Parcels A through C were rezoned by
the City of Mission Viejo to permit residential development by-right in accordance Government Code
Sections 65583.2(i) and 65583.2(h) in 2007 with a minimum density of 20 units per acre.
                                                        59                                 HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                                                  March 4, 2013

         10. Emergency Shelters, Transitional and Supportive Housing
The issue of homelessness is a complex statewide issue. In 2007, Senate Bill (SB) 2 amended state law
regarding emergency shelters and transitional/supportive housing. SB 2 generally requires that emergency
shelters be permitted by-right in at least one zoning district, or that jurisdictions enter into a multi-agency
agreement to deal with this issue more broadly. In 2009 the City amended the Municipal Code to
designate the Business Park zone where shelters are permitted by-right, along with specific development
standards, in conformance with the provisions of Senate Bill 2. Sites within this zone are located within
walking distance of shopping, medical, civic offices, employment and public transportation. The Business
Park zone encompasses more than 165 acres and there are currently some vacant parcels and buildings in
these zones that could accommodate shelters. The City will continue to work cooperatively with interested
agencies to facilitate the development of an emergency shelter.
Senate Bill 2 also specifies that transitional and supportive housing shall be treated as a residential use
with only those requirements that apply to other residential uses in the same district. As noted in Chapter
II, several transitional housing units have been established in Mission Viejo. City policies and regulations
permit transitional and supportive housing subject to the same standards and procedures that apply to
other residential uses of the same type in the same zone in conformance with SB 2.
         11. Mortgage Revenue Bond Financing
The County of Orange has established two revenue bond housing programs to increase the supply of
affordable housing in the County - the Multi-family Housing Revenue Bond Program and the Single-
Family Residential Mortgage Revenue Bond Program. Under these programs, tax-exempt bonds are
issued to provide funds for construction and mortgage loans to encourage developers to provide both
rental and for-sale housing that is affordable to lower-income families and individuals. The Mission Viejo
Company participated in both the multi-family and single-family bond programs. Subsequent to
incorporation, the City entered into a cooperative agreement with the County in support of additional
bond-financed projects in Mission Viejo.
         12. Non-Profit Housing Development
A non-profit housing corporation works to develop, conserve and promote affordable housing, either
owner- or renter-occupied. Particularly in relation to senior citizen housing (such as HUD Section 202
projects), the corporation is often a local religious organization interested in developing affordable
housing. The corporation is often involved with what is called "assisted housing", where some type of
government assistance (such as Section 8) is provided to the individual household to keep rents affordable.
Housing corporations can work with assisted housing in several ways.
a.       The corporation may assemble a development package and sell it to a profit-motivated developer.
         The package usually consists of a site, project design, the necessary permits, and, in some cases,
         preliminary financing commitments. The advantage of this method is that the non-profit can get
         low- and moderate-income housing built while ending its involvement early in the process and
         going on to other projects. The disadvantage is that the non-profit may lose control over the
         development at the time of sale. However, the corporation could negotiate to retain some control
         over the project in its contractual agreement with the developer.
b.       The non-profit corporation may participate in a joint venture with a profit-motivated developer.
         Though it usually performs the same functions as in the first method, the non-profit can retain
         more control over the development and gain hands-on development experience while benefiting
         from the financial resources of the for-profit developer. In this option, however, the non-profit has
                                                      60                                    HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                                                   March 4, 2013
         a longer involvement and would have to negotiate the rights and responsibilities of the two
         partners.
c.       In the third approach, the non-profit corporation is the developer. In this case, the group must
         employ staff with necessary expertise or rely heavily on consultants. In return, the group has total
         control over the development. This option requires more risk, money, time, effort, and capability
         on the part of the non-profit.
A non-profit corporation can help meet the City’s goals for additional housing by implementing or
assisting with the implementation of programs described in this Housing Element. The City will actively
support local non-profit groups to facilitate the development and improvement of both senior housing and
housing affordable to low-, very-low-, and extremely-low-income persons and families in Mission Viejo.
Support to non-profit groups, for example, will include technical assistance for development review
process, assistance locating and acquiring financing, and coordinator discussions between property owner,
non-profit developer, and various governmental agencies.
The City has a history of successful working relationships with non-profit affordable housing developers,
including Citizens Housing Corporation (Arroyo Vista multi-family apartment complex) and Jamboree
Housing Corporation (Heritage Villas Senior Apartments), developed during previous planning periods.
More recently, the city has coordinated meetings with non-profit developers, including Bridge, Habitat for
Humanity and Jamboree Housing Corporation. These meetings were successful and allowed the City an
opportunity to present its affordable housing sites, answer questions regarding the process, and discuss
available funding opportunities. The City will continue to facilitate new affordable housing projects by
meeting with interested developers at least twice a year and providing technical assistance to developers in
support of affordable housing development, including: evaluation of projects for appropriate use of
funding sources, support in the preparation of grant applications, and assisting in moving projects forward
through the public review process.
         13. Reverse Mortgage Program
The most substantial asset of most elderly homeowners is their home, which usually increases
significantly in value with inflation. And while owning a home may provide a rich asset base with the
onslaught of retirement and a fixed income, many elderly homeowners quickly become income poor.
Home maintenance repairs multiply as the home ages, and the rising costs in home utilities, insurance,
taxes, and maintenance often get deferred altogether, creating an unsafe and often depressing living
environment for the senior.
An alternative for elderly homeowners is to draw needed income from the accumulated equity in their
homes through a reverse mortgage. A reverse mortgage is a deferred payment loan or a series of such
loans for which a home is pledged as security. Qualification for the loan is based primarily on property
value rather than on income, allowing the elderly homeowner on a fixed income to receive a loan for
which he or she would not otherwise qualify. Most reverse mortgage programs permit homeowners to
borrow up to 80% of the assessed value of their property, receive needed principal of up to 25% of the
loan, and then receive monthly annuity payments for the life of the loan.
Most reverse mortgage loans have been underwritten by a government-sponsored program marketed
through independent mortgage brokers, although there are major independent financial firms that now
market reverse mortgage programs.
At the Norman P. Murray Community and Senior Center, information programs have been held to inform
interested residents about reverse mortgages. The City will continue to provide financial institutions with
                                                     61                                  HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                                                March 4, 2013

the opportunity to educate interested seniors. Social service caseworkers will also advise elderly
homeowners of the reverse mortgage programs.
Removing Governmental Constraints
Under current law, the Mission Viejo Housing Program must include the following:
       Address and, where appropriate and legally possible, remove governmental constraints to the
       maintenance, improvement, and development of housing.
         14. Efficient Processing
Residential projects in Mission Viejo generally receive concurrent processing, thereby shortening review
time and minimizing related holding costs. Nonetheless, the evaluation and review procedure contributes
to the cost of housing in that holding costs incurred by developers are ultimately reflected in the unit's
selling price. In order to streamline review times for affordable housing projects, the City will follow the
system outlined below.
This system will prioritize affordable housing applications in the following sequence:
            First, applications which require a Housing Element in compliance with State law such as the
             State's Rental Housing Construction Program and Federal HOME Program.
            Second, applications that meet all other City requirements and are requesting a density bonus
             in exchange for a minimum of 20% affordable housing units.
            Third, all other applications ranked in terms of the percentage of very-low- and low-income
             housing units to be included in the proposed development.
         15. Development Fees
Development fees have been set at a level necessary to cover the costs to the City and to make appropriate
contributions to the community. However, these fees contribute to the cost of housing, and may constrain
the development of low- and moderate-income units. For senior citizen and affordable housing projects,
the City shall explore a possible fee waiver or subsidy on a case-by-case basis. Based on the outcome of
this review, the City may modify fees for affordable and senior housing projects. In addition, the City will
encourage the school districts to reduce or eliminate school impact fees charged to affordable senior
housing developments. With regard to City projects, the payment of fees may be deferred until loan
proceeds are obtained or revenues from project proceeds are received.
Promoting Equal Housing Opportunity
In order to make adequate provision for the housing needs of all economic segments of the community,
the housing program must include actions that accomplish the following:
            Promote housing opportunities for all persons regardless of race, religion, sex, family size,
             marital status, ancestry, national origin, color, age or physical disability.
More generally, this program component entails ways and means to promote equal housing opportunity.
         16. Equal Housing Opportunity Services
The City contracts with the Fair Housing Foundation (FHF) to establish, maintain and further fair housing
choices. City staff refers fair housing cases to the Fair Housing Foundation as they are brought to the
                                                       62                                  HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                                                 March 4, 2013

attention of the City. In an effort to provide outreach, the City will place program brochures at the public
counter, the Community and Senior Center, and the library, which describe the services of the Fair
Housing Foundation and identify the City contact person.
Providing Housing-Related Public Services
To assist low- and moderate-income residents, the housing program should include complementary
programs that support the residents in obtaining adequate housing or assist them with their special needs.
These programs include, but are not limited to, continuum care for homeless, supportive services for
disabled persons, and childcare services.
          17. Community Development Block Grant (CDBG) Public Service Programs
The primary objective of the CDBG program is “development of viable urban communities, by providing
decent housing, a suitable living environment, and expanding economic opportunities, principally for
persons of low- and moderate-income.” CDBG funds may be used to provide public services (including
labor, supplies and material), provided that the public service meets a national objective of the CDBG
program. The amount of CDBG funds obligated within a program year to support public service activities
cannot exceed 15% of the City’s total allocation. These funds can target the needs of the low- and
moderate-income residents as identified in the City of Mission Viejo Consolidated Plan. Several
organizations operating service programs have been supported with City CDBG funds. These programs
include childcare services, senior-housing services, legal services, disabled services, homeless prevention,
and support services to abused and neglected children.
Research shows a need for public service programs geared to addressing child care for low-income
working parents, the elderly, abused women, neglected teenagers, and persons with disabilities. The City
will continue to actively publicize the CDBG program and availability of funds, and prioritize programs
which address these identified needs within the community.
          18. Pre-application Review Program
During the project development stage, City staff will encourage developers to include amenities or
facilities such as childcare, job training, work stations, and exercise equipment. These types of amenities
empower tenants to increase their financial independence and well-being. Projects that include these types
of amenities will be given priority when the City Council issues financial assistance or other
considerations.
          19. Energy Conservation
The City has many opportunities to directly affect energy use. In addition to required compliance with the
Building Code and Title 24 of the California Administrative Code relating to energy conservation, the
City sets forth goals and policies which encourage the conservation of non-renewable resources in concert
with the use of alternative energy sources to increase energy self-sufficiency. In a large part, energy
savings and utility bill reductions can be realized through the following energy design standards:
            Glazing – Glazing on south facing exterior walls allows for winter sunrays to warm the
             structure. Avoidance of this technique on the west side of the unit prevents afternoon sunrays
             from overheating the unit.
            Landscaping – Strategically placed vegetation reduces the amount of direct sunlight on the
             windows. The incorporation of deciduous trees in the landscaping plans along the southern
                                                      63                                 HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                                                March 4, 2013

                area of units reduces summer sunrays, while allowing penetration of winter sunrays to warm
                the units.
               Building Design – The implementation of roof overhangs above southerly facing windows
                shield the structure from solar rays during the summer months.
               Cooling/Heating Systems – The use of attic ventilation systems reduces attic temperatures
                during the summer months. Solar heating systems for swimming pool facilities save on
                energy costs. Natural gas is conserved with the use of flow restrictors on all hot water faucets
                and showerheads.
               Weatherizing Techniques – Weatherization techniques such as insulation, caulking, and
                weather stripping can reduce energy use for air-conditioning up to 55% and for heating as
                much as 40%. Weatherization measures seal a dwelling unit to guard against heat gain in the
                summer and prevent heat loss in the winter.
               Efficient Use of Appliances – Each household contains different mixture of appliances.
                Regardless of the mix of appliances present, appliances can be used in ways that increase their
                energy efficiency. Unnecessary appliances can be eliminated; proper maintenance and use of
                stove, oven, clothes dryer, clothes washer, dishwasher, and refrigerator can also reduce energy
                consumption. New appliance purchases can be made on the basis of efficiency ratings.
The City has a Green Building Program that offers incentives such as expedited processing and fee
waivers when project proponents agree to voluntarily incorporate environmentally sensitive and energy
efficient construction techniques into their projects that go beyond Building Code and Title 24
requirements. Details regarding this program are posted on the City’s website11.
In 2008, the City Council also adopted a permanent fee waiver for the installation of solar and other
energy-saving equipment. Details regarding this program are also found on the City’s website12. The fee
waiver program applies to all building permits for solar photovoltaic, solar thermal systems, tankless
water heaters, windows and/or doors containing glass, high-efficiency heating, ventilation, air
conditioning (HVAC) systems and other improvements that go beyond Building Code and Title 24
requirements. Expedited plan review and same-day inspection also accompany the fee waiver program. In
addition, in April 2008 the City adopted a Solar Energy Education Program to complement its existing
Green Building Program. The City also actively promotes and markets energy conservation and education
in the community.
The City will also actively pursue grant and funding opportunities associated with federal and state
Energy Efficiency and Conservation Block Grant programs.
11
    http://cityofmissionviejo.org/DepartmentPage.aspx?id=1966
12
    http://cityofmissionviejo.org/DepartmentPage.aspx?id=3064
                                                          64                                HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                                                    March 4, 2013

Quantified Objectives and Program Summary
The City’s quantified objectives and housing programs are summarized in the following tables.
                                                         Table H-34
                                       Quantified Objectives (2013-2021) –
                                                 City of Mission Viejo
                                                                 Income Category
                                        Ex. Low         V. Low        Low          Mod          Upper        Totals
           New construction                 21             21          29            33            73         177
           Rehabilitation                   45             45          38                                     128
           Conservation*                   140            140                                                 280
           *Quantified objective for new construction is for the RHNA projection period 1/1/2014 - 10/1/2021
           *Section 8 vouchers
                                                                65                                         HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                                                                   March 4, 2013

                                                                      Table H-35
                                                            Housing Program Summary
Program                   Responsible Agency      Funding Source           Program Objectives                              Schedule
1. Housing Rehabilitation Community Development   CDBG                     To maintain quality of housing in established   Throughout the planning period
Program                   Department                                       neighborhoods, particularly for very–low- and
                                                                           low-income households by providing 128
                                                                           deferred loans or grants for housing
                                                                           rehabilitation.
2. Home Weatherization    Community Development   So. Cal Edison and So.   To provide information to residents regarding   Throughout the planning period
Improvements              Department              Cal Gas                  available weatherization improvements to
                                                                           reduce housing utility costs.
3. Code Enforcement       Community Development   Department Budget        To enforce City codes pertaining to property    Throughout the planning period
                          Department                                       maintenance, building and zoning.
4. Section 8 Assistance   O.C. Housing Authority; HUD-Section 8            To provide at least 280 rental subsidies to     Throughout the planning period
Payment / Housing         City Community          Certificate & Housing    lower-income families and elderly, and
Vouchers                  Development Department  Vouchers                 encourage listing of rental units with County
                                                                           Housing Authority.
5. Land Use Element /     Community Development   Department Budget        To maintain a range of residential              Throughout the planning period
Development Code          Department                                       development opportunities through appropriate
                                                                           land use and zoning designations.
6. Inventory of Surplus   Community Development   Department Budget        To maintain an inventory of all land owned by   Throughout the planning period
Public Land               Department                                       public entities declared surplus.
7. Density Bonus Units    Community Development   Department Budget        Continue to implement the Development Code      Throughout the planning period.
                          Department                                       density bonus provisions in compliance with
                                                                           state law, in order to maximize the capacity of
                                                                           housing sites and facilitate construction of
                                                                           affordable units.
8. Second Units           Community Development   Department budget        To expand the affordable housing stock by       Throughout the planning period
                          Department                                       allowing a second unit on the same parcel as
                                                                           existing single or multifamily units.
9. Affordable Housing     Community Development   CDBG, Revenue Bonds      To meet the City’s regional housing need        Continue promoting affordable housing
Outreach                  Department                                       allocation for all income groups through the    development throughout the planning
                                                                           pursuit of multiple tactics.                    period.
10. Emergency Shelters    Community Development   Department budget        Continue to implement City policies and         Throughout the planning period
and Transitional Housing  Department                                       regulations regarding emergency shelters and
                                                                           transitional/supportive housing in
                                                                           conformance with SB 2.
                                                                         66                                                                  HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                                                                                                     March 4, 2013

Program                     Responsible Agency      Funding Source     Program Objectives                                Schedule
11. Mortgage Revenue        Orange County; Mission  Revenue Bonds      To increase supply of rental and ownership        Throughout the planning period
Bond Financing              Viejo Community                            units affordable to low- and moderate-income
                            Development Department                     households.
12. Non-Profit Housing      Community Development   Department budget  To provide support and assistance to non-profit   Throughout the planning period.
Development                 Department                                 housing organizations to facilitate affordable
                                                                       housing production commensurate with the
                                                                       City’s quantified objectives..
13. Reverse Mortgage        Community Development   Department budget  Coordinate with social service groups and         Throughout the planning period.
Program                     Department                                 lending institutions to provide information to
                                                                       seniors about reverse mortgage programs.
14.    Efficient Processing Community Development   Department budget  To provide concurrent processing for residential  Throughout the planning period.
                            Department                                 projects to shorten review time and minimize
                                                                       related holding costs.
15. Development Fees        Community Development   General Fund       To provide reduced development fees for           Throughout the planning period.
                            Department                                 affordable and senior citizen housing.
16. Equal Housing           Fair Housing Foundation HUD-CDBG           To ensure equal housing opportunity by            Throughout the planning period.
Opportunity Services                                                   providing tenant/landlord counseling, housing
                                                                       discrimination response, and related housing
                                                                       services through the Fair Housing Foundation.
17. Community               Community Development   HUD-CDBG           To fund public service programs that support      Throughout the planning period.
Development Block Grant     Department                                 lower-income households to obtain adequate
Public Service Programs                                                housing or assist them with special needs.
18. Pre-application Review  Community Development   Department budget  Encourage developers to include amenities such    Throughout the planning period.
Program                     Department                                 as childcare, computer workstations in affordable
                                                                       developments.
19. Energy Conservation     Community Development   Department budget  Continue the Green Building Program, which        Throughout the planning period.
Program                     Department                                 encourages energy conservation through
                                                                       incentives such as expedited processing and fee
                                                                       waivers for qualifying projects.
                                                                       Continue the Solar Energy Education Program,
                                                                       which promotes energy conservation throughout
                                                                       the community.
                                                                      67                                                                    HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                                                                                                    March 4, 2013

This page intentionally left blank
                                   68 HOUSING ELEMENT
                                            March 4, 2013
City of Mission Viejo                                                              Appendix A – Evaluation
                                              Appendix A
                           Evaluation of the Prior Housing Element
Section 65588(a) of the Government Code requires that jurisdictions evaluate the effectiveness of the
existing Housing Element, the appropriateness of goals, objectives and policies, and the progress in
implementing programs for the previous planning period. This appendix contains a review the housing
goals, policies, and programs of the previous Housing Element, and evaluates the degree to which these
programs have been implemented during the previous planning period, years 2008 through 2012. The
findings from this evaluation have been instrumental in refining the City’s 2013 Housing Implementation
Program.
Table A-1 summarizes the programs contained in the previous Housing Element along with program
objectives, accomplishments, and implications for future policies and actions.
Table A-2 summarizes the goals and policies contained in the previous Housing Element along with an
assessment of their appropriateness for the new planning period.
Table A-3 summarizes residential development in the city during 2006 - 2012.
Table A-4 presents the City’s progress in meeting the quantified objectives from the previous Housing
Element.
                                                   69                                HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                                            March 4, 2013

City of Mission Viejo                                                                                                                   Appendix A – Evaluation
                                                                       Table A-1
                                                       Housing Element Program Evaluation
                                                                 City of Mission Viejo
                                                                      2008 – 2012
                                                                                                                                            Future Policies and
 Program                   Responsible Agency      Funding Source       Program Objectives                         Accomplishments                 Actions
 1. Housing Rehabilitation Community Development   CDBG                 To maintain quality of housing in   Rehab applications were        The dissolution of
 Program                   Department              Redevelopment set-   established neighborhoods,          approved as follows:           the Community
                                                   aside                particularly for very-low- and low- 2008: 28                       Development
                                                                        income households by providing      2009: 27                       Agency (CDA) and
                                                                        100 deferred loans or grants for    2010: 14                       the reduction in
                                                                        housing rehabilitation.             2011: 20                       CDBG funding is
                                                                                                            2012: 6 (through July)         expected to result in
                                                                                                                                           less funding for
                                                                                                                                           housing rehab loans
                                                                                                                                           and grants in the
                                                                                                                                           future.
 2. Home Weatherization    Community Development   So. Cal Edison and   To provide information to residents Home weatherization flyers     This program should
 Improvements              Department              So. Cal Gas          regarding available weatherization  have been made available at    be continued.
                                                                        improvements to reduce housing      City Hall.
                                                                        utility costs.
 3. Code Enforcement       Community Development   Department Budget    To enforce City codes pertaining to The City’s Code Enforcement    This program should
                           Department                                   property maintenance, building and  staff has implemented this     be continued.
                                                                        zoning.                             program continuously.
 4. Section 8 Assistance   O.C. Housing Authority; HUD-Section 8        To provide at least 280 rental      Year 2008 - 288 vouchers.      This program should
 Payment / Housing         City Community          Certificate &        subsidies to lower-income families  Year 2009 - 286 vouchers.      be continued.
 Vouchers                  Development Department  Housing Vouchers     and elderly, and encourage listing  Year 2010 - 269 vouchers.
                                                                        of rental units with County         Year 2011 - 294 vouchers.
                                                                        Housing Authority.
 5. Land Use Element /     Community Development   Department Budget    To maintain a range of residential  The City has maintained an     This program should
 Development Code          Department                                   development opportunities through   appropriate range of           be continued.
                                                                        appropriate land use and zoning     development opportunities
                                                                        designations.                       commensurate with the City’s
                                                                                                            RHNA.
                                                                            70                                                            HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                                                                                                   March 4, 2013

City of Mission Viejo                                                                                                                 Appendix A – Evaluation
                                                                                                                                          Future Policies and
 Program                  Responsible Agency     Funding Source    Program Objectives                         Accomplishments                   Actions
 6. Inventory of Surplus  Community Development  Department Budget To maintain an inventory of all     In 2007 the City rezoned an       This program should
 Public Land              Department                               land owned by public entities       8.5-acre City-owned site (Site    be continued.
                                                                   declared surplus.                   C) for affordable housing and
                                                                                                       an RFP for development of
                                                                                                       this site was issued in 2011.
                                                                                                       No additional surplus
                                                                                                       properties have been
                                                                                                       identified.
 7. Density Bonus Units   Community Development  Department Budget To amend the Development Code       In 2009, the City Council         This program should
                          Department                               density bonus provisions in         adopted new Density Bonus         be revised to reflect
                                                                   compliance with state law, in order regulations in compliance with    ongoing
                                                                   to maximize the capacity of         state law. In 2011, the           implementation of
                                                                   housing sites and facilitate        Watermarke project was            the Density Bonus
                                                                   construction of affordable units.   approved with a 20% density       ordinance.
                                                                                                       bonus and a building height
                                                                                                       incentive for their 256-unit
                                                                                                       apartment project on Site B.
 8. Second Units          Community Development  Department budget To expand the affordable housing    Three second units have been      This program should
                          Department                               stock by allowing a second unit on  approved by the City during       be continued.
                                                                   the same parcel as existing single  2006-2012.
                                                                   or multifamily units.
 9. Affordable Housing    Community Development  CDBG, MV Comm.    To meet the City’s regional         The City has continued to         This program should
 Outreach                 Department             Dev. Agency       housing need allocation for all     market its affordable housing     be continued.
                                                 Housing Fund,     income groups through the pursuit   sites. In 2011, the City sent an
                                                 Revenue Bonds     of multiple tactics.                RFP to affordable housing
                                                                                                       developers for the City-owned
                                                                                                       Site C. Proposals are currently
                                                                                                       under review.
 10. Emergency Shelters   Community Development  Department budget Amend the Development Code in       In 2009, the City Council         This program
 and Transitional Housing Department                               conformance with SB 2.              adopted an ordinance to           objective has been
                                                                                                       amend the City's Development      completed, therefore
                                                                                                       Code to allow for By-right        this program will be
                                                                                                       construction of emergency         revised to continue
                                                                                                       shelters in the Business Park /   implementation of
                                                                                                       Industrial zone.                  the new ordinance.
 11. Mortgage Revenue     Orange County; Mission Revenue Bonds     To increase supply of rental and    Revenue bonds have been           This program should
 Bond Financing           Viejo Community                          ownership units affordable to low-  successfully used in the past to  be continued.
                          Development Department                   and moderate-income households.     finance three affordable
                                                                                                       projects in Mission Viejo.
                                                                       71                                                               HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                                                                                                 March 4, 2013

City of Mission Viejo                                                                                                                  Appendix A – Evaluation
                                                                                                                                           Future Policies and
 Program                    Responsible Agency    Funding Source    Program Objectives                         Accomplishments                    Actions
 12. Non-Profit Housing     Community Development Department budget To provide support and assistance   The City has held several         This program should
 Development                Department                              to non-profit housing organizations meetings with non-profit          be continued.
                                                                    to facilitate affordable housing    organizations to advise them
                                                                    production commensurate with the    of available affordable housing
                                                                    City’s quantified objectives..      sites and funding sources.
 13. Reverse Mortgage       Community Development Department budget Coordinate with social service      The City's Norman P. Murray       This program should
 Program                    Department                              groups and lending institutions to  Community and Senior Center       be continued.
                                                                    provide information to seniors      coordinates special workshops
                                                                    about reverse mortgage programs.    on reverse mortgages to
                                                                                                        inform and educate seniors,
                                                                                                        and offers a twice yearly
                                                                                                        financial series on various
                                                                                                        financial topics including
                                                                                                        reverse mortgages.
 14.   Efficient Processing Community Development Department budget To provide concurrent processing    The City continues to process     This program should
                            Department                              for residential projects to shorten projects concurrently and         be continued.
                                                                    review time and minimize related    efficiently. In 2011, the
                                                                    holding costs.                      Planning Division processed
                                                                                                        planning applications for the
                                                                                                        Watermarke and UDR
                                                                                                        apartment projects
                                                                                                        concurrently. Building plan
                                                                                                        check for new large scale
                                                                                                        projects is 10 days.
 15. Development Fees       Community Development General Fund & MV To provide reduced development      In the past, Community            This program will be
                            Department            Community         fees for affordable and senior      Development Agency (CDA)          continued but revised
                                                  Development       citizen housing.                    set-aside and CDBG monies         to reflect the loss of
                                                  Agency Housing                                        were available to fund            CDA funds.
                                                  Fund                                                  affordable housing projects.
                                                                                                        In March 2010, the CDA
                                                                                                        approved a $3.5 million
                                                                                                        subsidy to Lennar Homes to
                                                                                                        assist 22 affordable units, and
                                                                                                        in 2012 the CDA approved a
                                                                                                        $4.8 million subsidy for the
                                                                                                        Watermarke project to assist
                                                                                                        38 affordable units. However,
                                                                                                        with the dissolution of the
                                                                                                        CDA, funding for these
                                                                                                        subsidies will be very limited
                                                                        72                                                               HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                                                                                                  March 4, 2013

City of Mission Viejo                                                                                                                   Appendix A – Evaluation
                                                                                                                                           Future Policies and
 Program                 Responsible Agency      Funding Source    Program Objectives                          Accomplishments                    Actions
                                                                                                        in the future.
                                                                                                        In 2012 the City Council
                                                                                                        approved the “Improve, Don’t
                                                                                                        Move” fee waiver program.
 16. Equal Housing       Fair Housing Foundation HUD-CDBG          To ensure equal housing              For FY 2010-2011, 77               This program should
 Opportunity Services                                              opportunity by providing             households from Mission            be continued.
                                                                   tenant/landlord counseling,          Viejo were assisted with fair
                                                                   housing discrimination response,     housing issues and concerns.
                                                                   and related housing services         So far in FY2011-2012, 25
                                                                   through the Fair Housing             households have been assisted.
                                                                   Foundation.
 17. Community           Community Development   HUD-CDBG          To fund public service programs      The CDBG public service            This program should
 Development Block Grant Department                                that support lower-income            program has funded 10              be continued.
 Public Service Programs                                           households to obtain adequate        organizations providing
                                                                   housing or assist them with special  services for families, seniors,
                                                                   needs.                               homeless, shelter for victims
                                                                                                        of domestic violence, before
                                                                                                        and after school childcare, and
                                                                                                        persons with developmental
                                                                                                        disabilities.
 18. Pre-application     Community Development   Department budget Encourage developers to include      The Ridge townhome project         This program should
 Review Program          Department                                amenities such as childcare,         currently under construction       be continued.
                                                                   computer workstations in             will include on-site recreation
                                                                   affordable developments.             areas and facilities.
 19. Energy Conservation Community Development   Department budget Continue the Green Building          The City offers expedited          This program should
 Program                 Department                                Program, which encourages energy     processing and fee waivers for     be continued.
                                                                   conservation through incentives      qualifying green building
                                                                   such as expedited processing and     projects and solar installations.
                                                                   fee waivers for qualifying projects. The City received $876,000 in
                                                                                                        stimulus funding and has
                                                                   Continue the Solar Energy            installed a 12,000-sq-ft photo
                                                                   Education Program, which             voltaic panel system on the
                                                                   promotes energy conservation         roof of City Hall.
                                                                   throughout the community.
                                                                       73                                                                 HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                                                                                                  March 4, 2013

City of Mission Viejo                                                                                                                                     Appendix A – Evaluation
                                                                                   Table A-2
                                                      Appropriateness of Housing Element Goals and Policies
                                                                            City of Mission Viejo
       Goal                                                          Policy                                                                     Appropriateness
1: Expand upon the present range of housing types to meet future needs of residents.
                   1.1: Continue to provide a variety of dwelling unit types for all segments the population.                 Still appropriate, although the City is nearly built
                                                                                                                              out and therefore very limited opportunities for
                                                                                                                              new development are available.
                   1.2: Encourage a variety of public and private efforts in providing affordable housing opportunities to    Still appropriate – retain.
                        area residents, particularly for lower income households, the elderly, large families, the physically
                        impaired, and female heads of household.
                   1.3: Encourage the development of childcare facilities in conjunction with the development of housing.     Still appropriate – retain.
                   1.4: Continue to provide incentives to assist in the development of affordable housing, including          Still appropriate, although the state’s abolishment
                        expeditious permit processing and fee waivers.                                                        of local redevelopment agencies could significantly
                                                                                                                              reduce funding for affordable housing.
                   1.5: Where an established percentage of the dwelling units of a project are devoted to lower-income        Still appropriate, although the state’s abolishment
                        households, provide incentives such as density bonus, tax-exempt financing, waiver of fees,           of local redevelopment agencies could significantly
                        assistance with development of on- or off-site improvements, and reductions in minimum parking        reduce funding for affordable housing.
                        requirements.
2: Promote the continued maintenance and enhancement of residential areas.
                   2.1: Utilize the code enforcement division to ensure continued success in maintaining the integrity of     Still appropriate – retain.
                        neighborhood areas.
                   2.2: Provide for the continuing maintenance of public open space and landscaped areas adjacent to          Still appropriate – retain.
                        residential neighborhoods.
                   2.3: Provide rehabilitation loans and grants program to preserve and conserve the City's housing stock.    Still appropriate, although the state’s abolishment
                                                                                                                              of local redevelopment agencies could significantly
                                                                                                                              reduce funding for these types of activities.
                   2.4: Provide adequate standards for remodeling and the expansion of existing residential units to insure   Still appropriate – retain.
                        compliance with California Building Code requirements and City ordinances to insure compatibility
                        with surrounding residential development.
                   2.5: Monitor the level of existing affordable housing stock in the City.                                   Still appropriate – retain.
3: Provide support services in meeting the needs of the City's low and moderate income residents.
                   3.1: Encourage senior citizen independence through the promotion of housing services related to in-        Still appropriate – retain.
                        home care, meal programs, and counseling.
                   3.2: Encourage development of new housing units designated for elderly or disabled persons to be in        Still appropriate – retain.
                        close proximity to public transportation and community services.
                   3.3: Work with area social service providers in addressing the needs of the homeless population.           Still appropriate – retain.
                                                                                        74                                                                  HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                                                                                                                     March 4, 2013

City of Mission Viejo                                                                                                                                      Appendix A – Evaluation
       Goal                                                           Policy                                                                     Appropriateness
                   3.4: Support social service providers that operate shared housing programs which match low and              This program no longer available.
                        moderate income individuals who want to share rental housing costs for joint living arrangements.
                   3.5: Work with housing developers, builders, and non-profit organizations to develop low and moderate       Still appropriate, although the state’s abolishment
                        income housing.                                                                                        of local redevelopment agencies could significantly
                                                                                                                               reduce funding for affordable housing.
                   3.6: Support Mortgage Revenue Bond Programs aimed at providing housing opportunities for low and            Still appropriate – retain.
                        moderate income households.
                   3.7: The Disaster Aid Fund should be utilized to provide emergency shelter to victims of natural and        Still appropriate – retain.
                        manmade disasters.
4: Provide for housing which is sensitive to environmental and social needs.
                   4.1: Balance future increases in population growth with existing and projected community resources.         Still appropriate – retain.
                   4.2: Evaluate residential proposals within hillside areas in terms of potential impacts to landform and     Still appropriate – retain.
                        viewsheds.
                   4.3: Evaluate residential development proposals in terms of energy conservation measures provided.          Still appropriate – retain.
                   4.4: Ensure compatibility of new residential development with existing development to enhance the           Still appropriate – retain.
                        city's residential neighborhoods.
5: Promote equal housing opportunity.
                   5.1: Prohibit discrimination in the sale or rental of housing with regard to race, ethnic background,       Still appropriate – retain.
                        religion, disability, income, sex, age, and household composition.
                   5.2: Continue active support and participation with the Orange County Fair Housing Board to promote         Still appropriate – retain.
                        fair housing opportunities.
                   5.3: Implement state and federal laws for access and adaptability for the developmentally disabled, and     Still appropriate – retain.
                        continually adopt updates to City codes to reflect current accessibility requirements.
6: Preserve housing units affordable to low and very low income households.
                   6.1: Continue to monitor affordable housing projects to identify units that may be at risk of conversion to
                        market rate.                                                                                           Although no affordable units are at risk of
                   6.2: Contact at-risk housing project owners and discuss options for preserving affordability.               conversion during the new planning period, these
                   6.3: Encourage non-profit housing organizations to buyout at-risk housing projects or purchase market       policies will be continued.
                        rate apartment units.
                   6.4: Preservation of at-risk units shall be a priority for housing funding resources. Funding reallocation  Still appropriate, although the state’s dissolution of
                        from lower priority programs such as rehabilitation programs shall be considered when preservation     local redevelopment agencies is expected to
                        opportunities are presented.                                                                           significantly reduce funding for affordable
                                                                                                                               housing.
                                                                                          75                                                                 HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                                                                                                                      March 4, 2013

City of Mission Viejo                                                                                         Appendix A – Evaluation
                                                                     Table A-3
                                                   Residential Development by Income Category
                                                               City of Mission Viejo
                                                                    2006 - 2012
                                 Project/Location/           Year       GP/
                                                                                   VL  Low    Mod Above Total
                                       Type                  Built     Zoning
                      SFA Units:
                      The Ridge (Lennar)                    2011/12    RPD-30       3   1      0   42    46
                      2nd units:                             2006      RPD 6.5      1                     1
                                                             2007                   1                     1
                                                             2011                   1
                      Totals                                                        6   1      0   42    49
                                                                        76                                      HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                                                                       March 4, 2013

City of Mission Viejo                                                                 Appendix A – Evaluation
                                                           Table A-4
                          Progress in Achieving Quantified Objectives – 2008-2012
                                                  City of Mission Viejo
                                                                 Quantified
                     Program Category                                            Progress
                                                                 Objectives
            New Construction*
              Extremely low                                           17            0
              Very low                                                16            6
              Low                                                     26            1
              Moderate                                                29            0
              Above moderate                                          59            42
              Total                                                  147            49
            Rehabilitation
              Very Low                                                35
              Low                                                     40            66
              Moderate                                                25
              Above Moderate
              Total                                                  100            66
            Preservation/Conservation
              Very low                                             140**
                                                                              269-294 (varies)
              Low                                                  140**
              Total                                                280**         269-294
            *The RHNA projection period for new construction was 2006 - 2014.
            **Section 8 vouchers
                                                                77                         HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                                                 March 4, 2013

City of Mission Viejo                 Appendix A – Evaluation
This page intentionally left blank
                                   78    HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                March 4, 2013

City of Mission Viejo                                                  Appendix B – Residential Land Inventory
                                                Appendix B
                                     Residential Land Inventory
The detailed assumptions and methodology for the residential land inventory are provided below and
summarized in Table B-1. Exhibit B-1 shows the locations of potential housing sites.
1. Vacant Sites
Mission Viejo is almost completely built-out, and only a few vacant sites remain for housing
development. In order to encourage additional construction of affordable multi-family rental housing, in
2007 the City rezoned three vacant sites for affordable housing development by-right. These sites, referred
to as Sites A, B, and C, are summarized in Table B-2 and have the potential for 593 units. The locations of
these sites are shown in Exhibit B-1.
The City has had inquiries by developers for residential development on all three of these potential
housing sites, and has worked collaboratively with the owners to facilitate development. The City has
offered funding and grant incentives and concessions as well as a density bonus for qualifying projects to
promote the financial feasibility of homes affordable to lower-income families and workers. The City will
continue to facilitate the development of affordable housing, and ensure that affordable developments are
compatible with surrounding land uses and neighborhoods.
In addition to these three sites, two other high-density housing developments (Los Alisos Townhomes and
The Ridge) are expected to provide 464 units during the 2014-2021 projection period.
2. Second Residential Units
The Zoning Code allows second units in single-family residential districts, pursuant to state law. Three
second unit permits were issued during 2006-2011, or an average of about 0.5 units per year. It is
anticipated that second unit development will continue at a similar pace during the 2014-2021 projection
period, which would result in four additional units. Because second units have a maximum size of 640
square feet, these units are expected to rent in the very-low-income range based on affordability categories
(see Chapter 2, Table H-16). However, most of them are expected to be occupied by family members such
as elderly parents or grandparents with no cash rent paid.
3. Land Inventory Compared to the RHNA
As shown in Tables B-1 and B-2, the inventory of potential housing sites exceeds the City’s RHNA
allocation for the 2014-2021 projection period in all income categories.
                                                      79                                 HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                                                 March 4, 2013

City of Mission Viejo                                                              Appendix B – Residential Land Inventory
                                                          Table B-1
                                                Residential Sites Summary
                                                   City of Mission Viejo
                                                                              Income Category
                                                                                                 Above
                                                                    VL/L          Moderate
                                                                                              Moderate
                   Vacant sites                                      405              16           636
                   Potential second units                              4
                   Total                                             409              16           636
                   RHNA (2014-2021)                                   71              33           73
                   Adequate sites?                                   Yes            Yes*          Yes
                   Source: City of Mission Viejo Community Development Dept., 2012
                   *Reflects excess VL/L sites
                                                          Table B-2
                                                  Vacant Land Inventory
                                                   City of Mission Viejo
                                             Gen. Plan/               Density      Potential       Income Category
                  Site                         Zoning      Acreage     Du/Ac        Units     VL/L      Mod       AM
                                          Residential 30/
 Los Alisos Townhomes (UDR)                                  10.5        30.5        320        3/5*     16*      296
                                               RPD-30
                                          Residential 30/
 The Ridge (Lennar)                                          10.0        14.4        144       17/5*              122
                                               RPD-30
 Site A-Mission Foothill
 Marketplace                              Residential 30/
                                                             2.74         30          82       82**
 28715-28841 Los Alisos Blvd.                RPD 30A
 APN 839-161-07
 Site B-Andalucia/Mission Country
                                          Residential 30/
 Club (Watermarke)                                           7.12         36         256      21/17*              218
                                             RPD 30A
 APN 761-071-93
 Site C-City-owned property               Residential 30/
                                                              8.5         30         255      255**
 APN 740-112-03                              RPD 30A
 Subtotals                                                                          1,057     405**       16      636
 Second units                                                                          4       4***
 TOTALS                                                                             1,061       409       16      636
 * Affordability required by covenants (density bonus granted)
 ** Affordability based on default density
 *** Affordability based on market conditions
 Source: Mission Viejo Community Development Dept., 2012
                                                              80                                      HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                                                             March 4, 2013

City of Mission Viejo                            Appendix B – Residential Land Inventory
                             Exhibit B-1
                      Housing Sites Location Map
                                  81                               HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                           March 4, 2013

City of Mission Viejo                 Appendix B – Residential Land Inventory
This page intentionally left blank
                                   82                   HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                March 4, 2013

Land Use Element
 City of Mission Viejo
                                   TABLE OF CONTENTS
Section                                                     Page
INTRODUCTION TO THE LAND USE ELEMENT                           1
       Purpose of the Land Use Element                         1
       Scope and Content of the Element                        1
       Related Plans and Programs                              2
LAND USE ELEMENT GOALS AND POLICIES                            7
       Balanced Development in Mission Viejo                   7
       Growth Management                                       8
       Community Identity and Quality Urban Design             9
       Preservation of Open Space                             10
       Law Enforcement and Protection                         11
       Mission Viejo Civic Center                             12
       Education                                              12
       Library Service                                        13
       Water and Sewer Service                                14
       Storm Drainage and Urban Runoff Control                14
       Solid Waste                                            15
       Natural Gas, Electricity, and Communications           16
       Health Community                                       17
       Related Goals and Policies                             19
LAND USE PLAN                                                 21
       Land Use Policy Considerations                         21
       Land Use Designations                                  21
       Distribution of Land Uses                              29
       Specific Plan Study Area                               31
       Growth Management                                      31
       Airport Land Use Consistency                           32
       Provision of Public Services and Facilities            33
       Public Services                                        34
       Infrastructure                                         40
                                          i          LAND USE ELEMENT
                                                     DRAFT AUGUST 2013
                                   LIST OF TABLES
Section                                                               Page
Table LU-1   Land Use Policies by Element                             20
Table LU-2   Development Intensity / Density Standards                23
Table LU-3   Anticipated Land Use and Population in the City          30
Table LU-4   Existing Schools                                         38
                                   LIST OF FIGURES
Section                                                               Page
Figure LU-1 Floor Area Ratio Defined                                  24
Figure LU-2 Public Facilities                                         35
Figure LU-3 Schools / School Districts                                37
Figure LU-4 Water District Boundaries                                 41
Figure LU-5 Portable Water Distribution Facilities                    42
Figure LU-6 Master Drainage Facilities                                44
Figure LU-7 Sewer Collection / Treatment Facilities                   45
Figure LU-8 Energy Distribution                                       47
Figure LU-9 Natural Gas Lines                                         48
Figure LU-10 Underground Communication                                49
                                       ii                    LAND USE ELEMENT
                                                             DRAFT AUGUST 2013
_______________________________________________________________________________
                      INTRODUCTION TO LAND USE ELEMENT
_______________________________________________________________________________
The Land Use Element serves as a guide for land use planning in the City and has a major impact
on key issues examined in the other elements of the plan. This Element identifies the type and
location of existing and future land uses within the City. The specific land uses and their locations
within the community in turn affect the remaining General Plan elements. The land uses identified
in the Land Use Element also reflect the community’s goals to maintain its form and character,
maintain a quality living environment for families, strengthen the community’s distinctive image,
diversify and expand the local economy, provide for public facilities to meet community needs, and
preserve natural areas that make the City of Mission Viejo unique.
PURPOSE OF THE LAND USE ELEMENT
______________________________________________________________________________
The City of Mission Viejo is well known as a master planned community with a history of sound,
comprehensive planning which has created a modern community consisting of orderly development
supported by appropriate levels of public services and facilities. The Land Use Element designates
the proposed general distribution, and general location and extent of land use for housing, business,
industry, open space, natural resources, recreation, and other categories of public/quasi-public and
private uses of land. Through the use of text, maps, and diagrams, a clear and logical land use
pattern is established including standards for future development. The Land Use Element also
includes a citywide comprehensive strategy for the planning, management, and implementation of
public facilities including public services and infrastructure. Public services include law
enforcement, fire protection, and educational, civic, institutional, and cultural facilities.
Infrastructure includes facilities for power, water, sewer, waste, and communication. Infrastructure
such as streets and highway are not included in this element and are included in the Circulation
Element of the General Plan. Most of the public facilities discussed in this Element exist because
the City is built out. Despite reaching build out, Mission Viejo’s population will continue to grow at
a modest rate as infill development and the reuse of underutilized properties occur. The Land Use
Element will be a guide for local government to help ensure continued high levels of service while
accommodating growth.
SCOPE AND CONTENT OF THE ELEMENT
The Land Use Element presents the City’s general goals and policies regarding land use for the
long-term growth and development of the community. The goals identify overall City desires and
consist of broad statements of purpose and direction. The policies serve as guidelines for reviewing
development proposals, planning facilities to accommodate anticipated growth, and accomplishing
                                                                                     LAND USE ELEMENT
                                              1                                          AUGUST 19, 2013

community development strategies. The Land Use Plan describes how goals and policies will be
achieved or implemented. The Land Use Policy Map graphically identifies the land use
designations within the City discussed in the narrative portion of the Land Use Element.
RELATED PLANS AND PROGRAMS
_______________________________________________________________________________
The scope and content of the Land Use Element are primarily governed by the General Plan Law
and Guidelines and the Planning, Zoning, and Development Laws for the State. In addition, there
are a number of other plans and programs that are considered in the formulation, adoption and
implementation of land use policy. Relevant plan and programs are described below.
Related plans and programs are both local and regional in nature. Regional planning agencies such
as the Southern California Association of Governments (SCAG) and the Orange County Council of
Governments (OCCOG) recognize that planning issues extend beyond the boundaries of individual
cities. Efforts to address regional planning issues such as air quality, water quality, transportation,
affordable housing, and habitat conservation have resulted in the adoption of regional plans.
Relevant local and regional plans are discussed briefly and related to the Land Use Element in the
following sections.
For the provision of public facilities, public agencies prepare and adopt facility master plans to
guide development and to plan for maintenance of facilities within their jurisdictions. Some of the
major facility master plans impacting the City of Mission Viejo include: County of Orange
Facilities Implementation Plan (FIP), County of Orange Integrated Waste Management Plan, school
district master plans for each of the two school districts that serve the City, water district master
plans for the three water districts that serve the City, Mission Viejo Master Plan of Drainage, and
Mission Viejo Library’s Strategic Plan. The County’s Public Services and Facilities Element of its
General Plan relates to the content of this Element because some of Mission Viejo’s public services
are provided through contract agreements with the County of Orange.
City of Mission Viejo Development Code
The City’s adopted comprehensive Development Code is the primary implementation tool for the
Land Use Element and the goals and policies it contains. The Development Code is required to be
consistent with the City’s General Plan. A Zoning Map, consistent with the Land Use Policy Map,
was adopted as part of the Development Code. Together, the Development Code and Zoning Map
are used to identify the specific types of use, intensity and development standards applicable to
given parcels or areas of land.
Mission Viejo Community Development Area and Plan
On July 13, 1992, the City Council adopted Ordinance No. 92-86 establishing a 1,014 acre
Mission Viejo Community Development Project Area in the southern portion of the City as
provided for under California Community Redevelopment Law at that time. Implemented over a
40 year period, the program for the Project Area was designed to correct public infrastructure and
                                                                                     LAND USE ELEMENT
                                              2                                           AUGUST 19, 2013

facility deficiencies, and improve the traffic circulation system to accommodate community
requirements and future economic development. Due to the dissolution of redevelopment
agencies statewide in 2012, including Mission Viejo’s Community Development Agency, the
future use of funds pursuant to this program is unlikely.
California Environmental Quality Act and Guidelines
The California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) was adopted by the State legislature in response
to a public mandate for more thorough environmental analysis of projects that might affect the
environment. Provisions of the law and environmental review procedures are described in the
CEQA statutes, State CEQA Guidelines, and the City’s guidelines implementing CEQA. CEQA is
the instrument for ensuring that environmental impacts of local development projects are
appropriately assessed and mitigated.
Southern California Association of Governments
The Southern California Association of Governments (SCAG) is a regional council of government
agency for six counties in the Southern California region, including Orange County. As a
designated Metropolitan Planning Organization, SCAG is mandated by the federal government to
research and prepare plans for transportation, growth management, hazardous waster management,
and air quality. Additional mandates exist at the state level, including the preparation of the
Regional Housing Needs Assessment.
A voluntary agency established to serve as subregional organization to SCAG is the Orange County
Council of Governments (OCCOG). OCCOG represents Orange County on mandated and non-
mandated regional planning activities to provide a vehicle for its members to engage cooperatively
on such activities, and to conduct studies and projects designed to improve and coordinate common
governmental responsibilities and services on an area-wide and regional basis.
South Coast Air Quality Management Plan
The City of Mission Viejo is located in the South Coast Air Basin. The South Coast Air Quality
Management District (SCAQMD) sets and enforces regulations for stationary sources in the basin.
The SCAQMD in coordination with the Southern California of Governments (SCAG) periodically
develops an Air Quality Management Plan (AQMP) for the air basin. The AQMD includes a
comprehensive analysis of future emission forecasts which reflect demographic and economic
growth forecasts provided by SCAG. The build-out of the City of Mission Viejo is included in
these forecasts.
Orange County Local Agency Formation Commission
The Orange County Local Agency Formation Commission (OC LAFCO) is a state mandated local
agency whose jurisdiction is all of Orange County. State law requires OC LAFCO to promote
orderly growth and development, discourage urban sprawl while preserving open space and
agricultural lands, and encourage efficient service areas for local governments. Periodically OC
LAFCO prepares Municipal Service Review (MSR) studies for unincorporated county communities
                                                                                   LAND USE ELEMENT
                                             3                                        AUGUST 19, 2013

and island areas. MSR studies are state-mandated special studies designed to help public agencies
plan for future growth, challenges, and changes. These studies lay the foundation for Sphere of
Influence updates (i.e. the agency’s probable future service boundaries and areas of future growth)
and possible future annexations of land. In Mission Viejo’s case, the City’s Sphere of Influence
boundary is co-terminus with its City boundary. The City is actively monitoring the future
governance of the unincorporated areas east and southeast of the City, including the planned
communities of Las Flores, Ladera Ranch, and the Ranch Plan.
County of Orange Facilities Implementation Plan (FIP)
The County of Orange provides some of the public services in Mission Viejo including fire and
police services. These public services are outlined in the County Facilities Implementation Plan
(FIP) for each of the Growth Management Areas (GMA) located in the County. Mission Viejo is
located in GMA 9 and 10, which includes portions of Irvine, Lake Forest, Rancho Santa Margarita,
Laguna Hills, and several unincorporated communities east of Mission Viejo. The FIP for GMA 9
and 10 include a facility provision and financing plan for the public services within the area. The
Land Use relates to the County’s FIP by addressing the availability, maintenance, and quality of
services provided by the County.
Countywide Integrated Waste Management Plan
The County of Orange Integrated Waste Management Department manages the solid waste disposal
system for all of the incorporated and unincorporated areas in Orange County. The County of
Orange Integrated Waste Management Department owns and operates three active landfills and
four household hazardous waste collection centers, and monitors twelve closed landfills. In
addition, they are responsible for coordinating with the Orange County cities, sanitary districts and
commercial haulers to ensure proper disposal of solid waste. The County of Orange Integrated
Waste Management Department has adopted a Countywide Integrated Waste Management Plan to
plan and facilitate the proper disposal of the County’s waste.
School District Long-Range Facility Plans and Master Plans
Two public school districts and one community college district serve the City of Mission Viejo.
They are Capistrano Unified School District, Saddleback Valley Unified School District, and South
Orange County Community College District. Each district conducts periodic school facilities needs
analysis and has its own long range facility plan and master plan that addresses educational
programs, facilities, demographic data, and construction programs. Coordination with the school
districts to provide adequate educational facilities is an issue addressed in this Element.
National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES)
Mission Viejo is under the jurisdiction of the San Diego Regional Water Quality Control Board
(SDRWQCB) which implements the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES)
permit for the San Diego area (including southern Orange County). The NPDES permit, a
requirement under the Clean Water Act, addresses pollution from urban runoff that impacts water
quality of receiving waters (such as streams and lakes). Under the NPDES permit, each jurisdiction
                                                                                       LAND USE ELEMENT
                                              4                                           AUGUST 19, 2013

must implement measures to reduce urban runoff during all phases of land use development starting
with: planning, during construction, and after completion of the development. Requirements
include incorporating Best Management Practices to reduce water runoff from new and
redevelopment sites, construction activities, and existing uses, reporting any violations to the
SDRWQCB and educating the community of the negative water quality impacts from urban runoff.
Starting in 2010, the City must also adopt a Standard Storm Water Mitigation Plan to implement
low impact development techniques for new and redevelopment sites and develop a
Hydromodification Management Plan to manage increases in runoff discharge rates and durations
from new and redevelopment sites
Water District Master Plans
El Toro Water District, Moulton Niguel Water District, and Santa Margarita Water District
distribute water and maintain sewer service for the City of Mission Viejo. Each water district has a
master plan for the provision of the water and sewer service. Water districts are required to address
water supply, treatment, distribution infrastructure, reclamation, water conservation, meter
retrofitting, and water storage contingency plans. Local water management plan are supplemental to
the regional plans prepared by the Metropolitan Water District of Southern California (MWDSC)
and the Municipal Water District of Orange County (MWDOC). The Land Use Plan addresses the
need to coordinate with the water districts to ensure adequate water is available to existing and
future development.
City of Mission Viejo Master Plan of Drainage
The City of Mission Viejo Public Works Department administers the Master Plan of Drainage for
the City. The Master Plan of Drainage is an inventory of the storm drain system, ensuring proper
drainage to prevent flooding from surface water run-off. This plan is coordinated closely with the
County of Orange Flood Control District. The County of Orange Flood Control District maintains
county flood channels running through the City.
City of Mission Viejo Library Strategic Plan
The Mission Viejo Library opened to the public as a city-operated library in October 1997. In 2001,
the City Council adopted the Library’s Strategic Plan “The Pathway to Providing Exceptional
Library Service.” The Library’s Strategic Plan is a series of goals, objectives, and activities directly
related to maintaining one of the best libraries in Orange County.
City of Mission Viejo Community Services Master Plan
In 2006, the City Council adopted a Community Services Master Plan. The purpose of the master
plan is to provide a guide towards the orderly development of recreation programs, recreation
facilities, parks, and open space areas in the City. The master plan provides a set of actions for
implementation of goals, policies, and objectives as well as community services for the public. The
Community Services Master Plan is one of the primary implementation tools for the Conservation /
Open Space Element and the goals and polices it contains.
                                                                                     LAND USE ELEMENT
                                              5                                          AUGUST 19, 2013

City of Mission Viejo Wireless Master Plan
In 2007, the City Council received and filed a Wireless Master Plan relating to the future
development of cell sites throughout the City. The goals of the Wireless Master Plan are to: 1)
reduce the number of potential cell site locations through a coordinated co-location process; 2)
mitigate the visual impact of towers and antennas from view of the community by adopting design
standards that employ the best available “stealth” technologies; and 3) facilitate the development of
efficient wireless networks by taking a proactive approach and implementing a wireless master
plan.
                                                                                      LAND USE ELEMENT
                                            6                                            AUGUST 19, 2013

___________________________________________________________________
                   LAND USE ELEMENT GOALS AND POLICIES
___________________________________________________________________
The goals and policies contained in this Element address preservation of major areas of the City,
revitalization of others, and guidance of new development in those portions of the City presently
undeveloped. The following goals and policies focus on maintaining a balance between residential,
commercial and industrial land use, promoting high quality development, and minimizing existing
and potential land use conflicts.
BALANCED DEVELOPMENT IN MISSION VIEJO
______________________________________________________________________________
A well-balanced community may be considered one which provides a broad range of housing and
business opportunities, as well as recreational, institutional and cultural activities which enhances
the overall living environment. By encouraging such a mix of uses, the City can achieve a
balanced inventory of housing which meets the housing needs of all income groups, can enjoy a
stable employment and tax base, and can provide residents with suitable recreational
opportunities.
The community’s history of planning for development since the 1960’s has, to a large degree,
already provided a desirable balance. Residential development in the community offers a wide
range of quality housing types and prices. New commercial development and revitalization of
existing commercial development results in a variety of destination retail shopping, commercial
service, recreational, and business-related opportunities for Mission Viejo residents and residents
of surrounding areas. For example, there are highway commercial and regional commercial
districts in the southern portion of the City which include the Shops at Mission Viejo mall, a
regional shopping center with a broad market area, and boutique automobile dealerships. Also
revitalization opportunities exist in the neighborhood commercial districts in the City such as the
City’s core areas to serve as a local commercial and recreational destination. Employment
opportunities exist within the industrial, business park, and office areas located in the westerly
portion of the City. Recreational activities, parkland and schools exist throughout the community
and are located in close proximity to residential neighborhoods where the needs for such uses
originate. Major institutional uses located within the southern regional commercial district of the
City consist of the Saddleback Community College and Mission Hospital.
GOAL 1:         Maintain a balanced distribution of land uses to meet the needs of residents
                and the business community.
Policy 1.1:     Maintain the existing distribution of land uses within the City, while encouraging
                nonresidential activities that will provide revenue for the City and employment
                opportunities for existing and future residents.
                                                                                      LAND USE ELEMENT
                                             7                                           AUGUST 19, 2013

Policy 1.2:   Balance revenue and employment opportunity gains from nonresidential
              development with the protection of existing residential neighborhoods.
Policy 1.3:   Attract businesses which will contribute to the City’s economic growth and
              employment opportunities by working directly with public agencies and private
              entities involved in economic development.
Policy 1.4:   Maintain a land use plan which includes descriptions of allowable uses and levels
              of intensity reflecting existing and projected development within the City.
Police 1.5:   Maintain a variety of housing types that complements the employment
              opportunities in the community and encourages a 1 to 1 jobs / housing balance.
GROWTH MANAGEMENT
_______________________________________________________________________________
As the City continues to grow, additional demands will be placed on infrastructures (e.g.
roadways, water lines, sewer lines, and others) and public services. Present infrastructure
capacity of major infrastructure components can accommodate projected growth, but secondary
components of the infrastructure system must be extended to support new development and all
components must be maintained during future years. Continued demands for public services and
maintenance of infrastructures must be anticipated, and planning the financing of services and
maintenance is essential to assure maintenance of the character and quality of life in the City.
GOAL 2:       Maintain a balanced growth management and development program which
              avoids adverse public service, environmental or fiscal effects.
Policy 2.1:   Manage growth at a rate which is commensurate with the ability of the City to
              provide the desired level of public services and facilities.
Policy 2.2:   Determine the public services and infrastructure necessary to serve City
              inhabitants, and identify funding sources and phasing schedules.
Policy 2.3:   Maintain a capital improvement implementation plan to ensure the proper timing
              and siting of capital improvements.
Policy 2.4:   Require development to contribute its share of the cost of providing necessary
              public services and facilities.
Policy 2.5:   Limit new development unless demand on services caused by growth would not
              reduce the availability of services to the City’s population.
Policy 2.6:   Utilize development exactions as a mechanism to support new growth.
Policy 2.7:   Ensure necessary public facilities are in place prior to or concurrently with new
                                                                                   LAND USE ELEMENT
                                            8                                          AUGUST 19, 2013

               development.
Policy 2.8:    Review the fiscal and environmental impacts of proposed major development.
Policy 2.9:    Designate compatible land uses for environmentally sensitive land areas.
Policy 2.10:   Provide assistance to area school districts to ensure adequate planning for services
               and facilities.
Policy 2.11:   Provide assistance for the continued maintenance and necessary expansion of area
               educational facilities.
Policy 2.12:   Work cooperatively with local school districts in providing for the location of
               future schools as well as use of surplus facilities.
Policy 2.13:   Coordinate local growth policies with regional growth policies to strengthen local
               programs and support local needs, and participate in the regional decision making
               process.
Policy 2.14:   Solicit community support for proposed land annexations by requiring approval of
               a majority of the voters of the City before the City Council initiates or supports
               any annexation of land in excess of 100 acres.
Policy 2.15:   Prior to consideration of any land annexation to the City, the City Council shall
               require a complete feasibility study of the area proposed to be annexed which will
               fully document all revenues to the area and all costs and expenses to provide
               services to the area. In addition, the study shall document all costs necessary to
               upgrade any deficiencies in the area including but not limited to: streets,
               landscaping, traffic signals, under grounding of utilities, parks, athletic fields,
               greenbelts and any other public facilities.
Policy 2.16:   Recognize the potential impacts that land uses within the City of Mission Viejo
               have on adjoining land uses within the surrounding incorporated and
               unincorporated communities.
COMMUNITY IDENTITY AND QUALITY URBAN DESIGN
_______________________________________________________________________________
Mission Viejo’s history of planning and overall quality of development is well-recognized. Its
community identity was established through its inception as a planned community more than 20
years before incorporation, and this image is important to maintain as a City matures and as
development occurs in adjacent cities and unincorporated communities. The City’s open space
system and recreational opportunities represent important features of community identity which
provide a sense of place and location within its boundaries.
                                                                                  LAND USE ELEMENT
                                            9                                        AUGUST 19, 2013

GOAL 3:       Maintain community identity and development quality for the City and its
              neighborhoods.
Policy 3.1:   Maintain the integrity of residential neighborhoods by preventing the intrusion of
              incompatible land uses.
Policy 3.2:   Ensure that new development and land uses are architecturally consistent and
              compatible in scale and style with existing development and identified standards for
              the various districts within the City.
Policy 3.3:   Ensure that infill development is compatible with community open space areas and
              existing community character.
Policy 3.4:   Coordinate the provision of greenbelts and open space within and adjacent to the City
              to foster and enhance local identity and sense of place.
Policy 3.5:   Emphasize quality of design for new development and rehabilitation of existing
              development, including the preservation and increase of arterial landscape space.
Policy 3.6:   Continue ongoing code enforcement efforts and expand code enforcement operation
              as necessary.
Policy 3.7:   Establish conveniently located and architecturally identifiable public buildings and
              related public amenities which enhance community identity and meet the service
              needs of the City’s inhabitants.
Policy 3.8:   Maintain the integrity of the boundaries of the existing City of Mission Viejo unless
              expansion of those boundaries has been approved as described in policies under Goal
              2 of this element.
Policy 3.9:   Encourage the accessibility and usability of private and public buildings for the
              disabled.
Policy 3.10: Promote revitalization and rehabilitation of older residential, commercial, and
              industrial properties and buildings to enhance their quality and competitive
              advantage.
PRESERVATION OF OPEN SPACE
_______________________________________________________________________________
Open space within the City not only provides a sense of place, but also serves as a physical buffer to
protect persons and property from natural and man-made safety hazards, as well as land area for
recreation and the conservation of natural and cultural resources.
GOAL 4:         Maintain open space resources for the purpose of providing recreational
                opportunities, protecting the public from safety hazards and conserving
                                                                                     LAND USE ELEMENT
                                             10                                         AUGUST 19, 2013

                natural resources.
Policy 4.1:     Provide for the preservation of significant scenic areas, and natural open space
                areas and corridors within the City.
Policy 4.2:     In areas of hillside development, preserve natural slopes and bluffs in open space
                where feasible, minimize erosion, and compliment natural land forms through
                sensitive grading techniques.
Policy 4.3:     Utilize sensitive grading and project design techniques to reduce impacts
                associated with development of constrained lands.
Policy 4.4:     Protect areas of scenic beauty which may otherwise be affected by development.
LAW ENFORCEMENT AND PROTECTION
_______________________________________________________________________________
In Mission Viejo, the Orange County Sheriff’s Department provides law enforcement and the
Orange County Fire Authority provides fire protection.
High quality of life is dependent upon the ability of residents and business owners to receive
adequate police and fire protection. Public safety facilities are an important factor in ensuring
adequate protection and emergency service. The closer a public safety facility is to the scene of an
emergency, the faster the response. In addition to response time, emergency services must have
adequate resources including personnel and equipment. The large size of these two organizations
benefits the City of Mission Viejo because vast personnel and equipment can be called upon during
emergency situations.
Currently, levels of service for law enforcement, fire protection, and paramedic services are
adequate and meet the local criteria established. For these reasons, the following goals and policies
are established:
GOAL 5:         Maintain exceptional levels of law enforcement, fire protection, and paramedic
                services for the community.
Policy 5.1:     Review availability of State and Federal monies to offset costs of emergency
                services.
Policy 5.2:     Coordinate with County of Orange service agencies to achieve the desired levels of
                service offered, and cooperate with the County in land acquisition necessary for
                emergency facilities.
Policy 5.3:     Continue community involvement in the City’s crime prevention programs.
                                                                                    LAND USE ELEMENT
                                             11                                        AUGUST 19, 2013

Policy 5.4:     Continue to coordinate development proposals with the Orange County Fire
                Authority and the Orange County Sheriff’s Department.
MISSION VIEJO CIVIC CENTER
_______________________________________________________________________________
The City of Mission Viejo opened a new city owned City Hall facility in the heart of the City on
May 11, 2002. The City Hall’s central location in the City provides a convenient place for
residents and business owners to obtain government services and to participate in local
government. Services and facilities provided at the Civic Center include administrative
resources, development permit processing, council chamber, sheriff facilities, an emergency
operations center, and conference facilities. Across from City Hall is the Mission Viejo Library;
these two facilities constitute the Mission Viejo Civic Center.
The following goal and policies provide the impetus for maintaining the Mission Viejo Civic
Center.
GOAL 6:         Maintain the Civic Center as a high quality facility that meets the needs and
                expectations of the residents and businesses.
Policy 6.1:     Continue to assess the public’s needs for government facilities and services at the
                civic center.
Policy 6.2:     Continue to encourage joint use of governmental facilities with the County of
                Orange and other service providers at the civic center.
Policy 6.3:     Encourage the public’s use of the civic center as a place for participation in local
                government, including public hearings and meetings.
Policy 6.4:     Continue to encourage public use of these facilities for community based meetings
                and events.
EDUCATION
______________________________________________________________________________
Mission Viejo is a family-oriented community with a large proportion of school-aged children.
Included as part of the overall planned community, the City’s schools are located within the
individual neighborhoods that they serve and are well distributed throughout the City. The City
is served by two school districts: Saddleback Valley Unified School District and Capistrano
Unified School District. In addition, Saddleback Community College located in the southern
portion of the City, serves as a regional community college.
                                                                                   LAND USE ELEMENT
                                            12                                        AUGUST 19, 2013

School facilities will need to be flexible to accommodate fluctuations in demographics and class
sizes in order to maintain the quality education of the existing school system.
GOAL 7:         Work with and support efforts by local school and community college districts
                to provide high quality public education.
Policy 7.1:     Assist local school and community college districts in determining existing and
                future student population.
Policy 7.2:     Work closely with local school and community college districts regarding new or
                expanded school sites or facilities.
Policy 7.3:     Coordinate with local school and community college districts in the development
                and utilization of joint school / park facilities.
Policy 7.4:     Coordinate with local school and community college districts and community
                groups to mitigate parking problems associated with school sites.
LIBRARY SERVICE
______________________________________________________________________________
In 1997, the Mission Viejo Library opened as a city-operated library and in 2002 the library
completed an expansion of the facility. In 2001, the City Council adopted the Library’s Strategic
Plan, “The Pathway to Providing Exceptional Library Service.” The library’s mission statement
reads, “The purpose of the Mission Viejo Library is to give this community a place to access
information, experience cultural heritage, and pursue lifelong learning. It is a place where people
of all ages can go to find the facts, feed their dreams, meet their heroes, and learn the truth.”
The Mission Viejo Library and Cultural Services Department serves as the community’s
educational and cultural center. It is the gathering place for people of all ages, a premiere
resource for families, and a cornerstone of civic life in our community. It is forward-thinking in
its strategic planning to anticipate new technologies and systems, and it responds to the
community’s changing needs and preferences with creativity and innovation.
GOAL 8:         Develop and deliver library services and cultural programs to meet the
                changing needs of the community.
Policy 8.1:     Provide educational support, promote self-directed learning, and foster literacy.
Policy 8.2:     Assist in building the community’s prosperity by affording tools and resources for
                life transitions and enhancement.
Policy 8.3:     Anticipate new community challenges and rising expectations.
Policy 8.4:     Create an inviting and welcoming community-gathering place.
                                                                                     LAND USE ELEMENT
                                             13                                          AUGUST 19, 2013

Policy 8.5:    Enhance the Library staff’s ability to assist our patrons.
WATER AND SEWER SERVICE
______________________________________________________________________________
Potable water distribution and wastewater collection and treatment are provided to the City by
three water districts: Moulton-Niguel Water District, Santa Margarita Water District, and El Toro
Water District. The City’s water and wastewater infrastructure is modern and no known
deficiencies exist. The maintenance and replacement of existing facilities, including lateral water
and sewer lines, will continue as the City ages.
As Southern California’s demand for imported water grows, the conservation of water has
become an important issue particularly during drought conditions. Water conservation can be
accomplished at a local, as well as regional level. The following goal and policies are directed
toward maintaining quality water and sewer service in the City.
GOAL 9:        Maintain a consistent level of quality water and sewer services.
Policy 9.1:    Work closely with local water districts in determining future area needs.
Policy 9.2:    Continue to identify and implement water conservation programs.
Policy 9.3:    Continue to utilize reclaimed wastewater for irrigation wherever possible on public
               and private lands.
Policy 9.4:    Encourage the use of drought resistant landscaping to reduce overall City water use.
Policy 9.5:    Coordinate with the local water districts on the replacement of water and sewer
               facilities concurrent with other City capital improvement projects.
Policy 9.6:    Ensure that adequate water and sewer service is available as new and infill
               development occurs.
STORM DRAINAGE AND URBAN RUNOFF CONTROL
______________________________________________________________________________
Storm drainage facilities are provided to the City under contract with the Orange County Flood
Control District. The City’s Master Plan of Drainage identifies existing facilities and
deficiencies in the City and a program to correct known problem areas. As the City ages, the
replacement of the storm drainage facilities will be necessary. Additionally, water quality
measures to control urban runoff and prevent pollutants from disturbing natural water bodies and
                                                                                    LAND USE ELEMENT
                                            14                                         AUGUST 19, 2013

drainage systems are important contributors to the quality of life. The following policies are
incorporated into this Element to ensure that local facilities are maintained and replaced as
needed and urban runoff is properly controlled.
GOAL 10:        Provide necessary storm drainage and reduce the discharge of pollutants and
                runoff flow from urban development to the maximum extent practicable.
Policy 10.1:    Continue to improve the existing storm drainage system by correcting identified
                deficiencies.
Policy 10.2:    Develop a long-range program for the eventual replacement of aging drainage
                system components.
Policy 10.3:    Continue to develop, adopt, and administer stormwater management regulations,
                which have the overall goal of maintaining the level of stormwater runoff no greater
                than that associated with increased in base flood elevations.
Policy 10.4:    Require property owners to minimize pollutant loading and flow velocity from new
                development projects and redevelopment projects during and after construction to
                the maximum extent practicable.
Policy 10.5:    Limit development that disturbs natural water bodies and natural drainage systems
                to the maximum extent practicable.
Policy 10.6:    Require that post-development runoff from a site not contain pollutant loads that
                cause or contribute to exceedances of receiving water quality objectives and which
                have been reduced to the maximum extent practicable.
Policy 10.7:    Implement low impact development techniques where technically feasible.
Policy 10.8:    Educate all who live, work, and shop in the City to minimize activities that pollute
                urban runoff.
SOLID WASTE
______________________________________________________________________________
As landfills in Orange County rapidly reach capacity and new landfills become increasing
difficult to establish, the need to reduce the solid waste generation rate is crucial. Local
jurisdictions must work to reduce waste generated within their boundaries to decrease the rate at
which local landfills are filled. To accomplish this, the City has developed, in accordance with
Assembly Bill 939, a Source Reduction and Recycling Element (SRRE) that provides methods
and strategies to divert waste from local landfills.
The County of Orange Waste Management Department administers the management of solid
waste disposal in the County. The solid waste in the City is collected by a private waste
                                                                                   LAND USE ELEMENT
                                             15                                       AUGUST 19, 2013
collection service under contract with the City, and is disposed of at the Prima Deshecha Landfill
and Frank R. Bowerman Landfill. County solid waste policies and programs are included in the
County’s Solid Waste Management Plan. Mission Viejo cooperates with the County’s Plan in
reducing the amount of waste produced in the City by the establishment of goals and policies that
complement this plan. In addition, implementation of the Source Reduction and Recycling
Element helps the City to meet the State’s solid waste diversion mandates.
GOAL 11:        Provide necessary control of solid waste generation and disposal.
Policy 11.1:    Continue to encourage solid waste-recycling through the Source Reduction and
                Recycling Element as required by State legislation to delay the need for
                development of new landfill sites.
Policy 11.2:    Work closely with the County of Orange in developing strategies and programs to
                reduce the volumes of solid waste generated in the City.
Policy 11.3:    Continue to implement a citywide curbside recycling program, and a recycling plan
                for construction / demolition permits.
Policy 11.4:    Encourage the placement of recyclable material drop-off stations in convenient
                locations throughout the City.
NATURAL GAS, ELECTRICITY, AND COMMUNICATIONS
______________________________________________________________________________
Southern California Edison (SCE) and San Diego Gas and Electric Company (SDG&E) provide
electricity to the City, and Southern California Gas Company provides natural gas to the City.
Other utility service companies provide video service, cable service, telephony, and data services
in the City. These companies are essential for the support of existing and future development.
Wireless telecommunication services are provided by a number of wireless communication
companies.
GOAL 12:        Coordinate with utility companies for the provision of natural gas, electricity,
                and communications.
Policy 12.1:    Continue to work closely with utility service providers to ensure that adequate
                energy and communication facilities are available to all residents and businesses.
Policy 12.2:    Encourage utility companies and other service providers to underground existing
                overhead transmission facilities and, to the extent economically and technologically
                feasible, to underground proposed new facilities in the public rights-of-way.
GOAL 13:        Ensure that the location and design of wireless telecommunication antenna
                                                                                      LAND USE ELEMENT
                                            16                                           AUGUST 19, 2013

                facilities are consistent with adopted policies and regulations of the City.
Policy 13.1:    Reduce the number of potential wireless telecommunication antenna site locations
                through a coordinated co-location process.
Policy 13.2:    Reduce the adverse visual impacts and obtrusiveness of wireless telecommunication
                towers and antennas within the community by screening or enforcing design
                standards that employ the best available “stealth” or camouflage technologies.
Policy 13.3:    Consider the proximity of any proposed wireless telecommunication antenna facility
                to residences, schools, parks, recreation facilities, and open space areas.
Policy 13.4:    Establish and maintain development standards that ensure that wireless
                telecommunication service companies maximize efficiencies while minimizing the
                size of their equipment. Encourage the use of technology that ensures the efficient
                delivery of service using less equipment that occupies smaller parcels of land.
Policy 13.5:    Consider the applicability of the Wireless Master Plan during the development
                review process involving a proposed new wireless telecommunication antenna facility.
HEALTHY COMMUNITY
______________________________________________________________________________
Mission Viejo is a family-oriented community desiring to cultivate a culture of better health and
lifestyles for the community. Mission Viejo desires to seek opportunities through land use
planning and use of City facilities to support individual efforts to make healthier choices and
promote wellness within the community. The City of Mission Viejo already embraces healthy
community concepts through its Community Services Master Plan, park resources, recreation
centers, fitness programs, trails, bikeways, open spaces, community-building facilities, and
access to healthy foods. In addition, on April 18, 2011, the City Council adopted Resolution11-
24 declaring Mission Viejo a Healthy Eating Active Living (HEAL) city, joining the partnership
effort of other California cities to build healthier communities. The City has the unique ability to
positively affect the health of the Mission Viejo community now and in the future.
GOAL 14:        Work collaboratively with the community to develop and achieve a healthy
                community.
Policy 14.1:    Build relationships with residents and businesses that make community health a
                priority for the community.
Policy 14.2:    Support cohesive neighborhoods and lifecycle housing to promote health and safety.
Policy 14.3:    Build and maintain diverse, safe, and attractive public spaces that provide pleasant
                                                                                       LAND USE ELEMENT
                                             17                                            AUGUST 19, 2013

             places for neighbors to meet and congregate.
Policy 14.4: Work with regional planning and transportation agencies to reduce residents’
             reliance on cars through improved transit service linking residents with desired
             destinations such as health facilities, schools, parks, recreational resources, and
             commercial centers.
Policy 14.5: Expand community access to indoor and outdoor public facilities through joint use
             agreements with schools and / or other partners.
GOAL 15:     Create and maintain convenient and safe opportunities for physical activity
             for residents of all ages and income levels.
Policy 15.1: Protect and enhance parks and recreation centers to increase the opportunities for
             physical activity in existing areas.
Policy 15.2: Seek opportunities to create a balanced transportation system providing for the
             safety and mobility of pedestrians, bicyclists, and other forms of physical activity.
Policy 15.3: Ensure that pedestrian routes and sidewalks are integrated into continuous networks.
Policy 15.4: Support walking and biking connectivity between residential neighborhoods and
             schools, parks, recreational resources, and commercial centers.
GOAL 16:     Provide safe and convenient access to healthy foods for all residents.
Policy 16.1: Provide safe, convenient opportunities to purchase fresh fruits and vegetables by
             ensuring that sources of healthy foods are accessible in all neighborhoods.
Policy 16.2: Encourage healthy eating habits and healthy eating messages.
Policy 16.3: Avoid a concentration of unhealthy food providers within neighborhoods.
Policy 16.4: Provide ample opportunities for a farmers market, especially for access to fresh
             fruits and vegetables.
Policy 16.5: Consider the feasibility of providing areas for community gardens.
Policy 16.6: Encourage restaurants to disclose the calorie amount and grams of fat for each
             menu item listed on a menu or menu board in a clear and conspicuous manner.
Policy 16.7: Encourage restaurants to highlight “Heart Healthy” choices on the menu.
Policy 16.8: Encourage food retailers to prominently feature healthy check-out lanes free of
                                                                                   LAND USE ELEMENT
                                           18                                         AUGUST 19, 2013

                high density foods.
Policy 16.9:    Encourage food retailers to promote healthy food choices through signage and
                product information, such as in the produce section of the store.
Policy 16.10: Encourage food retailers to create ideas to generate interest in making healthy
                choices in food purchases.
GOAL 17:        Prioritize “greening” efforts and pursue a comprehensive strategy to ensure
                that residents breathe clean air and drink clean water.
Policy 17.1:    Encourage residents to reduce reliance on cars.
Policy 17.2:    Protect homes, schools, workplaces, and stores from major sources of outdoor air
                pollution.
Policy 17.3:    Prioritize “greening” efforts to keep air and water clean.
Policy 17.4:    Incentivize energy conservation and waste reduction by businesses and residences.
RELATED GOALS AND POLICIES
______________________________________________________________________________
The goals and policies contained in this element serve as the framework for other General Plan
Elements. A number of goals and policies included in these other elements support the goals and
policies, either directly or indirectly, in the Land Use Element. The supporting goals and policies
are identified in Table LU-1.
                                                                                  LAND USE ELEMENT
                                               19                                     AUGUST 19, 2013

                                         TABLE LU-1
                          LAND USE POLICIES BY ELEMENT
                                                  POLICIES BY ELEMENT
   ISSUE      Housing   Circulation Conservation/    Public         Noise     Economic          Growth
    AREA                              Open Space     Safety                 Development      Management
Balanced      1.1, 2.5, 1.1, 1.2    4.1-4.3,                                1.1-1.7,         6.1, 6.2
Development   3.5                   5.1-5.5                                 3.1-3.12
Growth        4.1-4.3,  1.1–1.3,    4.1-4.3,        1.1-1.3,  1.1-1.7,      2.1-2.5,         1.1-1.5
Management    6.4       2.1–2.4     5.1-5.5         3.1-3.6,  1.3-1.5,      3.1-3.12         2.1-2.5
                        23.1–23.2                   8.1-8.8   2.1-2.8                        3.1, 3.2
                                                                                             4.1-4.3
                                                                                             5.1-5.4
                                                                                             6.1, 6.2
Community     2.1-2.4,  4.1–4.3     1.5-1.7,                  1.4, 2.2-2.4, 3.1-3.12
Identity/     4.4,      5.1–5.2     3.1-3.7                   3.1-3.5
Quality Urban           14.1–14.3
Design        6.1-6.4
                        15.1–15.4
                        16.1–16.2
                        17.1–17.5
                        20.1–20.5
                        21.1–21.4
Open Space    2.2       17.1–17.5   1.1-1.11,       1.1-1.3,
Preservation            21.1–21.4   2.1-2.7,        3.1-3.6,
                                    3.1-3.7         6.1-6.7,
                                                    8.1-8.8
                                                   20                        LAND USE ELEMENT
                                                                                       August 2013

_____________________________________________________________________________
                                       LAND USE PLAN
______________________________________________________________________________
The Land Use Element describes the location and extent of future development in the City and
identifies standards for that development. The geographic locations of specific uses are
presented on the Land Use Policy Map which is a part of this Element. The Element focuses on
specific characteristics of the City:
1)   The relatively few number of undeveloped parcels of land left within the City;
2)   Existing development within the City, most of which is relatively recent, will increasingly
     require maintenance and preservation; and
3)   Revitalization or redevelopment of existing properties within the city where rehabilitation is
     necessary or conversion to other uses is desired for economic or social purposes.
LAND USE POLICY CONSIDERATIONS
______________________________________________________________________________
A wide range of natural and man-made environmental factors are considered in the formulation
of land use policy. Areas of special environmental significance, potential safety hazards,
limitations of existing infrastructure, and the nature and characteristics of existing development
all have influence on land use policy.
Land Use Constraints and Resources
The Public Safety Element identifies areas of Mission Viejo subject to such environmental
constraints as flooding, landsliding, and seismic conditions. In turn, the Conservation / Open
Space element identifies areas containing important ecological or natural resources. The
Circulation and Noise Elements describe roadway / transportation system capacities and areas of
the City impacted by noises levels. These constraints, consisting of both natural and man-made
factors will continue to influence long-range land use planning and are discussed in detail in the
Master Environmental Assessment for the General Plan.
LAND USE DESIGNATIONS
_______________________________________________________________________________
Land use designations are necessary to provide indications of the type and nature of development
that is allowed in a given location. While terms like “residential,” “commercial” and “industrial”
are generally understood, State general plan law requires a clear and concise description of the land
use categories shown on the land use policy map.
                                                                                    LAND USE ELEMENT
                                            21                                         AUGUST 19, 2013

The Mission Viejo Land Use Element provides for 17 land use categories or designations. Four of
these designations are established for residential development, ranging from low-density single-
family to high density multiple-family development. Four commercial designations, one office, one
industrial and a community facility category are included. Additionally, a special intensive overlay
designation is provided to allow the most intensive development in the City for the commercial /
office / community facility core in the Crown Valley Parkway / I-5 area illustrated. Generally, the
borders of the Commercial Intensive Overlay Area include the Southern California Edison
Easement (which crosses Crown Valley Parkway) to the north, Marguerite Parkway to the south,
Medical Center Road to the east, and Interstate 5 to the west. Three categories of mixed use are
established to offer some flexibility in providing complimentary commercial, office, residential, and
community facility uses. Parkland and open space areas are combined under the recreation / open
space designation. Major transportation facilities are included in a single transportation corridor
category.
Land Use Intensity / Density
State general plan law requires that the Land Use Element indicate the maximum intensities /
densities permitted within the City, and the land use designations contained in this element and
shown on the land use policy map are described in this way. Table LU-2 lists each of the land use
designations for the City and provides a corresponding standard for maximum intensity / density of
development on that parcel. Maximum allowable development on individual parcels of land is to
be governed by these standards. The table also included the expected overall levels of development
within each land use category on a City-wide basis. These expected overall levels of development
represent an anticipated intensity / density and are, therefore, less than the maximum allowed. For
various reasons, not every parcel in the City has in the past, nor will it in the future, develop to the
maximum allowed.
A number of terms are used to define the land use designations or categories described in this
element. The term “intensity” refers to the degree of development measured in terms of building
characteristics such as height, bulk, floor area ratio and / or percent of lot coverage. Intensity is
most often used to describe nonresidential development levels, but in a broader sense, is used to
express overall levels of all development types within a planning area. The overall intensity of
development within the City of Mission Viejo is low, although certain commercial areas, like those
along Crown Valley Parkway are of medium intensity.
For most nonresidential development categories (commercial, industrial, office, business park,
community facility, and recreation facilities), the measure of intensity known as “floor area ratio”
(FAR) provides the most convenient method of describing development levels. Simply stated, the
floor area ratio is the relationship of total gross floor area of all buildings on a lot to the total land
area of that lot expressed as a ratio. For example, a 21,780 square foot building on a 43, 560 square
foot lot (one acre) yields a FAR of .50:1 as illustrated in Figure LU-2. The FAR describes use
intensity on a lot and not the actual building height, bulk or coverage. As Figure LU-1 shows, the
.50:1 FAR can yield a building of one story in height covering one half of the lot area, or a taller
building which covers less of the lot and provides for more open space around the building.
                                                                                        LAND USE ELEMENT
                                               22                                           AUGUST 19, 2013

                                                TABLE LU-2
                       DEVELOPMENT INTENSITY / DENSITY STANDARDS
             LAND USE                   MAXIMUM DEVELOPMENT                         ANTICIPATED
          DESIGNATION                     INTENSITY / DENSITY (a)             INTENSITY / DENSITY (b)
          RESIDENTIAL                    DWELLING UNITS / ACRE               DWELLING UNITS / ACRE
    Residential 3.5 (R 3.5)                      0.0-3.5 du / ac                      3.14 du / ac
    Residential 6.5 (R 6.5)                      3.5-6.5 du / ac                      5.65 du / ac
    Residential 14 (R 14)                        6.5-14.0 du / ac                     14.0 du / ac
    Residential 30 (R 30)                        14.0-30.0 du / ac                    22.0 du / ac
          COMMERCIAL                        FLOOR AREA RATIO                     FLOOR AREA RATIO
    Com’l Neighborhood (CN)                  .75:1                              .25:1
    Com’l Community (CN)                    1.0:1                               .25:1
    Com’l Highway (CH)                      1.5:1                               .30:1
    Com’l Regional (CR)                     1.5:1                               .30:1
    Com’l Intensive Overlay (CI)            1.7:1                               .50:1 (CI-CH, CI-CR,CI-CF)
                                                                                .70:1 (CI-OP)
               OFFICE
    Office / Professional (OP)              1.5:1                               .50:1
           INDUSTRIAL
    Business Park (BP)                      1.0:1                               .45:1
            MIXED-USE
    CN / CF / R 14                          1.0:1 / 14.0 du / ac                .25:1 / 14.0 du / ac
    CH / OP                                 1.5:1                               .50:1
    OP / R 30 / BP                          1.5:1 / 30.0 du / ac                .50:1 / 28.0 du / ac
               OTHER                        FLOOR AREA RATIO                     FLOOR AREA RATIO
    Community Facility (CF)                           1.0:1                               .25:1
    Recreation / Open Space (R/OS)                   .50:1                                .20:1
    Transportation Corridor (TC)                     .50:1                                 -----
(a)  Maximum allowable level of development on individual parcels of land.
(b)  Assumed overall level of development City-wide. Since the development which has occurred to
     date has not reached the maximum allowed level of intensity of development or density, future
     development is expected to be less on a City-wide basis. Therefore, an “anticipated” level of
     density / intensity is used in projected total future development (see text).
                                                                                            LAND USE ELEMENT
                                                  23                                             AUGUST 19, 2013

Figure LU-1: Floor Area Ratio Defined
The term “density,” in a land use context, is a measure of the population or residential development
capacity of the land. Density is explained in terms of swelling units per acre (du/ac) or persons per
acre; thus, the density of a residential development of 100 dwelling units occupying 20 acres of land
is 5.0 du/ac. Within land use plans density is often described as a range (i.e., 3.5-6.5 du/ac).
Descriptions of each of the land use designations shown on the Land Use Policy Map are provided
to delineate the general types of uses allowed and their corresponding intensities or densities.
These use descriptions, types, and limitations and are to be further defined as specific uses within
the Development (Zoning) Code to be prepared following adoption of the General Plan. The
specific uses and development standards contained within the Development Code and shown on the
accompanying Zoning Map are to be consistent with the land use descriptions and standards
contained in this element or shown on the Land Use Policy Map.
                                                                                    LAND USE ELEMENT
                                              24                                        AUGUST 19, 2013

Residential Designations
Residential 3.5: This residential land use designation provides for the development of low density
detached and attached single family dwellings. This designation permits the construction of as
many as 3.5 single family dwelling units per gross acre of land. Other uses, such as churches,
schools, and childcare facilities, which are determined to be compatible with and oriented toward
serving the needs of low density detached single family dwellings, are also allowed.
Residential 6.5: This residential land use designation provides for the development of low to
medium density detached and attached single family dwellings (duplexes, condominiums, and
townhomes). The Residential 6.5 designation allows the construction of as many as 6.5 detached or
attached single family dwelling units per gross acre of land. Other uses, such as churches, schools,
childcare facilities, which are determined to be compatible with and oriented towards serving the
needs of low to medium density detached and attached single family dwellings, are also allowed.
Residential 14: This residential land use designation provides for the development of medium and
higher density detached and attached single family dwellings, as well as multi-family dwellings
(apartments). This designation permits the construction of as many as 14 single family or multi-
family dwelling units per gross acre of land. Other uses, such as churches, schools, and childcare
facilities, which are determined to be compatible with and oriented toward serving the needs of
medium and higher density detached and attached single-family dwellings and multi-family
dwellings, are also allowed.
Residential 30: The highest density single family attached and multi-family dwelling units are
provided for by this land use designation. This designation allows as many as 30 single family
attached or multi-family dwelling units per gross acre of land. Other uses, such as churches,
schools, congregate care and childcare facilities, which are determined to be compatible with and
oriented toward serving the needs of higher density single family attached and multi-family
dwelling units, are also allowed.
Commercial Designations
Commercial Neighborhood: This commercial designation includes smaller-scale business
activities which generally provide a retailing or service-oriented function, serving the needs of local
residents located near those activities. Examples of Commercial Neighborhood uses include: food
and drug stores, clothing stores, professional and business offices, furniture and appliance stores,
sporting goods, hardware stores, restaurants, and specialty retail. Commercial Neighborhood
projects typically occur on 5 to 10 acres of land with approximately 50,000 square feet of building
floor area. Businesses are oriented toward convenience shopping, consumer goods and services,
and professional office activities, which may be accessed by automobiles and pedestrians. The
maximum intensity of development permitted in this category has a floor area ratio of .75:1.
Commercial Community: Commercial activities within this designation include retail,
professional office, and service-oriented business activities which serve a community-wide area and
population. Commercial Community uses include the same types allowed in Commercial
                                                                                      LAND USE ELEMENT
                                             25                                          AUGUST 19, 2013
Neighborhood areas, but may also support larger-scale anchor uses such as junior department
stores, home improvement centers, discount stores, furniture / appliance outlets, and entertainment
centers. Specialized housing designed to meet the physical and social needs of senior citizens is
allowed provided the property is situated in the Senior Housing Overlay Zone and subject to a
Conditional Use Permit. Commercial Community development generally occurs on 10 to 30 acres
of land and includes 100,000 to 300,000 square feet of building floor area. Permitted activities are
generally more intensive than those occurring in the Commercial Neighborhood category, and they
are typically located on arterial roadways to accommodate the higher traffic volumes generated by
their presence. Commercial Community developments are accessible to automobiles and
pedestrians, and may also be served by public transit. The maximum intensity of development
permitted in this category has a floor area ratio of 1.0:1.
Commercial Highway: Commercial activities within this designation include highway-oriented
businesses providing goods and services to a broad population utilizing major transportation
corridors. Uses within the Commercial Highway category include those described in both the
Commercial Neighborhood and Community categories, and also include other uses which serve
both local and non-local populations, such as, automobile and motorcycle dealerships, auto service
operations, and hotels and motels. Specialized housing designed to meet the physical and social
needs of senior citizens is allowed provided the property is situated in the Senior Housing Overlay
Zone and subject to a Conditional Use Permit. Commercial activities are accessed primarily by
automobile or public transit, and individual sites may range in size from less than one acre to 30 or
more acres of land area. Commercial activities are generally intensive with a maximum floor area
ratio of 1.5:1.
Commercial Regional: This commercial category includes large-scale retail and consumer-service
business activities which serve a large geographic area and population. Commercial Regional
development typically occurs on a minimum of 50 acres of land and includes 300,000 to 1,000,000
square feet of building floor area. Regional centers are intensive commercial projects often
containing several major department stores as anchors, large entertainment complexes, and
numerous smaller supportive retail and commercial service activities. Commercial Regional uses
include the uses permitted in the Commercial Neighborhood, Community, and Highway categories,
with some exceptions such as automobile dealerships or professional offices. Commercial
Regional development is located near major freeways for automobile and public transit access. The
maximum intensity of development permitted is a floor area ratio of 1.5:1.
Commercial Intensive Overlay: In certain areas of the City near major freeway interchanges,
more intensive development is desired than in other areas with the same land use designations. The
overlay designation achieves this purpose by permitting a greater maximum floor area ratio than
that permitted in the base land use designation. This overlay designation limits the most intensive
projects to areas where infrastructures can support such development. Commercial activities within
this category include any of the most intensive commercial retail, commercial service, professional
office, or community facility uses in the vicinity of major freeway interchanges. Traffic generation
for uses in this category is high and locations for such uses are limited. The maximum intensity of
development for this category is 1.7:1, and the primary uses are major hotels, corporate
headquarters, hospitals and medical offices, and major retail / service commercial. Generally, the
                                                                                    LAND USE ELEMENT
                                              26                                       AUGUST 19, 2013
borders of the Commercial Intensive Overlay area include commercial, office, and community
facility development along both side of Crown Valley Parkway between the Interstate 5 Freeway
and Los Altos, such as Kaleidoscope, the Shops at Mission Viejo mall, and Mission Hospital
Regional Medical Center, and an additional portion of office development along Puerta Real to Via
Grande. The Land Use Policy Map of the General Plan illustrates the area where the Commercial
Intensive Overlay is applied.
Office and Industrial Designations
Office / Professional: Office / Professional uses include business activities primarily involved in
providing professional or administrative services. These activities include legal and medical
services, financial institutions, corporate offices, government offices, cultural and community
facilities, and a wide range of similar uses which together may constitute major concentrations of
employment or community activity. Some small-scale retail and service commercial activities
designed to meet the needs of the employee population are allowed as secondary / supportive uses.
Specialized housing designed to meet the physical and social needs of senior citizens is allowed
provided the property is situated in the Senior Housing Overlay Zone and subject to a Conditional
Use Permit. Office / Professional development is generally located on arterial roadways or near
freeways for convenient automobile access and public transit service. The maximum intensity of
development for this category is a floor area ratio of 1.5:1.
Business Park: This industrial / business designation includes research, light manufacturing,
business/ professional offices, warehousing / distribution, wholesaling, storage, public utilities and
uses, and service commercial activities. The Business Park category provides for major
employment concentration and is generally served by arterial roadways and freeways, providing
automobile and public transit access. The intensity of development permitted has a maximum floor
area ratio of 1.0:1.
Mixed Use Designations
Commercial Neighborhood / Community Facility / Residential 14: This designation includes
three land used designations described elsewhere as single categories of use. This mixed-use
designation allows any one of the three categories of use to exist individually on a site, or a
combination of any two of the three categories may exist on a site or as a single project to
accommodate complementary uses. All uses described for each single land use designation
category earlier in the Land Use Element are allowed as described in those individual categories.
The maximum intensity of development for this category is a floor area ratio of 1.0:1 and a
maximum residential density of 14 dwelling units per gross acre of land.
Commercial Highway / Office Professional: This mixed-use designation includes both the
Commercial Highway and Office Professional categories, and allows either category to exist
individually on a site, or allows both categories to be combined on the same site or as a single
project. All uses described for each single land use description category earlier in the Land Use
Element are allowed as described in those individual categories. The maximum intensity of
development is a floor area ratio of 1.5:1.
                                                                                    LAND USE ELEMENT
                                            27                                         AUGUST 19, 2013
Office Professional / Residential 30 /Business Park: This mixed-use designation includes the
Office Professional and Residential 30 and Business Park categories, and allows either category to
exist individually on a site, or allows any one of those categories to exist individually on a site, or to
be combined with either or both of the other categories on the same site or as a single project. All
uses described for each single land use designation category earlier in the Land Use Element are
allowed as described in those individual categories. The maximum intensity of development is a
floor area ratio of 1.5:1 for Office Professional, and 1.0:1 for Business Park, and the maximum
residential density is 30 dwelling units per gross acre of land.
Other Designations
Community Facility: The Community Facility designation includes a wide range of public, quasi-
public, and private uses, such as school sites, churches, childcare centers, government
administrative offices and facilities, public utilities, libraries, museums, art galleries, community
theaters, hospitals, and cultural and recreational activities. Included in this category are Saddleback
Community College and other institutions of higher learning. A weekend outdoor marketplace in
the parking lot is a permissible use under the Community Facility designation for Saddleback
College, provided that the use is a secondary use sanctioned by the Board of Trustees and does not
conflicts with or replace educational activities provided, further, that it does not result in a shortage
of parking and that it does not create a nuisance for nearby residential and commercial uses.
Community facility uses are distributed throughout the City and have a maximum floor area ratio of
1.0:1.
In addition to the Community Facility designation, community facility uses are allowed under a
number of other land use designations. The other designations are identified in the table below, but
the precise locations for specific community facility uses will be identified through zoning.
Land Use Designations                       Community Facility Uses
Residential
Residential 3.5                                          X
Residential 6.5                                          X
Residential 14                                           X
Residential 30                                           X
Office
Office / Professional                                    X
Mixed Use
CN / CF / R14                                            X
CH / OP                                                  X
OP / R30 / BP                                            X
Recreation / Open Space: The Recreation / Open Space designation includes both public and
private recreational uses necessary to meet the active and passive recreational needs of City
                                                                                       LAND USE ELEMENT
                                              28                                           AUGUST 19, 2013
residents. Active recreation activities include golf courses / driving ranges, equestrian centers,
community recreational facilities, public parklands, and indoor and outdoor sports / athletic
facilities. Passive recreation uses include museums, galleries, nature preserves, outdoor theater,
designated open space and similar uses. These activities should be widely distributed throughout
the city and have a maximum floor area ratio of .50:1.
Community Facilities as defined in this Land Use Element are included within this definition of
Recreation / Open Space as applied to the recreation centers listed below:
Felipe Recreation Center
Marguerite Recreation Center
Montanoso Recreation Center
Sierra Recreation Center
Distinctions between the active recreation / open spaces and passive recreation / open spaces,
including wilderness areas will be made in the Development Code and the Zoning Map.
Transportation Corridor: The Transportation Corridor designation applies to land within the
Interstate 5 Freeway, the Foothill Transportation Corridor, and the Southern California Regional
Rail Authority (SCRRA) railway corridors. Lands within these corridors are reserved for
transportation purposes as their primary use. Secondary uses such as open space linkages and
landscaped areas, public and private parking areas, and other transportation-related activities and
facilities are allowed. The maximum floor area ratio for development is .50:1.
DISTRIBUTION OF LAND USES
______________________________________________________________________________________________________________________
The statistical distribution of planned land uses citywide is described in Table LU-3. This table
identifies each land use designation, its associated land acreage, and the total land acreage for all
planned land uses in the City. The table also provides estimates of the total number of residential
dwelling units planned and the resulting population. For nonresidential land uses, such as
commercial, office, industrial, and community facility, estimates of building square footage are
depicted.
                                                                                                  LAND USE ELEMENT
                                                   29                                                 AUGUST 19, 2013
                                           TABLE LU-3
         ANTICIPATED LAND USE AND POPULATION IN THE CITY
               LAND USE                     Gross        Dwelling       Population           Square
           DESIGNATION                    Acres (a)       Units                             Footage
                                                                                          (000’s) (C)
Residential
  - Residential 3.5                            2,245          8,027             22,476
  - Residential 6.5                            3,895        18,137              50,784
  - Residential 14                               648          4,516             12,644
  - Residential 30                               211          3,910             10,948
Commercial
  - Commercial Neighborhood                       67                                            583.70
  - Commercial Community                         135                                          1,176.12
  - Commercial Highway                           145                                           1,651.8
  - Commercial Regional                             -                                                 -
Commercial Intensive Overlay
  - Community Facility                            28                                            487.87
  - Commercial Highway                              5                                            87.12
  - Commercial Regional                           74                                          1,289.38
  - Office/Professional                           47                                          1,151.17
Office
  - Office/Professional                           91            319                893        1,585.58
Industrial
  - Business Park                                249                                          4,061.54
Mixed-Use
  - Com. Neighborhood/ Community                    5            (d)                             43.55
     Facility/Res. 14
  - Commercial Highway/Office                    9(e)                                           156.82
     Professional
  - Office/Res. 30/Business Park                  41                                            438.71
Other
  - Community Facility                           735                                          6,401.38
  - Recreation/Open Space                      2,019                                          5,110.12
  - Transportation Corridor                      997                                                  -
Total                                         11,646        34,909              97,745      24,224.86
Notes:
(a) For purposes of establishing net acreage by category, the gross acreage for residential land uses
     should be reduced by 25% and nonresidential uses by 20% because Mission Viejo’s topography
     is not flat and has considerable slope area.
(b) Population is based on State Department of Finance estimate of 2.8 persons per household.
(c) Square footage for nonresidential categories is based on average FAR for uses represented.
(d) No Residential development calculated because the only site with this designation is presently
     developed as commercial neighborhood.
(e) Also lies within Commercial Intensive Overlay.
                                                                                  LAND USE ELEMENT
                                                      30                          DRAFT AUGUST 2013
                                                      28

SPECIFIC PLAN STUDY AREA
_______________________________________________________________________________
The land use designations described above define the general types of uses allowed and their
corresponding intensities or densities. In addition to these designations, State planning law
provides methods and approaches to ensure proper planning for important subareas within the City.
The Specific Plan is an important planning method which can be utilized to manage development
and its associated impacts within areas of the City which warrant special attention. There are two
areas in the City that consideration should be given to future preparation of a Specific Plan.
The first Specific Plan Study Area is the southerly portion of the City. This area represents the
major urban activity center in the City and includes major commercial and employment generating
uses, such as the Shops at Mission Viejo mall, auto dealerships along Interstate 5, and office
developments along Crown Valley Parkway. In addition, there are significant community facilities
like the Saddleback Community College and Mission Hospital Regional Medical Center, and a
range of housing types and densities. Generally, the borders of this area include the Southern
California Edison Easement (which crosses Crown Valley Parkway) to the north, Via Escolar to the
south, the eastern City limits to the east, Interstate 5 Freeway to the west, and an additional portion
of the City along Cabot Road located south of Oso Parkway is also included.
The second Specific Plan Study Area is the City’s geographic center. This area is a combination
of commercial, office, public facility, and recreation uses generally located in vicinity of the
intersection of Marguerite Parkway and La Paz Road to the north, and the intersection of
Marguerite Parkway and Oso Parkway to the south. This area includes a civic center with a city
hall and public library; several large commercial centers with retail stores, offices, restaurants,
automobile repair shops, and churches; Avalon Mission Viejo Apartments; Thomas R. Potocki
Conference Center; Norman P. Murray Community and Senior Center; Oso Viejo Community
Park; Newhart Middle School; World Cup sports fields; and Oso Creek and existing trail system.
There has been minimal new development or revitalization of existing properties within the
Mission Viejo Village Center area, especially the large commercial center southeasterly of the
intersection of Marguerite Parkway and La Paz Road. A fragmented ownership pattern, dated
architectural design, an abundance of surface parking lots, minimal landscaping, and the lack of a
pedestrian environment are obstacles hindering the establishment of a downtown or town center
for this area.
The Land Use Policy Map of the General Plan illustrates the extent of the Specific Plan Study Area.
GROWTH MANAGEMENT
______________________________________________________________________________
Goal 2 of this Element calls for the establishment of a growth management and development
program which avoids adverse public service, environmental, or fiscal effects. A number of
policies are identified to implement the growth management goal. These policies describe
certain actions, analysis and programs to be undertaken by the City to accomplish the growth
                                                                                      LAND USE ELEMENT
                                              31                                         AUGUST 19, 2013

management intent and objectives. Contained in the Growth Management Element is a Growth
Management Plan. In addition to the implementation programs described in the Growth
Management Plan, there are several other existing plans and programs that work in conjunction
with one another to meet the City’s growth management objectives.
The plans and programs are described below are components of the Growth Management
Program.
Environmental Review
Under the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA), all private and public development
projects are subject to review for their resulting environmental impacts. Where the City or
another lead agency (such as one of the special districts) determines that a project will cause
significant environmental impacts, measures to mitigate (avoid or reduce) those impacts are
adopted as part of project approval. These mitigation measures are applied during the
appropriate phases of the project, and offset otherwise adverse impacts associated with growth
and development.
Fiscal Impact Analysis
Development within the City will generally have fiscal impacts; that is, development represents
both costs to the City to provide public services, and revenue from taxation and fees collected.
These fiscal impacts can be estimated prior to development approval through methods described
in the Economic Development Element and its Technical Report. Management of growth and
development within the City takes into account the fiscal as well as environmental impacts of
development.
Commercial Intensive Overlay Designation
Described earlier in this element as a land use designation, the Commercial Intensive Overlay
acts as a component of growth management by identifying those areas where greater intensity of
development can be accommodated based on the capacity of planned infrastructure and the use of
innovative techniques to deal with factors such as traffic, parking, and urban design.
AIRPORT LAND USE CONSISTENCY
______________________________________________________________________________
The Airport Land Use Commission for Orange County (ALUC) reviews general plans for
consistency with the Airport Environs Land Use Plan (AELUP).
On July 21, 2005, ALUC adopted a Resolution No. 2005-1 confirming that the AELUP for the
Marine Corps Air Station (MCAS) El Toro was no longer applicable to the MCAS El Toro
property or its environs, and the AELUP no longer had any legal effect. The City of Irvine is
currently developing the former MCAS with a new planned community development called
“Heritage Fields” and the “Great Park.”
                                                                                   LAND USE ELEMENT
                                           32                                          AUGUST 19, 2013

ALUC reviews the establishment of heliports/helistops for consistency with the AELUP for
Heliports. The key issues include specifying whether or not heliports/helistops are permitted
within the jurisdiction; compliance with the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA),
Caltrans/Division of Aeronautics, ALUC, and City requirements when developing
heliports/helistops; and reference to building height restrictions imposed by the FAA.
Currently, there is one private heliport operating in the City. Mission Hospital has an existing
heliport for medical emergencies on top of west wing of their five story bed tower building on
the upper hospital campus off Medical Center Road, south of Crown Valley Parkway. No
helicopters are based at the hospital. The site plan permit for the bed tower and attendant helipad
was approved by the City’s Planning Commission in 1989.
The City’s Development Code does not expressly permit or prohibit heliports/helistops. If such a
use was proposed, it would undergo a discretionary site plan permit review process and be
reviewed for consistency with the intent, purpose, and development standards of the underlying
zoning district. The City will ensure that each applicant seeking a discretionary site plan permit
or similar approval for the construction or operation of a heliport or helistop complies fully with
the state permit procedure provided by law and with all conditions of approval imposed or
recommended by the FAA, Caltrans/Division of Aeronautics, ALUC, and City development
requirements.
The City’s Development Code limits structure height in nearly all zoning districts to 35 feet in
height. There is one commercial height overlay zoning district off Crown Valley Parkway that
permits structures not exceeding 150 feet in height if approved by the a discretionary site plan
permit through the City’s Planning Commission. In the event the City should receive a variance
application to permit a structure more than 200 feet above ground, the City will ensure that
development proposals reference North American Vertical Datum 1998 (NAVD88) and that the
application fully comply with procedures provided by Federal and State law, with the referral
requirements of ALUC, and with all conditions of approval imposed or recommended by the
FAA and ALUC including filing a Notice of Landing Area Proposal (Form 7480-I) and a Notice
of Proposed Construction or Alteration (Form 7460-1). These requirements shall be in addition
to all other City development requirements.
PROVISION OF PUBLIC SERVICES AND FACILITIES
______________________________________________________________________________
The Land Use Plan identifies public services and facilities necessary for the City of Mission Viejo
to prosper. The Land Use Plan contains measures to ensure that an adequate level of service for
public facilities is provided and maintained to meet the City’s needs. In addition, service
standards and funding mechanisms for the provision of the individual public facilities are
described below.
As it relates to the provision of public services and facilities, the Land Use Plan contains two
                                                                                   LAND USE ELEMENT
                                            33                                        AUGUST 19, 2013

components, which constitute the public facilities within the City: public services and
infrastructure. Public services within the City include law enforcement, fire protection services,
educational facilities, and civic, institutional and cultural facilities. Infrastructure includes those
facilities necessary to distribute power (natural gas and electricity) or water (storm drainage and
potable water). Infrastructure also includes wastewater collection/treatment facilities and solid
waste facilities such as landfills.
The City’s policy is to coordinate with the local service districts through adherence to the local
master plans for public facilities. The public facilities in the City provided by the County of
Orange are planned for in the County’s Facilities Implementation Plan (FIP). The County service
standards, adopted by Mission Viejo, are contained within the County’s Public Services and
Facilities Element of its General Plan and outlined in this Element.
The Land Use Element provides for public facilities under the Community Facilities land use
designation. Figure LU-2 illustrates the locations of the public facilities in the City at build-out
of the General Plan. The provision of these public facilities is a result of coordination with the
County and the local service providers (e.g., school and water district, etc.) to designate lands for
the provision of needed facilities.
PUBLIC SERVICES
______________________________________________________________________________
The County provides law enforcement and fire protection services for the City of Mission Viejo.
 It is important that the City maintain cooperation and coordination with the county departments,
which service the City so that an adequate level of service is maintained throughout the City.
                                                                                       LAND USE ELEMENT
                                             34                                           AUGUST 19, 2013


Law Enforcement
The City’s law enforcement is provided by the Orange County Sheriff-Coroner Department. The
City of Mission Viejo is the largest city served by the Orange County Sheriff’s Department.
Approximately thirty deputies, four investigators, and one investigative assistant are assigned to
Mission Viejo. The City can be provided with additional specialized personal from the Orange
County Sheriff’s Department in the event of homicides, missing persons, vice, fraud, narcotics,
sexual assault, and other complicated crimes. The Sheriff substation that serves the City is
located in Aliso Viejo. County Sheriff facilities are funded through public facility development
agreements as new development occurs. The following are County-wide service standards and
Department goals for the Sheriff’s Department:
 Respond within 5 minutes or less to calls of life or property threatening incidents in progress.
 Respond within 20 minutes or less to a non-emergency.
Fire Protection
Fire protection and paramedic services are provided through contract with the Orange County
Fire Authority. Three stations exist within the City as shown in Figure LU-2, although stations
located outside the City will also respond to areas within the City. Funding for fire protection is
provided primarily through the Structural Fire Fund. The Orange County Fire Authority has
adopted the following service standards for fire protection response:
 OCFA responds within 5 minutes or less to emergencies 80 percent of the time.
 Paramedic companies arrive on-scene at all medical emergencies within 8 minutes 90 percent
    of the time.
Educational Facilities
In order to maintain the quality of education available to City inhabitants, the City will also
continue to coordinate with the school districts and their future school projection process.
Standards are included within the Public Facilities Plan to maintain appropriate levels of service
for educational facilities in the City. The public school system within the City was planned
concurrently with the development of Mission Viejo, and in cooperation with the Capistrano
Unified School District and the Saddleback Valley Unified School District. The City’s
educational facilities include three high schools, one continuation high school, three
intermediate/middle schools, one Kindergarten through 8th grade school, one Kindergarten
through 8th grade charter school, 11 elementary schools, and one special facility for the
handicapped within the City boundaries. A community college is also located in the City as
shown in Figure LU-3 and listed on Table LU-4.
                                                                                  LAND USE ELEMENT
                                           36                                        AUGUST 19, 2013


                                           TABLE LU-4
                                     EXISTING SCHOOLS
                                             EXISTING
Capistrano Unified School District
     1  Barcelona Hills Elementary School / Oxford Preparatory Academy*
     2  Carl Hankey Elementary School
     3  Castille Elementary School
     4  Viejo Elementary School
     5  Fred L. Newhart Middle School
     6  Capistrano Valley High School
     7  Philip J. Reilly Elementary School
     8  Bathgate Elementary School
Saddleback Valley Unified School District
     9  Cordillera Elementary School
     10 Del Cerro Elementary School
     11 Del Lago Elementary School
     12 de Portola Elementary School
     13 Glen Yermo Elementary School
     14 La Tierra Elementary School**
     15 Linda Vista Elementary School
     16 Montevideo Elementary School
     17 O’Neill Elementary School***
     18 La Paz Intermediate School
     19 Los Alisos Intermediate School
     20 Mission Viejo High School
     21 Silverado High School (Continuation)
     22 Trabuco Hills High School
     23 Esperanza Special Education School
South Orange County Community College District
     24 Saddleback Community College
Notes: Numbers adjacent to schools are location references for Figure LU-3, Schools / School Districts.
* In 2011, Barcelona Elementary School was converted to a K-8 Oxford Preparatory Academy charter
school.
**In 2009, LaTierra Elementary School closed and is used by SVUSD for adult education and an early
childhood center.
***In 2009, O’Neill Elementary School closed and is used by SVUSD for adult education and recreation
and community services.
                                                   38
                                                                                       LAND USE ELEMENT
                                                                                       DRAFT AUGUST 2013

Educational facilities in Mission Viejo are constructed based on projected student enrollment by
students residing in the attendance area as derived from local development plans. Both school
districts operate under their individual district master plans. The school districts require accurate
population projections to arrive at projected student population figures for school facility
planning purposes. City General Plan land use projections are necessary in determining what
future school needs will be. The City’s Land Use Plan provides important information to these
districts for the planned development of needed facilities. The City cooperates with the districts
in maintaining an adequate level of service and in providing a positive learning environment and
quality education through the following standards:
 The City shall provide the school districts with timely and accurate data on development
    permits issued and development projections in order for the districts to determine future
    educational needs throughout each school district.
The school districts that serve the City also contribute to the City’s open space and recreational
system. The City has agreements with the local school districts for the joint use of school
recreational facilities for parkland as described in the City’s Conservation/Open Space Element
of the General Plan.
Mission Viejo Library
The Mission Viejo Library opened to the public as a city-operated library in October 1997. The
library facility is located within the Civic Center complex at the geographic center of Mission
Viejo. In 2001 the Mission Viejo City Council adopted the library’s strategic plan “The Pathway
to Providing Exceptional Library Service.” The strategic plan outlines the mission and vision
statement for the library as well as defining a series of goals and corresponding actions to
accomplish the goals. The following are goals contained in the Library Strategic Plan:
    Encourage the public’s validation of the Library’s importance in the community.
    As funding allows, expand library services and programs commensurate to community
     needs and increase/improve access to information about these services to the community.
    Deploy technology resources that enable the Mission Viejo Library to fulfill the research and
     information needs of the community.
    Expand and enhance innovative library services and programs by pursuing grants and
     additional fundraising measures.
Civic / Medical / Cultural Facilities
The City has established a civic center in the geographic center of the city to house the City’s
governmental operations. The new city owned facility opened to the public on May 11, 2002.
The Civic Center contains City Hall and the Mission Viejo Library. The central location allows
the City a convenient location to better serve the residents and business owners Mission Viejo.
                                                                                     LAND USE ELEMENT
                                            39                                          AUGUST 19, 2013

The following standards apply to the function of the City’s civic center:
 Government operations shall be centralized to the extent feasible.
In addition to the Civic Center, other city run public facilities existing within the City include:
The Animal Services Center, Felipe Tennis Center, Marguerite Tennis Center, Marguerite
Aquatics Center, Montanoso Recreation Center, Norman P. Murray Community and Senior
Center, Thomas R. Potocki Conference Center, Sierra Recreation Center, and City Corporation
Yard. In addition, there is a City owned facility that is currently leased by the YMCA. Each
location exists to improve the quality of life for the people of Mission Viejo.
Medical services, including paramedics, trauma care, and health maintenance, is provided to City
residents at three hospitals located within the City boundaries. Mission Hospital is a regional
medical and trauma center located on Crown Valley Parkway. A Kaiser Permanente health
maintenance organization facility and the Royale Mission Viejo Hospital (a County operated
psychiatric care facility) are also located in Mission Viejo.
INFRASTRUCTURE
______________________________________________________________________________
The City’s infrastructure (water, power, and sewage distribution systems and storm drainage
system) was pre-planned and constructed as the community of Mission Viejo developed.
Therefore, the City’s infrastructure was designed to meet the demands of the City’s development.
An important aspect of this Land Use Plan is its reliance on conservation to reduce the City’s
demand on local infrastructure, particularly water systems and solid waste disposal.
The policies contained in the Element emphasize coordination with service providers so that new
infrastructure is installed as development occurs. Figures LU-4 through LU-10 depict the existing
and future facilities for the distribution of potable water, the collection of urban runoff, the
treatment of sewage, and the provision of electricity, natural gas, and telecommunication systems.
The City’s Master Environmental Assessment (MEA) and various facility plans provide the
technical information and master plans to insure the adequate provision of these facilities. The
maintenance of existing infrastructure is also emphasized as an important City goal.
Water Distribution
Potable water is provided to the City through a complex water distribution system directed by
several agencies. This system is described within the City’s MEA. Three water districts have
facilities within the City: Moulton Niguel Water District, El Toro Water District, and Santa
Margarita Water District. The district boundaries, within the study area, are shown in Figure LU-4.
 Most of the water distribution facilities in Mission Viejo were installed relatively recently and are
adequate to serve the community. Figure LU-5 illustrates the City’s facilities as contained in the
water districts’ master plans. The City is primarily concerned with the conservation of water and the
ability to take full advantage of the City’s water resources.
                                                                                     LAND USE ELEMENT
                                              40                                         AUGUST 19, 2013



Water Reclamation Standards
The City’s residents can help to reduce demands on the imported water system in cooperation with
the local water districts’ efforts to reclaim wastewater for landscape irrigation purposes. The City
will support the local water districts’ reclamation plans by encouraging the use of reclaimed water
and requiring that new development provide the infrastructure needed to use non-domestic water.
Non-domestic water plans are being implemented by both the Moulton Niguel Water District and
the Santa Margarita Water District. The El Toro Water District does not currently have the
infrastructure to deliver non-domestic water to the City and there are no plans to implement such a
system. The following standards have been adopted to implement the City’s reclaimed wastewater
policy:
     All new commercial development shall install and utilize non-domestic water facilities for use
      in irrigation whenever feasible.
     Non-domestic water shall be utilized for the irrigation of all public parks, manufactured slopes,
      and greenbelts, wherever feasible.
     Drought-resistant landscaping shall be incorporated into all non-residential development
      projects.
     When existing non-residential developments are redeveloped, provisions shall be made to
      replace landscaping with drought-resistant species.
Drainage Facilities
The City’s Master Drainage Plan serves to manage the City’s flood control system, identify existing
facilities and deficiencies, and outline a program to correct known problem areas with cooperation
and assistance from the Orange County Flood Control District. Figure LU-6 depicts the City’s
master drainage facilities. Policies contained in this Element ensure that local facilities are
maintained and replaced as needed.
Wastewater
The three water districts provide sewage treatment in Mission Viejo. Figure LU-7 illustrates the
sewage collection and treatment facilities throughout the City. Most of the sewage collection
facilities were constructed relatively recently and provide adequate collection and treatment of the
City’s wastewater. Most of the sewage generated in Mission Viejo is treated at the Moulton
Niguel/Santa Margarita Water District wastewater reclamation facility in Mission Viejo. As
discussed above, the water districts that serve Mission Viejo have initiated water reclamation
programs whereby locally generated waste policies in this Element serve to ensure that wastewater
facilities will be maintained and replaced or expanded concurrently with demand.
                                                                                      LAND USE ELEMENT
                                              43                                         AUGUST 19, 2013



Solid Waste
As increasing demands are placed on local landfills and as jurisdictions work to reach State
mandated solid waste diversion requirements, it is imperative that local jurisdictions continue to
implement programs to reduce waste generation. The remaining life of Prima Deshecha Landfill
and Frank R. Bowerman Landfill can be lengthened if solid waste is diverted through waste
reduction practices and reuse and recycling programs. The City of Mission Viejo will continue to
contribute to the recycling effort as the policies with this Element illustrate. The City will
cooperate with the County’s Solid Waste Management Plan and any recycling programs initiated by
the County including the safe disposal of household hazardous waste.
Energy
Energy is provided to City residents in the form of electricity and natural gas. Two companies,
Southern California Edison (SCE) and San Diego Gas and Electric Company (SDG&E), provide
electrical energy to the City. As shown on Figure LU-8, SCE serves the area north of La Paz Road,
whereas SDG&E serves the area south of La Paz Road. The major electric transmission lines are
owned by SCE. Natural gas is provided to the City by Southern California Gas Company. The
Southern California Edison and San Diego Gas and Electric major transmission lines are shown in
Figure LU-8. The Southern California Gas distribution and supply lines are shown in Figure LU-9.
Mission Viejo is a planned community and energy has been supplied to the area commensurate
with new development. The policies contained in the Element ensure that additional supplies will
be furnished for future demand. The City strongly encourages local providers of energy and gas to
underground existing and future distribution and supply lines, including overhead transmission
facilities. The City has in the past and will continue to take an active role in the future of reviewing
the environmental impacts of energy and gas distribution and supply lines that are passing through
the City and are being expanded due to other jurisdictional impacts.
Telecommunications
Telecommunication systems, such as telephone, cable, and wireless technology are important for
the City’s efficient and effective operation. The telecommunication facilities are located below
ground under most of the City’s major streets as shown in Figure LU-10. In addition to
underground facilities wireless telecommunication antenna facilities are above ground and are
located throughout the City. The City works with wireless telecommunication companies to
minimize the visual impact of the antenna facilities.
Governmental information, such as public notices and other city business and emergency directives,
can be disseminated quickly and effectively through the modern and complete telecommunications
system that exists throughout the City. The City will pursue opportunities to encourage the
installation of state-of-the-art advances in telecommunication systems (for example, fiber-optics).
The City will take advantage of this system and use it to its fullest capability to serve Mission Viejo
residents.
                                                                                        LAND USE ELEMENT
                                              46                                           AUGUST 19, 2013




Noise Element
City of Mission Viejo
                                TABLE OF CONTENTS
Section                                                             Page
INTRODUCTION TO THE NOISE ELEMENT                                      1
       Purpose of the Noise Element                                    1
       Scope and Content of the Element                                1
       Related Plans, Programs, and Other Regulatory Documents         2
       Relationship to Other General Plan Elements                     4
NOISE ELEMENT GOALS AND POLICIES                                       5
       Transportation Related Noise                                    5
       Noise and Land Use Planning                                     6
       Non-Transportation Related Noise                                6
       Related Goals and Policies                                      7
NOISE PLAN                                                             9
       Noise Fundamentals                                              9
       Noise Impact Analysis                                          10
       Non-Transportation Related Noise                               15
                                         i                      NOISE ELEMENT
                                                               FEBRUARY 2, 2009
                                LIST OF TABLES
Section                                                               Page
Table N-1  Noise Polices by Element                                    8
Table N-2  Typical Outdoor Community Noise Equivalent Levels          16
Table N-3  Noise Compatibility Matrix                                 19
Table N-4  Construction Equipment Noise                               20
Table N-5  Existing Noise Contours                                    21
Table N-6  General Plan Buildout Year 2025 Noise Contours             22
Table N-7  Railroad Noise Contours                                    23
Table N-8  Increase in Noise Levels (dBA) for Future Year 2025        24
                               LIST OF FIGURES
Section                                                               Page
Figure N-1 Existing Noise Contour Map                                 17
Figure N-2 General Plan Buildout Year 2025 Noise Contour Map          18
                                      ii                        NOISE ELEMENT
                                                               FEBRUARY 2, 2009
______________________________________________________________________________
                    INTRODUCTION TO THE NOISE ELEMENT
______________________________________________________________________________
The Noise Element of a General Plan contains a comprehensive program for noise reduction and
control. The City of Mission Viejo is affected by several sources of noise, including vehicular
traffic, commercial and industrial activity, and periodic occurrences such as construction and
aircraft. High noise levels associated with various activities can create stress and irritation. The
City of Mission Viejo desires to achieve and maintain an environment free from objectionable,
excessive, or harmful noise to protect and enhance the quality of life experienced by residents
living and working within the community. The control of noise, therefore, is an essential
component in creating a safe, compatible, and productive environment.
PURPOSE OF THE NOISE ELEMENT
______________________________________________________________________________
The purpose of the Noise Element is to limit the exposure of the community to excessive noise
levels. The Noise Element is to identify and appraise existing noise problems in the community,
and to provide guidance to avoid noise and land use compatibility problems in the future. This
Element addresses existing and projected noise sources in the community and identifies ways to
reduce existing and potential noise impacts. In particular, the Noise Element contains policies
and programs to achieve and maintain noise levels compatible with various types of land uses.
These policies and programs emphasize the need to control noise through land use regulation, as
well as enforcement of other City ordinances.
The Noise Element satisfies the requirements of state planning law and is a mandated component
of the General Plan. Government Code section 65302(f) establishes the required components of
the Noise Element. The Element also complies with California Health and Safety Code Section
56050.1 guidelines for Noise Elements.
SCOPE AND CONTENT OF THE NOISE ELEMENT
______________________________________________________________________________
The Noise Element is a mandatory component of the General Plan as outlined in the State
Government Code. Noise exposure contours in the Element present quantified projections of
future noise conditions associated with both short and long term growth. This noise information
serves as the basis for guidelines describing compatible land uses.
The Noise Element has three sections: 1) Introduction; 2) Goals and Policies; and 3) the Noise
Plan. In the second section, goals and policies are established which address identified noise
issues. The goals identify overall City desires and consist of broad statements of purpose and
direction. The policies are guidelines aimed to reduce or avoid adverse noise effects on residents
and businesses. The Noise Plan describes how goals and policies will be achieved, or
implemented.
                                                1                                      NOISE ELEMENT
                                                                                      FEBRUARY 2, 2009
RELATED PLANS, PROGRAMS, AND OTHER REGULATORY DOCUMENTS
______________________________________________________________________________
Many plans and programs enacted through federal, state and local legislation directly relate to
the Noise Element. These plans and programs are administered by agencies with powers to
enforce federal, state and local laws.
The intent of the Noise Element is to set goals to limit and reduce the effects of noise intrusion
and to set acceptable noise levels for varying types of land uses. To this end, the City has the
authority to set land use noise standards and place restrictions on private activities that generate
excessive or intrusive noise. However, it should be recognized that the City does not have the
authority to regulate all sources of noise within the City and various other agencies may
supersede City authority.
Federal Highway Administration
State routes and freeways that run through the City are subject to federal funding and, as such,
are under the purview of the Federal Highway Administration (FHWA). The FHWA has
developed noise standards that are typically used for federally-funded roadway projects or
projects that require either federal or Caltrans review.
U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development
The Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) issues formal requirements related
specifically to standards for exterior noise levels along with policies for approving HUD-
supported or assisted housing projects in high noise areas.
Federal Railroad Administration
The EPA is charged with the regulation of railroad noise under the Noise Control Act. The EPA
Office of Noise Abatement and Control was closed in 1982, leaving the enforcement of EPA
regulations to the Federal Railroad Administration (FRA).
California Department of Health Services
The California Department of Health Services (DHS) Office of Noise Control studied the
correlation of noise levels and their effects on various land uses. As a result, the DHS
established four categories for judging the severity of noise intrusion on specified land uses. A
land use compatibility chart for exterior community noise exposure prepared by the California
Office of Noise Control and adopted in this Noise Element demonstrates land use compatibility.
While the chart is presented in terms of the Ldn or CNEL, the City prefers the use of the CNEL
descriptor, as it is slightly more conservative (i.e., restrictive), in protecting sensitive land uses.
It identifies “normally acceptable,” “conditionally acceptable,” “normally unacceptable,” and
“clearly unacceptable” exterior noise levels for various land uses. A “conditionally acceptable”
designation implies new construction or development should be undertaken only after a detailed
analysis of the noise reduction requirements for each land use is made and needed noise
insulation features are incorporated in the design. By comparison, a “normally acceptable”
                                                   2                                        NOISE ELEMENT
                                                                                           FEBRUARY 2, 2009

designation indicates that standard construction can occur with no special noise reduction
requirements.
While this land use compatibility chart is based on a 24-hour value, the City is aware that some
land uses are not occupied on a 24-hour basis, and a descriptor (such as Ldn or CNEL) may be
overly restrictive in siting these types of sensitive land uses. Such uses may include, but are not
limited to, schools, libraries, and churches. In these cases, a more appropriate standard would
consider the time of occupancy of the land use. Here, the City recommends the use of a 65 dBA,
12-hour Leq (Lea(12)) that includes those hours of actual use. (If a facility is to be used in
excess of 12 hours per day, the CNEL standard should be used.)
California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) and Guidelines
The California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) was adopted by the State legislature in
response to a public mandate for thorough environmental analysis of projects that might affect
the environment. The provisions of the law and environmental review procedure are described
in the CEQA Statutes and the CEQA Guidelines. Excessive noise is considered an
environmental impact under CEQA. Implementation of CEQA ensures that during the decision
making stage of development, City officials and the general public will be able to assess the
potential noise impacts associated with private and public development projects.
California Noise Insulation Standards (Title 24)
The California Commission of Housing and Community Development officially adopted noise
insulation standards in 1974. In 1988, the Building Standards Commission approved revisions to
the standards (Title 24, Part 2, California Code of Regulations). As revised, Title 24 establishes
an interior noise standard of 45 dB(A) for residential space (CNEL or Ldn). Acoustical studies
must be prepared for residential structures to be located within noise contours of 60 dB(A) or
greater (CNEL or Ldn) from freeways, major streets, thoroughfares, rail lines, rapid transit lines,
or industrial noise sources. The studies must demonstrate that the building is designed to reduce
interior noise to 45 dB(A) or lower (CNEL or Ldn).
City of Mission Viejo Noise Ordinance
The City of Mission Viejo has the authority to set land use noise standards and place restrictions
on private activities that generate excessive or intrusive noise.
The City of Mission Viejo has adopted noise referral zones as the criterion for assessing the
compatibility of residential land uses with transportation related noise sources. The 60 dBA
CNEL contour represents the noise referral zone for which any proposed noise sensitive land use
within this zone should be examined on a project specific basis that may require mitigation to
City or State (Title 25) standards. For Mission Viejo, the 60 dBA CNEL contour represents
zones where residential development may require noise mitigation as part of the project. Typical
noise standards for sensitive land uses include a 65 dBA CNEL for exterior areas and 45 dBA
CNEL for interior areas.
The most effective method to control community noise impacts from non-transportation noise
sources is through the application of a community noise ordinance. The adopted City of Mission
                                                   3                                 NOISE ELEMENT
                                                                                    FEBRUARY 2, 2009
Viejo Noise Ordinance is designed to protect quiet residential areas from a variety of stationary
noise sources.
RELATIONSHIP TO OTHER GENERAL PLAN ELEMENTS
______________________________________________________________________________
According to state planning law, the Noise Element must be consistent with the other General
Plan elements. Each element is independent and all the elements together comprise the General
Plan. All elements of the General Plan are interrelated to a degree, and certain goals and policies
of one element may also address issues that are primary subjects of other elements. Table N-1
provided in the following section identifies the policies by General Plan element that are related
to Noise Element issues. This integration of overlapping issues and policies provides a strong
basis for implementation of plans and programs and achievement of community goals.
Policies and plans in the Noise Element are designed to protect existing and planned land uses
from significant noise impacts. To do this, the Element identifies potential noise sources and
establishes programs to avoid or mitigate noise impacts from community development.
Concurrently, the Land Use Element contains policies to ensure that environmental conditions,
including noise, are considered in all land use decisions. Planning for future residential and
other sensitive land uses on the Land Use Policy Map is intended to avoid new noise sensitive
development in areas where noise impacts cannot be reduced or mitigated to acceptable levels.
The Noise Element is linked to the transportation policies in the Circulation Element.
Transportation noise is largely responsible for excessive noise levels in certain locations within
Mission Viejo. The projected noise contours identified in this Element directly correspond to
the Circulation Plan and the projected traffic generated from the proposed land uses. Both the
Noise and Circulation Elements contain policies and programs to minimize the effects of
transportation noise on existing and planned land uses. Noise exposure is a key consideration
when locating and designing new arterials.
The Noise Element also relates to the Conservation / Open Space Element. Excessive noise can
diminish enjoyment of parks and other designated open space. Because of this, noise levels are
considered in the planning of new recreational and open space areas. Additionally, open space
areas can be used to separate and buffer noise sensitive land uses from noise producers.
                                                4                                     NOISE ELEMENT
                                                                                    FEBRUARY 2, 2009
____________________________________________________________________________
                      NOISE ELEMENT GOALS AND POLICIES
______________________________________________________________________________
The goals and policies in this Element address reduction of noise impacts from transportation
noise sources, integration of noise impact considerations in land use planning decisions, and
control of non-transportation related noise impacts. The following goals, policies and
implementation measures focus on minimizing noise impacts by use of both post-development
remedial actions and pre-development planning actions.
TRANSPORTATION RELATED NOISE
______________________________________________________________________________
The primary source of noise impacting Mission Viejo results from transportation-related noise.
Both Interstate 5 and the railroad, along with other major roadways, create high levels of noise
that affect the overall quality of life in the community. Reduction in transportation-related noise
is necessary to deal with the detrimental effects attributable to excessive noise.
GOAL 1:         Minimize noise impacts from transportation noise sources.
Policy 1.1:     Require the construction of noise barriers to mitigate sound emissions where
                necessary or where feasible. Actively participate in the development of noise
                abatement plans for freeways, tollroads, and railroads.
Policy 1.2:     Employ noise mitigation practices, as necessary, when designing future streets
                and highways, and when improvements occur along existing road segments.
                Mitigation measures should emphasize the establishment of natural buffers or
                setbacks between the arterial roadways and adjoining noise-sensitive areas.
Policy 1.3:     Control truck traffic routing to reduce transportation-related noise impacts to
                sensitive land uses.
Policy 1.4:     Continue to enforce the noise standards of the State Motor Vehicle Code and
                other state and federal legislation pertaining to motor vehicle noise.
Policy 1.5:     Require that development generating increased traffic and subsequent increases in
                the ambient noise level adjacent to noise-sensitive land uses provide appropriate
                mitigation measures.
Policy 1.6:     Maintain roadways so that the paving is in good condition to reduce noise-
                generating cracks, bumps, and potholes.
Policy 1.7:     Require sound walls, berms and landscaping along freeways, tollroads, and
                railroad rights-of-way to beautify the landscape and reduce noise, where
                appropriate.
                                                   5                                    NOISE ELEMENT
                                                                                       FEBRUARY 2, 2009
Policy 1.8:    Require private heliports/helistops to comply with the City noise regulations and
               Federal Aviation Administration standards.
Policy 1.9:    Encourage the development and use of alternative transportation modes and
               technologies that minimize noise impacts.
Policy 1.10:   Monitor proposals for future transit systems and require noise control to be
               considered in the selection of transportation systems that may affect the City.
NOISE AND LAND USE PLANNING
______________________________________________________________________________
Certain areas within Mission Viejo are subject to high noise levels as discussed in the Noise
Contour Map (Figures N1 and N2). Consideration of the sources and recipients of noise early in
the land use planning process can be an effective method of minimizing the impact of noise on
population in the community. Consideration may be given to both reducing noise in areas
already severely impacted by noise through rehabilitative improvements and avoiding potential
noise impacts through proper land use planning.
GOAL 2:        Minimize the effects of noise through proper land use planning.
Policy 2.1:    Ensure that new development and reuse/revitalization projects can be made
               compatible with the noise environment by utilizing noise/land use compatibility
               standards and the Noise Contour Map as a guide.
Policy 2.2:    Require the inclusion of design features in development and reuse/revitalization
               projects to reduce the impact of noise on residential development.
Policy 2.3:    Ensure proposed development meets noise insulation standards for construction
               and residential development.
NON-TRANSPORTATION RELATED NOISE
______________________________________________________________________________
Noise sources that are not directly related to transportation include: construction noise,
manufacturing or business operations noise, and property maintenance activities. Such noise
sources should be controlled to minimize exposure to excessive noise levels.
GOAL 3:        Minimize non-transportation related noise impacts.
Policy 3.1:    Reduce the impacts of noise-producing land uses, activities, and businesses on
               noise-sensitive land uses.
Policy 3.2:    Incorporate sound-reduction design in new construction or rehabilitation projects
               impacted by non-transportation-related noise.
                                                 6                                    NOISE ELEMENT
                                                                                    FEBRUARY 2, 2009
Policy 3.3:      Minimize stationary noise sources and noise emanating from construction
                 activities and special events.
RELATED GOALS AND POLICIES
______________________________________________________________________________
The goals and policies contained in this Noise Element are supported by policies of other
elements that correspond with the major issue areas considered in this element. Table N-1
illustrates the consistency between these General Plan elements.
                                                7                              NOISE ELEMENT
                                                                             FEBRUARY 2, 2009
                                          TABLE N-1
                            NOISE POLICIES BY ELEMENT
                                                 POLICIES BY ELEMENT
 ISSUE AREA    Land Housing     Circulation    Conservation    Public  Public        Economic    Growth
                Use                            / Open Space    Safety Facilities    Developmt.  Managemt.
Transportation 2,9, 4.4         2.1, 8.3, 9.2, 1.6, 3.7       5.3
Noise Control  3.1              9.3, 10.3,
                                20.5
Noise and Land 2.8  4.4         9.2, 20.5      1.6
Use Planning
Integration
Noise Control  2.9, 2.1, 4.4                   1.6
for Non-       3.1,
Transportation 3.6
Noise Sources
                                                                                 NOISE ELEMENT
                                                                               FEBRUARY 2, 2009
                                               8
______________________________________________________________________________
                                            NOISE PLAN
______________________________________________________________________________
This section of the Noise Element identifies predominate noise sources within the City and
methods to reduce noise. Sources of noise and threshold noise levels are described, as well as
actions to be taken to reduce impacts resulting from different types of noise.
Mission Viejo, like most urbanized areas, is experiencing increased noise levels associated with
transportation and other sources of noise. As the noise level in various parts of the community
rises, the City must seek ways to safeguard its population from excessive noise levels. The goals
and policies identified in the previous section establish an agenda to reduce overall noise levels
within the City. This Noise Plan defines the City’s approach to achieve the agenda and generally
outlines the action programs.
Noise in the community is the cumulative effect of noise from transportation activities and
stationary sources. Transportation noise refers to noise from automobile use, trucking, airport
operations, and rail operations. Non-transportation noise typically refers to noise from stationary
sources such as commercial establishments, machinery, air conditioning systems, compressors,
residential and recreational uses, and landscape maintenance equipment.
Regardless of the type of noise, the noise levels are highest near the source and decrease with
distance. Noise is problematic when noise sensitive land uses are affected. Noise sensitive land
uses (i.e., activities that are interrupted by noise) include residences, schools, hospitals, churches,
and recreation areas. Most noise impacts can be avoided when noise sources, sensitive land uses,
and information about the future noise environment are considered in land use planning and
development decisions.
NOISE FUNDAMENTALS
______________________________________________________________________________
Noise is defined as unwanted or undesired sound. Airborne sound is the result of a very rapid
change in air pressure from the surrounding “normal” atmospheric pressure. The combination
of noise from all sources near and far is the Ambient Noise Level. For purposes of this
discussion, the ambient noise level at a given location is termed “environmental noise”.
Understanding environmental noise requires some familiarity with the physical description of
noise.      The important physical characteristics of sound include its frequency range,
intensity/loudness and temporal/time-varying aspect. The decibel (dBA), A-weighted level, and
Community Noise Equivalency Level (CNEL) are all units of measurements used to describe
and numerically weight noise.
The decibel is a unit of measurement describing the amplitude or strength of sound. The
Community Noise Equivalent Level (CNEL) is the weighted average of the intensity of a sound,
with corrections for time of day, and averaged over 24 hours. The time of day corrections
require the addition of five decibels to sound levels in the evening from 7:00 p.m. to 10:00 p.m.,
                                                    9                                    NOISE ELEMENT
                                                                                        FEBRUARY 2, 2009

and the addition of ten decibels to sound levels at night between 10:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m. These
additions are made to the sound levels at these time periods because during the evening and night
hours there is a decrease in overall amount of loudness of noise generated, when compared to
daytime hours; therefore, there is an increased sensitivity to sounds. For this reason, the sound is
perceived as louder and it is weighted accordingly.
The Day-Night Average Level (LDN) is the average equivalent A-weighted sound level during a
24-hour day, obtained after addition of 10 decibels to sound levels in the night after 10:00 p.m.
and before 7:00 a.m.
The most common sounds vary between 40 dBA (very quiet) to 100 dBA (very loud). Normal
conversation at three feet is approximately at 60 dBA, while loud jet engine noises equate to 110
dBA, which can cause serious discomfort. Due to the logarithmic nature of the sound measuring
(decibel) scale, doubling the sound energy of a noise source only increases the decibel rating by
3 dBA. However, due to the internal mechanism of the human ear and how it receives and
processes noise, a sound must be nearly 10 dBA higher than another sound to be judged twice as
loud. Physical health, psychological well-being, social cohesion, property values and economic
productivity can all be affected by excessive amounts of noise.
Typical noise levels in terms of the CNEL scale for different types of noise impacts are presented
on Table N-2. The effects of noise on people can be grouped into three general categories:
subjective effects (such as annoyance and nuisance), interference with activities (such as
conversation and sleep), and physiological effects (such as stress or even hearing loss).
In community noise assessment, changes in noise levels greater that 3 dBA are often identified as
significant, while changes less than 1 dBA will not be discernible to the human ear. In the range
of 1 dBA to 3 dBA, people who are very sensitive to noise may perceive a slight change in noise
level. No scientific evidence is available to support the use of 3 dBA as the significance
threshold. In laboratory testing situations, humans are able to detect noise level changes of
slightly less than 1 dBA. However, in a community situation the noise exposure is extended over
a long time period, and changes in noise levels occur over years, rather than immediately as in
the comparison made in a laboratory situation. Therefore, the level at which changes in
community noise levels become discernible is likely to be some value greater than 1 dBA, and 3
dBA appears to be appropriate for most people.
NOISE IMPACT ANALYSIS
______________________________________________________________________________
Noise Sources
The existing noise environment surrounding the City of Mission Viejo is influenced primarily by
transportation related noise sources. The transportation related noise sources include traffic
noise from nearby freeways, toll roads, roadways and additional noise impacts can be attributed
to passenger and freight railway and random aircraft overflights.
The San Diego Freeway (I-5) is oriented in a north/south direction and runs along the western
boundary just inside the City. The portion of the freeway that is within the City boundary lies
                                                 10                                   NOISE ELEMENT
                                                                                     FEBRUARY 2, 2009
between La Paz Road and Avery Parkway freeway interchanges. The San Diego Freeway is
primarily below grade in relation to adjacent land uses within the boundaries of the City of
Mission Viejo. A number of single family residences exist along the east side of the San Diego
Freeway between La Paz Road and Crown Valley Parkway. A number of these homes are
adjacent to the freeway are exposed to noise levels in excess of 65 CNEL. The CNEL noise
contours for the freeway are shown on the existing noise contour map identified in Figure N-1.
The rear yards of the homes (rear yards face the freeway) are protected from the freeway by
noise barriers in the form of block walls, fences, or shielding provided by natural topography.
The noise barriers were designed at the time of residential development to mitigate existing and
projected noise impacts associated with the San Diego Freeway. In the past, the City worked
with Caltrans to have a rear yard sound wall installed at single family residences along the east
side of the San Diego Freeway between Alicia Parkway and La Paz Road. Other sensitive land
uses along the San Diego Freeway include Mission Viejo High School generally located at the
southeast corner of the freeway and La Paz Road. In addition, the Foothill Transportation
Corridor (SR-241) runs in a northwest/southeast direction through northern Mission Viejo.
Existing residential developments near this toll road had mitigation measures incorporated into
their project designs to protect those residences from noise impacts.
Traffic noise on surface streets is a significant source of noise within the community. The major
roadways in the City include: El Toro Road, Los Alisos Boulevard, Alicia Parkway, La Paz
Road, Oso Parkway, Crown Valley Parkway, Santa Margarita Parkway, Trabuco Road, Jeronimo
Road, Muirlands Boulevard, Marguerite Parkway, Olympiad Road, Felipe Road, and Avery
Parkway. Noise levels along roadways are determined by a number of traffic characteristics,
most importantly, average daily traffic (ADT). Additional factors include the percentage of
trucks, vehicles speed, and the time distribution of traffic and gradient of the roadway.
Noise levels along roadway are determined by a number of traffic characteristics, but most
importantly, by the average daily traffic (ADT). Additional factors include the percentage of
trucks, vehicle speed, the time and distribution of traffic, and gradient of the roadway.
The land uses along the major freeways are commercial, industrial, residential, and open space.
The residential land uses that are adjacent to the major roadways are of primary importance
when evaluating the noise environment within the City. Many of these homes are located within
the 65 CNEL contour; however, residential developments within the City have been required to
include measures to mitigate roadway noise levels to below 65 CNEL at the outdoor living area.
Therefore, actual mitigated noise levels at residences throughout the City are less than 65 CNEL.
The unmitigated CNEL noise contours for the arterial roadways are shown on the existing noise
contour map identified as Figure N-1.
A railroad line runs along the western boundary of the City. The railroad line is used as a
primary track by both freight and passenger trains (Amtrak and Metrolink). The line enters the
City at the southwest corner City boundary, and runs north along the San Diego Freeway. The
railroad lines continue north along the western City boundary to where it leaves the City near
Los Alisos Boulevard and Jeronimo Road. Approximately 8 freight, 24 Amtrak and 25
Metrolink operations occur per day along the portion of line within Mission Viejo. Land uses
along the railroad lines include single family residences and Mission Viejo High School.
Existing residences are set back from the tracks and are protected by solid block walls, which
lower the CNEL levels at rear yards to below the 65 CNEL. In some areas, the block wall acts as
                                                   11                                  NOISE ELEMENT
                                                                                      FEBRUARY 2, 2009
the noise barrier for both the railroad line and the San Diego Freeway. The CNEL noise
contours for the railroad lines are shown on the existing noise contour map identified as Figure
N-1.
In the past, an additional noise source affecting the City of Mission Viejo was aircraft over
flights from the El Toro Marine Corp Air Station (MCAS); however, this facility has been closed
since Year 2000. In addition, Orange County voters rejected a measure to build a commercial
airport at the MCAS site. Therefore, there is no significant aircraft noise is projected to occur
within the City of Mission Viejo. The City of Irvine is currently developing the former MCAS
with a new planned community development called the “Great Park.”
Mission Hospital has an existing heliport for medical emergencies on top of west wing of their
five story bed tower building on the upper hospital campus off Medical Center Road, south of
Crown Valley Parkway. No helicopters are based at the hospital. The site plan permit approved
by the City’s Planning Commission in 1989 for the bed tower building conditioned that the
helicopter flight paths be directed away from residential areas, and sound baffling be installed
along the edge of the helicopter pad. The overall volume of flights is not substantial and noise
levels are single events with limited and short duration.
The City of Mission Viejo has commercial sources of noise at a number of locations throughout
the City. These include commercial centers that range in size from small corner shopping
centers to the Shops at Mission Viejo mall. The City has a number of locations with residential
land uses adjacent to commercial land uses. The primary noise associated with commercial
centers in the City involves loading activities, haul truck noise, air conditioning and refrigeration
compressors, traffic and parking lot activity. Residences bordering commercial centers are
protected from loading activities and haul trick noise by noise barriers. Planned communities
such as Mission Viejo are able to incorporate mitigation measures into the design prior to
construction in order to assure land use compatibility. In addition, the City’s noise regulations in
the Mission Viejo Development Code ensures that these activities will not exceed specified noise
levels at certain times of the day.
Although the City of Mission Viejo is nearly built-out, future noise levels are projected to
increase as a result of increased traffic volumes and growth in surrounding areas.
Noise Measurements
To determine the existing noise level environment and to assess potential noise impacts on the
adjacent residential areas, noise measurements were taken at various locations throughout the
City. The results of the survey and the methodology used in the measurement are summarized in
the Noise Element Technical Report. A copy of this report may be obtained in the City’s
Community Development Department.
Noise Contours
The community noise contours for the City of Mission Viejo are presented in Figures N-1 and N-
2 for both existing and future Year 2025 conditions, respectively. The existing conditions are
based upon existing traffic volumes, railroad volumes, and other sources of noise in the
community. Future conditions are estimated for Year 2025 conditions. A combination of traffic
                                                  12                                   NOISE ELEMENT
                                                                                      FEBRUARY 2, 2009

volumes, roadway classifications, speed, distances, and vehicle mix were used to estimate the
traffic noise contours. Railroad contours were determined including but not limited to railroad
volumes, train type, train length, speed, and distances.
The contours shown in Figures N-1 and N-2 include 55, 60, 65, and 70 dBA CNEL noise levels.
Because the City of Mission Viejo uses the 60 dBA CNEL contour to define the noise referral
zone, this is the noise level for which noise considerations should be included when making land
use policy decisions.
The existing and future noise contours are also described in Tables N-5, N-6, and N-7
respectively. Table N-8 shows the difference in CNEL levels between existing and buildout
conditions. It should be noted that the noise contours are conservative, since they do not take
into consideration topographic conditions, existing noise barriers or building structures. The
methodology used for computing the noise contours is presented in the Noise Element Technical
Report.
Noise and Land Use
The compatibility of different land uses is directly related to the user’s sensitivity to noise and
the potential for impacts to be mitigated. Particularly sensitive land uses include residences,
schools, libraries, places of worship, hospitals, and nursing homes. In addition, parks, golf
courses and other outdoor activity areas can be sensitive to noise disturbances. Less sensitive
land uses include commercial and industrial uses, hotels and motels, playgrounds and
neighborhood ballparks, and outdoor spectator sports arenas. Least sensitive to noise are heavy
commercial and industrial uses, transportation, communication and utility land uses.
Table N-3 illustrates the ranges of allowable exterior noise levels for various land uses.
Short-Term Construction Noise Impacts
Construction noise represents a short-term impact on ambient noise levels. Noise generated by
construction equipment, including trucks, graders, back-hoes, bull-dozers, concrete mixers and
portable generators can reach high levels. Grading activities typically represent one of the
highest potential sources for noise impacts. The most effective method of controlling
construction noise is through local control of construction hours and limiting hours of
construction to normal weekday working hours.
Noise levels for equipment, which might be used for the excavation and construction of the
proposed project, are presented in Table N-4. Note that the noise levels presented are for a
distance of 50 feet. The noise levels in Table N-4 decrease at a rate of approximately 6 dBA per
doubling of the distance. Therefore, at 100 feet the noise levels will be about 6 dBA less than
reported in the exhibit. Similarly, at 200 feet, the noise levels would be 12 dBA less than
indicated in Table N-4. Intervening structures or topography will act as a noise barrier, and
further reduce noise levels.
Since construction noise is of a temporary nature, the City of Mission Viejo does not require
noise mitigation. Section 9.22.035(d) of the City’s Development Code regarding noise control
provides an exemption for noise sources associated with construction. However, this noise code
                                                 13                                    NOISE ELEMENT
                                                                                      FEBRUARY 2, 2009

does require operational considerations (i.e., hours of construction, mufflers on construction
equipment, etc.) to minimize noise impacts during the construction process.
Noise Mitigation
The most effective method the City has to mitigate transportation noise is through reducing the
impact of the noise onto the community (i.e. noise barriers and site design review). Noise
concerns should be incorporated into land use planning in order to reduce future noise and land
use incompatibilities. This can be achieved by establishing standards and criteria that specify
acceptable limits of noise for various land uses throughout the City. These criteria are designed
to integrate noise considerations into land use planning to prevent noise/land use conflicts.
As the rail operations expand, additional noise mitigation measures may be necessary to meet the
City noise standards. The City should work with the rail operators to further mitigate increasing
rail operations.
Noise impact reports are required for all new construction in the City of Mission Viejo that may
be adversely impacted by noise sources. In addition, the City’s Noise Ordinance provides a
means to insure that stationary source noise does not adversely impact noise sensitive uses.
The City has little direct control over noise produced by transportation sources since the State is
responsible for regulating motor vehicle noise. Therefore, City noise programs focus on
reducing the impact of transportation noise on the community.
The most effective ways to mitigate transportation noise impacts on the community are through
utilization of a design review process, and implementation of the California Environmental
Quality Act (CEQA). Identification of potential impacts from transportation noise will occur
during these stages of the development process and mitigation measures may be required to meet
City noise standards identified in this Element. The most common ways to reduce
transportation-related noise impacts are through site planning, landscaping, use of natural
topography, and the design and construction of noise barriers. Small noise reductions can also
be achieved by use of setbacks and landscaping.
Noise barriers should be included in roadway and freeway designs and improvements. The City
supports efforts by Caltrans, OCTA, and other transportation providers to provide acoustical
protection for noise sensitive uses along transportation corridors. Additionally, the City will
request that barriers be included in any future improvement projects constructed as part of future
freeway, roadway, and rail projects to mitigate identified or potential long and short term noise
impacts to nearby residence and businesses. The City continues to promote the use of berms,
embankments, landscaping, setbacks, and architectural design where appropriate and effective,
rather than conventional wall barriers to enhance community aesthetics.
Noise Control at the Source
Reducing noise at the source is the most efficient and effective way to control noise from
transportation systems. The California Vehicle Code contains noise regulations pertaining to the
operation of all vehicles on public roads, which are enforced through coordination with the
California Highway Patrol and the Orange County Sheriff’s Department. While the City is
                                                 14                                   NOISE ELEMENT
                                                                                     FEBRUARY 2, 2009

ultimately limited in its ability to restrict noise at the source, Mission Viejo regulates traffic flow
and coordinates with the California Highway Patrol and the Orange County Sheriff’s Department
to enforce speed limits to reduce traffic noise.
NON-TRANSPORTATION RELATED NOISE
______________________________________________________________________________
In addition to transportation related noise, excessive noise generated by non-transportation
sources, such as commercial and industrial centers, agricultural activities, and restaurants and
bars, have the potential to impact sensitive receptors. Enforcement of City noise requirements,
analysis of potential noise impacts during the site design review process, and compliance with
CEQA are the best means to protect sensitive receptors. Potential noise impacts can be identified
during the preliminary stages of the development process and mitigation measures can be
imposed.
When reviewing proposed non-residential projects, the City considers noise generation and
potential impacts to surrounding development. New development can be made compatible with
the noise environment by utilizing noise/land use compatibility standards and standards
contained in the Housing Element as a guide for future planning and development decisions. An
acoustical analysis is required for projects that will generate noise potentially affecting sensitive
receptors. Where significant impacts are identified, mitigation measures are required.
Mitigation measures that could be applied when reviewing projects include acoustically treated
and/or quiet designs for furnaces, fans, motors, compressors, valves, pumps and other
mechanical equipment. Noise resulting from special one-time events should be minimized as ell.
The City may also require limited delivery hours and/or hours of operation in order to minimize
impacts to adjacent residential uses. In addition, all City departments must comply with state and
federal OSHA standards. Any new equipment or vehicles purchased by the City will comply
with local, state and federal noise standards, and the City will encourage landscaping contractors
to utilized modern noise-reducing equipment.
                                                    15                                   NOISE ELEMENT
                                                                                        FEBRUARY 2, 2009

                                Typical Outdoor Community
                                        Noise Equivalent LeveFs
                         TABLE N-2
CNEL IN DECIBELS                   OUTDOOR LOCATION
                 F
                 90                ALONG SIDE A BUSY FREEWAY
                                   3/4 MILE FROM TOUCHDOWN AT MAJOR AIRPORT
                     F
                 80
                                   DOWNTOWN WITH SOME CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY
                                   URBAN HIGH DENSITY APARTMENT
                 70—   —
                                   URBAN ROW HOUSING ON MAJORAVENUE
                 60                 OLD URBAN RESIDENTIAL AREA
                                    WOODED RESIDENTIAL
                  50
                     -
                                    AGRICULTURAL CROP LAND
                  40—  —
                                     RURAL RESIDENTIAL
                     - :
                                     WILDERNESS AMBIENT

                                         FIGURE N-i
Exisdng Noise Contour Map
                                                   /
                                                           /
                                                         /
                                                       /
   Legend:
           70 CIBA CNEL Contour Boundary
                                                     /
         =65 CIBA CNEL Contour Boundary
           60 dBA CNEL Contour Boundary
    I i• zc
         am
         . z
         mm
II II II
nfl’,
zzz
         x.
         - 0
           C
UT
             -1,
             G)
             C
             m
             z
               )

                                                          Noise Compatibility Matrix
                                      TABLE N-3
                                    Cazonzzrnfty No/Es &postrre
     Land Lisa Category                  ITh orCNEL, dA
                                         t
                              f5   qa        65        70        15 80
                                                                         INTERPHETAT1ON:
  Residential Low Denally  “2’7 7”
  Sirgie FamIly, Duplex,
  Mobile Hcmes
                                                                        K//IA
                                                                         Normally Acceptable
                           7:
                           -
                           7 ///y                                        Specified land use is satisfactory,
                                                                         based upon the assumption thatany
  Residential
  MuIIL Family                                                           buildings invoived are of normal
                                                                         conventional construction, without
                                                                         any special noise insulation
 Transient Lodging
                           77/77/                                  — —   :rei:irements.
  Motels. Holels
                                                                        xx>c
 Schools, Ubrarles,                                                     ConditIonally Acceptable
 Churches. Hospilals,                                                   New construction or development
 Nursing Homes                                                          should be undertaken only after a
                                                                        detailed analysis of the noise reduction
                                                                        requirements is made and neected
 A.dilorlurns, Concert                                                  noise insulation features included in
 Nails, Amphithealers                                                   the design. Conventional construction,
                                                                        but with closed windows and fresh air
                                                                        supply systems or air conditioning
                                                                        will normally suffice.
 Sports Arena, Outdoor                                      :  -
 Spectator Sports
 flaygrou nds,                                                          Normally Linacceptabie
 Neighborhood Parks
GoliCourses, Riding        ///7/4//[ //// —             I               New onnstrucbon or development
                                                                       should generally be discouraed, If
                                                                       new construction or development does
                                                                       proceed. a detailed analysis of the
                                                                       noise reducbon requirements must be
Recreallon, Cemeteries                                                 made and needed noise insulation
                                                                       features included in The design..
Office Buildings. Business
Commercial and
Professional                                                           Clearly Unacceptable
                                                                       New construction or development
Induslrial Manufacliring.  “////,9/// // /                             should generally not be undertaken.
tItililles. Agricillura
                                            [

                                           Construction Equipment Noise
                                 TABLE N-4
                Noise Ranges of Typical Construction Equipment
                                                      1
           Construction Equipment          Noise Levels in dBA Leq at 50 feet
                                                                         1
Front Loader                                              73-86
Trucks                                                    82-95
Cranes (moveable)                                         75-88
Cranes (derrick)                                          86-89
Vibrator                                                  68-82
Saws                                                      72-82
Pneumatic Impact Equipment                                83-88
iackhammers                                               81-98
Pumps                                                     68-72
Generators                                                71-83
Compressors                                               75-87
Concrete Mixers                                           75-88
Concrete Pumps                                             81-85
Back Hoe                                                   73-95
Pile Driving (peaks)                                      95-107
Tractor                                                    77-98
Scraper/Grader                                             80-93
Paver                -
                                                           85-88
                                             TABLE N-5
                                        Existing Noise Contours
                                                                              Distance to Noise Contour (feet)
                                                                   CNELat 100 7OdBA       65dBA       6OdBA
                                                                   Feet (dBA)
                                                                        1      CNEL        CNEL        CNEL
                   Roadway                    Segment
                            Santa Margarita Pkwy to Painted Trails    64.7      44           95         204
 El Toro Road
                            Trabuco Rd to Vista Del Lago              66.4      57          123         265
 Los Alisos Boulevard
                            Vista Del Lago to Santa Margarita Pkwy    66.4      58          125         269
                            Jeronimo Rd to Trabuco Rd                 69.0      86          186         399
 Alicia Parkway
                            Trabuco Rd to Marguerite Pkwy             68.0      73          1 58        340
                            Marguerite Pkwy to Olympiad Rd            68.9      84          182         391
                            Olympiad Rd to City Boundary              68.4      79          170         365
                            Chrisanta Dr to Marguerite Pkwy           65.7      52          1 12        241
 La Paz Road
                            Marguerite Pkwy to Olympiad Rd            63.7      38           82         177
                            1-5 Freeway to Marguerite Pkwy            69.3      90          194         418
 Oso Parkway
                            MargueritePkwy to Felipe Pkwy             68.5      79          170         366
                            Marguerite Pkwy to Oso Pkwy               62.6      32           69         150
 Felipe Parkway
                            1-5 Freeway to Marguerite Pkwy            70.4      107         230         496
Crown Valley Parkway
                            Marguerite Pkwy to City Boundary          69.7       95         206         443
                            East of Marguerite Pkwy                   59.0       19          40          86
Avery Parkway
Santa Margarita Parkway     ElToro Rd to Los Alisos Blvd              67.1       64         138         298
                            Marguerite Pkwy to Melinda Rd             67.3       66         143         307
                           Olympiad Rd to Santa Margarita Parkway     60.4       23          50          107
Melinda Road
                           Marguerite Pkwyto Melinda Rd               62.1       30          64          137
Olympiad Road
                           Melinda Rd to Alicia Pkwy                  62.6      32           70          150
                           Alicia Pkwy to Jeronimo Rd                 63.8       39          84          180
                           Jeronimo Rd to La Paz Rd                   64.0      40           86          186
                           South of La Paz Rd                         64.0       40           86         185
                           Los Alisos Blvd to Alicia Pkwy              65.1      47          101         218
Trabuco Road
                           Alicia Pkwy to Marguerite Pkwy             64.3       42          90          193
Jeronimo Road              Alicia Pkwy to Marguerite Pkwy              64.6      43           94         201
                           Marguerite Pkwy to Olympiad Rd             61.4       27           57         123
                           Alicia Pkwy to La Paz Rd                    63.3      36           78         167
Muirlands Boulevard
Marguerite Parkway         Santa Margarita Pkwy to Olympiad Rd         65.5      50          108         233
                           Olympiad Rd to Alicia Pk                    65.3      49          105         226
                           Alicia Pkwy to Trabuco Rd                   64.8      45           97         208
                           Trabuco Rd to Jeronimo Rd                   66.6      59          128         275
                           Jeronimo Rd to La Paz Rd                    68.2      76          165         355
                                               TABLE N-6
                         General Plan Buildout Year 2025 Noise Contours (Proj ected)
                                                                              Distance to Noise Contour (feet)
                                                                   CNELat 100  7OdBA      65dBA      6OdBA
                                                                   Feet (dBA)
                                                                         1      CNEL       CNEL       CNEL
                 Roadway                       Segment
                            Santa Margarita PkWY to Painted Trails    66.5        58        125        270
 El Torn Road
                            Trabuco Rd to Vista Del Lago              66.7        60        130        280
 Los Alisos Boulevard
                            Vista Del Lago to Santa Margarita Pkwy    67.0        64        137        295
                            Jeronimo Rd to Trabuco Rd                 70.2       103        222        479
 Alicia Parkway
                            Trabuco Rd to Marguerite Pkwy             69.1        87        187        402
                            Marguerite Pkwyto Olympiad Rd             69.4        91        196        422
                            Olympiad Rd to City Boundary              68.6        80        173        372
                            Chrisanta Dr to Marguerite Pkwy           66.2        56        121        260
 La Paz Road
                            Marguerite Pkwy to Olympiad Rd            63.8        39         84        180
                            1-5 Freeway to Marguerite Pkwy            70.1       102        220        474
 Oso Parkway
                            MargueritePkwy to Felipe Pkwy             70.5       107        231        498
                            Marguerite Pkwy to Oso Pkwy               62.9        33         72        155
Felipe Parkway
                            I-S Freeway to Marguerite Pkwy            71 .4      123        266        573
Crown Valley Parkway
                            Marguerite Pkwy to City Boundary          72.3       143        308        664
                            East of Marguerite Pkwy                    59.8       21         45         97
Avery Parkway
                            El Toro Rd to Los Alisos Blvd             68.3        77        166        358
Santa Margarita Parkway
                            Marguerite Pkwy to Melinda Rd             68.4        79        169        365
                            Olympiad Rd to Santa Margarita Parkway     61.1       26         55         118
Melinda Road
                            Marguerite Pkwy to Melinda Rd              63.2       35         76         164
Olympiad Road
                            Melinda Rd to Alicia Pkwy                  63.5       37         80         172
                           Alicia Pkwy to Jeronimo Rd                  63.8       39         84         180
                           Jeronimo Rd to La Paz Rd                    6.4.1      41         87         188
                           South of La Paz Rd                          6.4.4      42         91         196
                            Los Alisos Blvd to Alicia Pkwy             65.5       50         108        233
Trabuco Road
                           Alicia Pkwy to Marguerite Pkwy              64.9       45         98         211
                           Alicia Pki to Marguerite Pkwy               64.8       45         96         208
Jeronimo Road
                            Marguerite Pkwy to Olympiad Rd             61.6       28          59        128
                           Alicia Pkwy to La Paz Rd                    63.8       39          83        179
Muirlands Boulevard
                           Santa Margarita Pkwy to Olympiad Rd         66.2        56        121        260
Marguerite Parkway
                           Olympiad Rd to Alicia Pkwy                  65.7       52         111        240
                           Alicia Pkwy to Trabuco Rd                   65.1       47         101        218
                           Trabuco Rd to Jeronimo Rd                   66.8       62         133        286
                           Jeronimo Rd to La Paz Rd                    68.5       80         171        369
                                                 TABLE N-7
                               Railroad Noise Contours in the Vicinity of
                                            The City of Mission Viejo
                                                                           Distance (Feet)
                                                                           CNEL Contour
                                                                                 1
                                                        CNELat    7OdBA 65dBA        6OdBA   55dBA
      Location                   Segment                100 Feet   CNEL  CNEL         CNEL    CNEL
Mission Viejo
 Existing           Avery Parkway to Alicia Parkway       74.7     232    495         1,0S0   2,225
 Projected Buildout Avery Parkway to Alicia Parkway       78.0     385    820         1 ,725  3,700
                                                 TABLE N-8
                        Increase In Noise Levels (dBA) For Future Year 2025
                                                                   Existing CNEL Buildout CNEL  Change in
                                                                    at 100 Feet   at 100 Feet  Noise Level
                Roadway                       Segment                  (dBA)         (dBA)     (dBA CNEL)
 El Toro Road               Santa Margarita Pkwy to Painted Trails      64.7          66.5         1 .8
 Los Alisos Boulevard      Trabuco Rd to Vista Del Lago                 66.4          66.7         0.3
                           Vista Del Lago to Santa Margarita Pkwy       66.4          67.0         0.6
 Alicia Parkway            Jeronimo Rd to Trabuco Rd                    69.0          70.2         1.2
                           Trabuco Rd to Marguerite Pkwy                68.0          69.1         1.1
                           Marguerite Pkwy to Olympiad Rd               68.9          69.4         0.5
                           Olympiad Rd to City Boundary                 68.4          68.6         0.1
 La Paz Road               Chrisanta Dr to Marguerite Pkwy              65.7          66.2         0.5
                           Marguerite Pkwy to Olympiad Rd               63.7          63.8         0.1
 Oso Parkway               1-5 Freeway to Marguerite Pkwy               69.3          70.1         0.8
                           MargueritePkwy to Felipe Pkwy                68.5 .        70.5         2.0
 Felipe Parkway            Marguerite Pkwy to Oso Pkwy                  62.6          62.9         0.2
 Crown Valley Parkway      1-5 Freeway to Marguerite Pkwy               70.4          7L4          0.9
                           Marguerite Pkwy to City Boundary             69.7          72.3         2.6
Avery Parkway             East of Marguerite Pkwy                       59.0          59.8         0.8
Santa Margarita Parkway    El Torn Rd to Los Alisos Blvd                67.1          68.3         1.2
                          Marguerite Pkwyto Melinda Rd                  67.3          68.4         1.1
Melinda Road              Olympiad Rd to Santa Margarita Parkway        60.4          61.1         0.7
Olympiad Road             Marguerite Pkwy to Melinda Rd                 62.1          63.2         1.1
                          Melinda Rd to Alicia Pkwy                     62.6          63.5         0.9
                          Alicia Pkwy to Jeronimo Rd                    63.8          63.8         0.0
                          Jeronimo Rd to La Paz Rd                      64.0          64.1         0.1
                          South of La Paz Rd                            64.0          64.4         0.4
Trabuco Road              Los Alisos Blvd to Alicia Pkwy                65.1          65.5         0.4
                          Alicia Pkwyto Marguerite Pkwy                 64.3          64.9         0.6
Jeronimo Road             Alicia Pkwy to Marguerite Pkwy                64.6          64.8         0.2
                          Marguerite Pkwy to Olympiad Rd                61.4          61.6         0.3
Muirlands Boulevard       Alicia Pkwy to La Paz Rd                      63.3          63.8         0.5
Marguerite Parkway        Santa Margarita Pkwy to Olympiad Rd           65.5          66.2         0.7
                          Olympiad Rd to Alicia Pkwy                    65.3          65.7         0.4
                          Alicia PkwytoTrabuco Rd                       64.8          65.1         0.3
                          Trabuco Rd to Jeronimo Rd                     66.6          66.8         0.2
Public Safety Element
   City of Mission Viejo
                                TABLE OF CONTENTS
Section                                                                  Page
INTRODUCTION TO THE PUBLIC SAFETY ELEMENT                                 1
       Purpose of the Public Safety Element                               1
       Related Plans and Programs                                         1
       Public Safety Element Scope and Content                            2
PUBLIC SAFETY ELEMENT GOALS AND POLICIES                                  3
       Geologic Hazards                                                   3
       Seismic Hazard                                                     4
       Flood Hazard                                                       5
       Disaster Preparedness Plan                                         6
       Hazardous Material Exposure                                        6
       Fire                                                               8
       Crime                                                              9
       Water Quality                                                      9
RELATED GOALS AND POLICIES                                               11
THE PUBLIC SAFETY PLAN                                                   12
       Introduction and Scope of Plan                                    12
       Potential Public Safety Hazard Areas and Assessment               13
       Hazard Mitigation                                                 14
       Modified Mercalli Intensity Scale (Table PS-2)                    15
       Emergency Response and Action                                     16
       Hazardous Materials Plan                                          17
                                         i                 PUBLIC SAFETY ELEMENT
                                                                  FEBRUARY 2, 2009
                                  LIST OF TABLES
Section                                                        Page
Table PS-1  Public Safety Policies by Element                   11
Table PS-2  Modified Mercalli Intensity Scale                   15
                                 LIST OF FIGURES
Section                                                        Page
Figure PS-1  Seismic Hazard Zones                               18
Figure PS-2  Fault Map                                          19
Figure PS-3  Flood Hazard Zones                                 20
Figure PS-4  Hazardous Materials Map                            21
Figure PS-5  Very High Fire Hazard Map                          22
Figure PS-6  Emergency Facilities Map                           23
                                        ii       PUBLIC SAFETY ELEMENT
                                                        FEBRUARY 2, 2009
______________________________________________________________________________
             INTRODUCTION TO THE PUBLIC SAFETY ELEMENT
__________________________________________________________________________ _____
The Public Safety Element is directly concerned with reducing the potential risk of loss of life,
injury, property damage, and economic and social dislocation resulting from a disaster, accident, or
other hazard. This element outlines goals and policies to mitigate identified hazards specific to
Mission Viejo. This element is a comprehensive update to the City’s first Public Safety Element
adopted on October 8, 1990.
PURPOSE OF THE PUBLIC SAFETY ELEMENT
______________________________________________________________________________
Section 65302(g) of the State of California Government Code requires general plans to include, “a
safety element for the protection of the community from any unreasonable risks associated with the
effects of seismically induced surface rupture, ground shaking, ground failure, tsunami, and dam
failure; slope instability leading to mudslides and landslide, subsidence and other geologic hazards
know to the legislative body; flooding and wildland and urban fires.”
The Element contains goals and policies that will minimize the risks associated with identified
hazards in order to protect the community. Much of the background information necessary to
formulate goals and policies is included in the Public Safety Element Technical Report and the
Master Environmental Assessment (MEA). These reports identify the major hazards that might
affect the City as well as the resources that are currently available to respond in the event of an
emergency.
RELATED PLANS AND PROGRAMS
______________________________________________________________________________
Mission Viejo General Plan
The Public Safety Element is closely related to the goals, policies, plans, and programs outlined in
the other Mission Viejo General Plan Elements. The Land Use Element, for example, contains land
use policies to ensure that development does not occur in areas that may be subject to flooding,
landslides, wildland fires, or other hazards. The Circulation Element ensures efficiency of
roadways in moving large numbers of people during emergency situations.
Emergency Operations Plan (EOP)
Mission Viejo has prepared an Emergency Operations Plan to address the City’s response in the
event of a large scale disaster or emergency situations. The City of Mission Viejo Emergency
Operation Plan closely relates to the Public Safety Element because it outlines the City’s response
to emergency situations. The EOP is required by all California cites and the Governor’s Office of
                                                                                PUBLIC SAFETY ELEMENT
                                             1                                         FEBRUARY 2, 2009

Emergency Services has provided directives concerning the preparation of the EOP. The EOP’s
focus is on the operational concepts and response procedures relative to large-scale disasters. The
City of Mission Viejo adopted the Emergency Operations Plan (EOP) in 1992. This plan was
updated in 1999 to be in full compliance with the California Standardized Emergency Management
System (SEMS), qualifying the City of Mission Viejo for disaster reimbursement from the State of
California. The policies and measures indicated in this Public Safety Element are designed as
supplements to the specific procedures contained in the City’s EOP for emergency responses.
County of Orange
Other plans related to public safety include the County’s Safety Element of their General Plan,
which describes regional hazards and County procedures for emergency responses. The County’s
Waste Management Plan also is referenced within this Element as it relates to the transportation
and disposal of waste materials in Mission Viejo and the state and local policies for control of these
materials.
SCOPE AND CONTENT OF ELEMENT
______________________________________________________________________________
The Public Safety Element is organized into two main sections: The Public Safety Goals and
Policies and The Safety Plan. The Public Safety Goals and Policies contain broad goals of
minimizing risk and specific policies emphasizing emergency preparedness and prudent land use
planning. The Safety Plan builds upon the assessment of local hazards contained in the City’s
Master Environmental Assessment and the Public Safety Element Technical Report. The Safety
Plan identifies appropriate standards that are needed to ensure that adequate levels of emergency
services are provided.
                                                                                PUBLIC SAFETY ELEMENT
                                            2                                          FEBRUARY 2, 2009

_______________________________________________________________________________
               PUBLIC SAFETY ELEMENT GOALS AND POLICIES
_______________________________________________________________________________
This section contains goals and polices focused on reducing the risks associated with hazards where
mitigation is possible. The following goals and policies are grouped into a number of major hazard
areas ranging from natural to man-made hazards.
There is an important relationship between land use planning and the reduction of potential hazards.
Certain considerations need to be given when development is proposed in areas subject to
environmental constraints that could result in loss of life, personal injury, or property damage. In
addition, physical design controls provide protection against a number of potential hazards.
Policies related to building design and site planning provide a basis for the development of specific
guidelines and regulations that are effective in reducing the damaging effects of natural and man-
made disasters.
GEOLOGIC HAZARDS
______________________________________________________________________________
Landslides, subsidence, uplift, erosion, and dangerous soil characteristics (expansive, peat, sulfate,
gaseous, and corrosive soils, and hydro-consolidation) are natural geologic occurrences that can
have devastating impacts on developed areas resulting in property damage, and even loss of life.
As part of the City’s mandate to protect the public health and safety, it must ensure that new
development is constructed on lands that are geologically safe or that have been properly prepared
for development. For these reasons, the following goal policies are established:
GOAL 1:         Protect the community from hazards associated with geologic formations.
Policy 1.1:     Require soil and geotechnical reports for new developments, both residential and
                commercial. Development in areas that contain potentially hazardous geologic/soils
                conditions shall require detailed geotechnical studies and mitigation measures that
                reduce the identified risks prior to the approval of development.
Policy 1.2:     Monitor known and potential geologic hazards in the City through periodic updates
                to the City’s Master Environmental Assessment and Emergency Operations Plan.
Policy 1.3:     Coordinate with the County of Orange and surrounding jurisdictions to reduce
                geologic hazard conditions.
                                                                                 PUBLIC SAFETY ELEMENT
                                              3                                         FEBRUARY 2, 2009

SEISMIC HAZARD
______________________________________________________________________________
Mission Viejo is situated in a seismically active region. The Uniform Building Code designates
seismic zones, on a scale of 1 to 4 (4 being the most active and sever seismic zone), for the
purpose of determining structural requirements. Mission Viejo is designated as being within
seismic zone 4. The City is aware of the need to cooperate with local and state agencies to
reduce the risk of seismic hazards to its inhabitants. The State of California passed the Alquist-
Priolo Special Studies Zone Act and the Seismic Hazards Mapping Act to assist localities in
identifying and mitigating potential seismic hazards.
The Alquist-Priolo Special Studies Zone Act was passed in 1972 by the State legislature to
mitigate the hazards of surface faulting to structures for human occupancy. The State Geologist
designates regulatory zones (known as Earthquake Fault Zones) near active faults that have the
potential to surface rupture. Proposed development projects within Earthquake Fault Zones
require a geologic investigation prior to local government approval. A licensed geologist must
carry out the geologic investigation to demonstrate that proposed buildings would not be
constructed across active faults. The most recent list of cities affected by the Alquist-Priolo
Earthquake Fault Zones was published in May 1999 by the Department of Conservation,
California Geological Survey. Mission Viejo is not listed as one of the affected cities.
The Seismic Hazards Mapping Act was passed on April 1, 1991 by the State legislature to
identify areas where earthquakes are likely to cause shaking, liquefaction, landslides, or other
ground failures, and to regulate development to reduce future earthquake losses. The process for
this act is similar to the process outlined in the Alquist-Priolo Special Studies Zone Act. The
State Geologist designates regulatory zones (called Zones of Required Investigation) in areas
were seismic hazards exist. The Zones of Required Investigation require geologic investigations
and appropriate mitigation measures prior to obtaining building permits. When real property
within the zones is sold, the seller or the seller’s agent must disclose this fact to potential buyers.
Using these acts as tools, the City of Mission Viejo implements planning and building standards
ensuring new development implements mitigation measures thus reducing the risk of damage
from seismic events. In addition, maintenance of public facilities is necessary to reduce the risk
of hazards involving a major structure, such as dam failure, as a result of a seismic event. The
following goal and policies have been adopted by the City to help reduce risks to its inhabitants
from seismic hazards:
GOAL 2:        Reduce the risk of seismic hazards.
Policy 2.1:    Follow established standards for grading and construction to mitigate the potential
               for seismic hazards.
Policy 2.2:    Support continued State inspection of the Upper Oso Reservoir Dam, El Toro
               Reservoir Dam, and Lake Mission Viejo Dam to reduce risk of dam failure as a
               result of a seismic event.
                                                                                  PUBLIC SAFETY ELEMENT
                                              4                                          FEBRUARY 2, 2009

Policy 2.3:    Coordinate with the County of Orange, Caltrans and surrounding jurisdictions to
               reduce seismic hazard conditions and preparing for seismic event conditions.
Policy 2.4:    Coordinate with Caltrans and the County of Orange to ensure that any seismic
               hazards associated with bridges are identified and corrected.
Policy 2.5:    Ensure that critical facilities, such as hospitals and schools, are not located across
               active or potentially active faults.
Policy 2.6:    Continue to implement operational guidelines and design standards, consistent with
               Public Utility Commission limitations, for subsurface transmission lines including
               natural gas, petroleum, water, and waste water which minimizes potential
               environmental damage resulting from operational failure due to natural or man-
               made catastrophes.
Policy 2.7:    Monitor any proposed changes to the Alquist-Priolo Special Studies Zone Act the
               and Seismic Hazards Mapping Act that may impact the City.
(See figure PS-1 Seismic Hazard Zone Map and figure PS-2 Fault Map)
FLOOD HAZARD
______________________________________________________________________________
New development results in more impermeable surfaces such as parking lots, paved streets, etc.
These impermeable surfaces result in increased runoff during storms sometimes resulting in
flooding. Four watercourses exist through parts of the City. Land uses that exist in or adjacent to
these flood plains may become threatened in the case of a 100-year flood event or a stream
blockage. In addition, in the unlikely event of a dam failure, flooding of portions of the City may
occur. Areas subject to flooding and dam inundation should contain only those land uses that are
appropriate with potential flooding conditions (open space, parks, etc.). Any structures within
flood-prone areas should be protected from flooding events. For these reasons, the following
goals and policies are established:
GOAL 3:        Protect the City’s inhabitants from risk associated with flood hazards.
Policy 3.1:    Maintain appropriate land use designations for areas subject to flooding.
Policy 3.2:    Identify flood hazard areas and implement a system of protective controls.
Policy 3.3:    Work with the Federal Emergency Management Agency and the County of Orange
               in reducing community risk due to flooding.
Policy 3.4:    Prohibit development, grading, or filling in floodplain areas with the exception of
               necessary public roadways, water supply projects, flood control projects,
               recreational uses, or where the primary function is improvement of fish and wildlife
               habitat.
                                                                                PUBLIC SAFETY ELEMENT
                                              5                                        FEBRUARY 2, 2009

Policy 3.5:    Maintain and update a storm drain master inventory.
Policy 3.6:    Coordinate the city’s storm drain master inventory with adjacent communities.
Policy 3.7:    Give priority to less intrusive, environmentally compatible flood control projects
               over extensive man-made controls.
(See figure PS-3 Flood Hazard Zone Map)
DISASTER PREPAREDNESS PLAN
______________________________________________________________________________
Manmade and natural disasters can have devastating consequences on a community that is not
prepared for such a catastrophe. While emergency preparedness cannot always prevent a disaster
from occurring, the loss of life, injury, and property damage can be substantially reduced in most
instances. Most experts agree that the effects of a major disaster can be significantly reduced if
persons are familiar with the appropriate actions to take in the event of a major disaster or crisis.
The importance of emergency preparedness in the City is underscored by the following goal and
supporting policies.
GOAL 4:        Develop and maintain a disaster preparedness plan.
Policy 4.1:    The City’s adopted Emergency Operations Plan (EOP) shall serve as the City’s
               disaster preparedness plan, which shall identify all resources and funds (City,
               County, State and Federal) available for use in the event of a natural or man-made
               disaster.
Policy 4.2:    Establish implementing actions or programs under the EOP, such as rescue efforts,
               medical efforts, emergency shelter and provisions, communications, evacuation, and
               economic recovery.
Policy 4.3:    Establish procedures for requesting emergency funds from State and Federal
               sources.
Policy 4.4:    Establish a City disaster fund containing monies available for emergency shelter and
               other disaster-related relief efforts.
HAZARDOUS MATERIAL EXPOSURE
______________________________________________________________________________
The handling and storage of hazardous materials, both household and industrial, has become a
daily occurrence within urban areas. Many households and commercial and industrial
establishments throughout Mission Viejo store and/or use hazardous materials in some capacity.
When improperly stored and disposed of, these materials can result in a multitude of hazards for
the community including fire, water contamination, illness, and death.
                                                                               PUBLIC SAFETY ELEMENT
                                              6                                       FEBRUARY 2, 2009

The Southern California Association of Governments (SCAG) with input from the Orange
County Health Care Agency has prepared a Hazardous Waste Management Plan that
encompasses a regional plan to dispose of, store, and reduce the risks associated with hazardous
waste. The associated hazardous materials issues include accidental spillage of wastes, the
transportation of wastes through populated areas, and disposal of wastes in a safe manner.
One of the greatest risks to a community from hazardous materials is during the transportation of
materials from suppliers to users on freeways, streets, and railroads. The California Department
of Transportation is the primary regulatory authority for interstate transport of hazardous
materials, establishing safe handling procedures. The California Highway Patrol enforces the
regulations regarding hazardous material transportation.
Hazardous materials such as petroleum and natural gas can also be transported through
underground pipelines. These underground pipelines have the potential to rupture contaminating
drinking water and causing fire. The California State Fire Marshal, Office of Liquid Pipeline
Division, enforces and inspects underground pipelines. The Orange County Fire Authority
(OCFA) has emergency response authority in the event of a ruptured pipeline.
The Orange County Fire Authority’s other responsibilities include inventorying the distribution
of hazardous materials. The OCFA has developed and implemented area emergency plans to
respond to a hazardous material incident and requires businesses that handle hazardous materials
to develop business emergency plans to deal with fire and the release of those materials.
The San Onofre Nuclear Generating Station (SONGS) is approximately 15 miles southeast of
Mission Viejo. The nuclear power plant is located next to San Onofre State Beach, on Camp
Pendleton U.S. Marine Corps Base. The Nuclear Regulatory Commission establishes an area
around all nuclear power plant identified as an Emergency Planning Zone (EPZ). Extensive
planning efforts within the SONGS EPZ are provided for emergency actions in the unlikely event
of a serious emergency. The State of California has defined the area around and adjacent to the
Emergency Planning Zone as the Public Education Zone. Mission Viejo falls within the Public
Education Zone. For the reasons, the following goal and policies are established:
GOAL 5:        Protect the City’s inhabitants from exposure to hazardous materials and
               wastes.
Policy 5.1:    Cooperate with the County and SCAG in implementation of its Hazardous Waste
               Management Plan.
Policy 5.2:    Cooperate with railroad operations to ensure that hazardous materials transported by
               rail do not pose a threat to life or property.
Policy 5.3:    Land uses involving the production, storage, transportation, handling, or disposal of
               hazardous materials shall be located a safe distance from other land uses that may be
               adversely affected by such activities.
                                                                               PUBLIC SAFETY ELEMENT
                                               7                                      FEBRUARY 2, 2009

Policy 5.4:     Establish transportation routes for the conveyance of hazardous materials.
(See figure PS-4 Hazardous Materials Map)
FIRE
______________________________________________________________________________
The City’s urban fringe and rural residential areas are prone to wildland fire hazards. These areas
are subject to both wild and urban fires due to the proximity to Cleveland National Forest. The
region’s natural vegetation is highly prone to wild fire, with the potential that a fire in the
national forest could spread to developed areas of the City. The urbanized areas of the City are
also subject to structural fires. The City will reduce the potential for dangerous fires by
coordinating with the Orange County Fire Authority (OCFA) to implement fire hazard education,
fire protection, and fuel modification programs. The current Uniform Fire Code and the City’s
adopted Very High Fire Hazard Severity Zone Ordinance (Ordinance No. 95-151) will be used to
reduce structure fire hazards. In addition, the City will work closely with local water districts
and OCFA to ensure that water pressure is adequate for fire fighting purposes. For these reasons,
the following goal and policies are established:
GOAL 6:         Protect the City’s inhabitants from risk associated with fires.
Policy 6.1:     Continue to work closely with OCFA on educating residents and businesses
                regarding wildland fire hazards.
Policy 6.2:     Implement and enforce established regulations for fire-resistant building materials
                for areas subject to wildland fire hazards.
Policy 6.3:     Continue to implement programs to provide notice to all residents located near
                wildland fire hazard areas.
Policy 6.4:     Maintain mutual aid agreements with the County of Orange and surrounding cities
                for fire protection.
Policy 6.5:     Work closely with the Orange County Fire Authority to establish and maintain a
                wildfire defense planning and weed abatement programs to reduce the danger of
                vegetation fires in or adjacent to the City.
Policy 6.6:     Work closely with the Orange County Fire Authority to adopt and enforce the most
                current edition of the Uniform Fire Codes and the City’s Very High Fire Hazard
                Severity Zone Ordinance.
Policy 6.7:     Establish a vegetation management program in brush areas.
(See figure PS-5 Very High Fire Hazard Map).
                                                                               PUBLIC SAFETY ELEMENT
                                              8                                       FEBRUARY 2, 2009

CRIME
______________________________________________________________________________
In 2008 the City of Mission Viejo was named the second safest city in the United States by
independent private research and publishing company, CQ Press. The CQ Press award is based
on a city’s reported crime rate in six basic categories: murder, rape, robbery, aggravated assault,
burglary and motor vehicle theft. While this achievement is one to be proud of, continued
diligence in deterring crime will ensure that the City continues to be one of the safest cities in the
United States. For these reasons, the following goals and policies are established:
GOAL 7:         Protect the City’s inhabitants and businesses from criminal activity.
Policy 7.1:     Provide substantive levels of police service and protection.
Policy 7.2:     Encourage development of programs and practices that incorporate crime prevention
                methods, techniques, and experience into the planning process and improve public
                awareness of ways to reduce criminal activity.
Policy 7.3:     Continue to coordinate land use proposal reviews with Mission Viejo Police
                Services to assure that police patrol services are adequately addressed.
Policy 7.4:     Continue to provide an effective approach and response to the removal and
                abatement of graffiti.
WATER QUALITY
______________________________________________________________________________
Water is an essential resource for sustaining life. Therefore, the protection of this resource is a
priority for the City of Mission Viejo. As mandated by the California Regional Water Quality
Control Board, San Diego Region, cities in South Orange County are required to develop a program
to control the discharge of pollutants. The program includes measures to prevent and treat
pollutants from entering the watershed. For these reasons, the following goal and policies are
established:
GOAL 8:         Protect the City’s water quality and watersheds from risk associated with
                urban runoff.
Policy 8.1:     Minimize the amount of impervious surfaces and directly connected impervious
                surfaces in areas of new development and redevelopment and where feasible slow
                runoff and maximize on-site infiltration of runoff.
Policy 8.2:     Implement pollution prevention methods supplemented by pollutant source
                controls and treatment. Use small collection strategies located at, or as close as
                possible to, the source (i.e., the point where water initially meets the ground) to
                minimize the transport of urban runoff and pollutants offsite and into a municipal
                                                                                 PUBLIC SAFETY ELEMENT
                                              9                                         FEBRUARY 2, 2009

            separate storm sewer system (MS4).
Policy 8.3: Preserve, and where possible, create or restore areas that provide important water
            quality benefits, such as riparian corridors, wetlands, and buffer zones. Encourage
            land acquisition of such areas.
Policy 8.4: Limit disturbances of natural water bodies and natural drainage systems caused by
            development including roads, highways, and bridges.
Policy 8.5: Prior to making land use decisions, utilize methods available to estimate increases
            in pollutant loads and flows resulting from projected future development. Require
            incorporation of structural and non-structural best management practices to
            mitigate the projected increases in pollutant loads and flows.
Policy 8.6: Avoid development of areas that are particularly susceptible to erosion and
            sediment loss; or establish development guidance that identifies these areas and
            protects them from erosion and sediment loss.
Policy 8.7: Reduce pollutants associated with vehicles and increasing traffic resulting from
            development. Coordinate local traffic management reduction efforts with Orange
            County Transportation Authority’s Congestion Management Plan.
Policy 8.8: Ensure post-development runoff from a site shall not contain pollutant loads that
            cause or contribute to an exceedance of receiving water quality objectives and
            which have not been reduced to the maximum extent practicable.
RELATED GOALS AND POLICES
                                                                            PUBLIC SAFETY ELEMENT
                                         10                                        FEBRUARY 2, 2009

   ______________________________________________________________________________
   The goals and policies contained in the other elements are also important in addressing public
   safety issues. A number of goals and policies contained in the Conservation and Open Space
   Element are concerned with development restrictions in areas subject to environmental
   constraints that might affect both persons and property. The Housing Element also contains
   policies that underscore the importance of ensuring that housing is both safe and decent. Other
   elements containing policies that serve to support the aims expressed in this Element are
   identified in Table PS-1: Public Safety Policies by Element.
                                                     TABLE PS-1
                                      PUBLIC SAFETY BY ELEMENT
                                                         POLICIES BY ELEMENT
ISSUE AREA            Land   Housing     Circulation     Conservation Noise   Public      Economic        Growth
                       Use                               /Open Space         Facilities  Development   Management
Protect              2.8,    2.4, 4.2                    1.3                1.1, 1.2,
community            2.9,    3.8                         3.1, 3.4           1.4
from geologic        4.1-4.3
hazards
Reduce the           2.8,    2.4, 3.8                                       1.1, 1.2,
risk of seismic      2.9,                                                   1.4
hazards
                     4.1-4.3
Protect              2.8,    2.4, 3.8                                       1.1, 1.2,
community            2.9,                                3.4                1.4
from flood hazards
                     4.1-4.3                                                6.1-6.3
Develop a                    3.8, 4.1    1.1-1.13,                          1.1-1.4
disaster                                 4.1-4.7, 5.4
preparedness
plan
Protect              2.8,                                3.4                1.1, 1.2,
community            2.9,    2.4, 3.8                                       1.4,
                     4.1-4.3                                                7.1-7.4
from hazardous
materials exposure
Protect              2.8,                                                   1.1, 1.2,
community            2.9,    2.4, 3.8                                       1.4
from fire            4.1-4.3
Hazards
Protect              2.1,                1.8                                1.1-1.4
Community            2.2     3.8, 4.1                                                                  1.5
                     2.5
from crime
Protect              2.8,                                1.1, 1.2           5.1-5.6,
community’s          2.9,    2.4, 3.8                                       6.1-6.3
                     4.3
water quality and
watersheds from
risk associated with
urban runoff.
   _______________________________________________________________________________
                                                                                        PUBLIC SAFETY ELEMENT
                                                      11                                       FEBRUARY 2, 2009

                               THE PUBLIC SAFETY PLAN
_______________________________________________________________________________
This section of the Public Safety Element includes an assessment and discussion of emergency
preparedness planning needed both to provide everyday safety and emergency services, and to
respond to major disasters. This section serves as a supplement to the City’s Emergency Operations
Plan (EOP), which identifies appropriate actions to be taken by City staff in response to an
emergency. In addition, the Plan identifies standards needed to ensure that an adequate level of
emergency service is provided in the future.
INTRODUCTION AND SCOPE OF THE PLAN
______________________________________________________________________________
A broad variety of public safety services are provided by several public agencies. Most
significant are fire response and safety as provided by the Orange County Fire Authority and law
enforcement services by the Orange County Sheriff’s Department. Other City departments
provide day-to-day services related to public safety. The Public Works Department is responsible
for the maintenance of streets, flood control, and some aspects of public safety. Also, the Public
Works Director coordinates health related activities during major disasters and is responsible for
guiding the construction and engineering of disaster response and recovery operations.
The City’s Building Services Division is responsible for the enforcement of construction codes
for safety. Other agencies involved in public safety service having jurisdiction or public safety
services within the City include the California Highway Patrol, the State/National Guard, and the
County Health Care Agency and its branches. Service from these outside agencies should
continue to be available, somewhat independent of the City’s planned development and control.
Therefore, the following sections concentrate primarily on services provide by the Orange County
Fire Authority or the Orange County Sheriff’s Department.
An earthquake, or even a more localized incident such as a chemical spill, may force the
evacuation of thousands of people. Thousands of others may require emergency shelter and
medical treatment. The Emergency Response and Action section of this Element identifies
emergency evacuation routes and emergency shelters.
An emergency preparedness strategy will assist existing efforts by public officials in improving
public readiness. The emergency operations procedures described in the City’s EOP outline the
responsibilities of City and contract County personnel in the event of disaster. As indicated, this
information serves as a basis for future emergency preparedness planning in the City.
                                                                               PUBLIC SAFETY ELEMENT
                                            12                                        FEBRUARY 2, 2009

Emergency planning and preparedness, as considered in this Element, consists of three main
components:
    1. Potential public safety hazard areas and assessment;
    2. Hazards mitigation; and
    3. Emergency response and action.
Potential natural and man-made hazards have been identified in the Risk of Upset Section of the
Master Environmental Assessment (MEA). The MEA contains supporting data and background
material needed to assess the level of risk in the City. Hazards mitigation is accomplished by a
number of goals and policies contained in the Element, which reduce the likelihood of
environmental upset or the damaging effects that might result from a disaster or accident.
POTENTIAL PUBLIC SAFETY HAZARD AREAS AND ASSESSMENT
______________________________________________________________________________
Mission Viejo is recently developed and structures were built under modern building codes using
current construction techniques to minimize damage resulting from seismic shaking. Structures in
the City meet local, County, and State construction codes and should withstand the level of shaking
experienced in the area. Developments were planned and built in accordance with modern planning
techniques to avoid placement of structures in potentially hazardous areas such as land subject to
landslides and flooding.
Figure PS-1 indicates the location of the potential hazardous areas in the City that could pose a
public safety threat. Hazardous areas include those areas that may be threatened by flooding, fire,
explosion from a major railroad accident or line eruption, or those areas that contain unstable earth
conditions. Figure PS-1 illustrates the areas within the City that are subject to seismic shaking in
the event of a major seismic event along the Newport-Inglewood Fault or the San Andreas Fault.
The levels of intensity described by the figure are defined in Table PS-2 by the Modified Mercalli
Intensity Scale. Areas that would sustain the worst damage as a result of seismic shaking include
steeply sloped areas that may be susceptible to landslides. Fire damage from a seismic event would
also pose a safety hazard to residential areas should utility lines rupture following an earthquake,
igniting surrounding structures.
The City’s Public Safety Technical Report and Risk of Upset Section of the City’s Master
Environmental Assessment, as technical appendices to this Element, describe the major
environmental hazards and their associated risks. Unstable geologic and soils conditions and areas
that contain steep slopes over 30% grade present developmental constraints that could pose a risk to
building safety. Wildland fire-prone areas occur in the undeveloped areas outside of the City;
however, a major fire could threaten nearby homes in eastern Mission Viejo. Because the City is
located along two major transportation corridors (Interstate 5 and the OCTA Metrolink Railroad
right-of-way), potential hazards are associated with hazardous materials that may be transported
                                                                                 PUBLIC SAFETY ELEMENT
                                            13                                          FEBRUARY 2, 2009

along these routes. Flooding hazards also pose a threat to those areas located within a dam
inundation area or within a 100-year floodplain.
HAZARD MITIGATION
______________________________________________________________________________
Certain planning practices will be considered when assessing development proposals within areas
where hazardous risks are associated. The City’s zoning and building codes and the policies
contained within this Element serve to reduce or avoid risks associated with the placement of
development within hazardous areas. The Uniform Building Code designates Mission Viejo as
being within climate zone 8, seismic zone 4, of having a maximum wind speed of 70 mph, and
wind exposure as B. These designations help designer’s design and the City of Mission Viejo
Building Department approve structures that will hold up against specific regional impacts.
The City has adopted the International Conference of Building Officials (ICBO) uniform family of
codes. The ICBO codes contain nationally utilized standards including fire safety requirements for
minimum roadway widths and minimum building clearances. The City has been developed under
modern public safety codes for building construction and essentially no deficiencies associated with
fire equipment access exist.
Because Mission Viejo has been recently developed, few hazards associated with development of
sensitive areas exist. The City is mainly concerned with emergency preparedness and
responsiveness in case of major disaster.
                                                                               PUBLIC SAFETY ELEMENT
                                           14                                         FEBRUARY 2, 2009

                                                TABLE PS-2
                              MODIFIED MERCALLI INTENSITY SCALE
 MAGNITUDE ON                                     Effects At Different Levels of Intensity
 RICHTER SCALE                                          Intensity Scale of 1931 (abridged)
     Below 3.0         I. Not felt except by a very few under especially favorable circumstances.
                       II. Felt only be a few persons at rest, especially on upper floors of buildings. Delicately
      3.0-3.9           suspended objects may swing.
   Distance Felt:      III. Felt quite noticeably indoors, especially on upper floors of buildings, but many people
(approx. miles) 15      do not recognize it as an earthquake. Standing motorcars may rock slightly. Vibration like
                        passing of truck. Duration estimated.
                       IV. During the day felt indoors by many, outdoors by few. At night some awakened. Dishes,
      4.0-4.9           windows, doors disturbed; walls make cracking sound. Standing motorcars rocked noticeably.
   Distance Felt:      V. Felt by nearly everyone, many awakened. Some dishes, windows, etc., broken; a few
(approx. miles) 30      instances of cracked plaster; unstable objects overturned. Disturbances of trees, poles,
                        and other tall objects sometimes noticed.
      5.0-5.9
                        VI. Felt by all, many frightened and run outdoors. Some heavy furniture moved; a few
   Distance Felt:
                        instances of fallen plaster or damaged chimneys. Damage slight.
 (approx miles) 70
                       VII. Everybody runs outdoors. Damage negligible in building of good design and construction;
                        slight to moderate in well-built ordinary structures; considerable in poorly built or badly
      6.0-6.9           designed structures; some chimneys broken. Noticed by persons driving motorcars.
   Distance Felt:      VIII. Damage slight in specially designed structures; considerable in ordinary substantial
(approx miles) 125      buildings, with partial collapse; great in poorly built structures. Panel walls thrown out of
                        frame structures. Fall of chimneys, factory stacks, columns, monuments, walls. Persons
                        driving motorcars disturbed.
                       IX. Damage considerable in specially designed structures; well-designed frame structures
                        thrown out of plumb; great in substantial buildings, with partial collapse. Buildings shifted
      7.0-7.9           off foundations. Ground cracked conspicuously. Underground pipes broken.
   Distance Felt:
(approx miles) 250     X. Some well-built wooden structures destroyed; most masonry and frame structures destroyed
                        with foundations; ground badly cracked. Rails bent. Landslides considerable from river banks
                        and steep slopes. Shifted sand and mud. Water splashed (slopped) over banks.
                       XI. Few, if any, (masonry) structures remain standing. Bridges destroyed. Broad fissures in
                        ground. Underground pipelines completely out of service. Earth slumps and land slips in soft
      8.0-9.8           ground. Rails bend greatly.
                       XII. Damage total. Practically all works of construction are damaged greatly or destroyed.
                        Waves seen on ground surface. Lines of sight and level are distorted. Objects are thrown
                        upward into the air.
  Source: California Department of Conservation, Division of Mines and Geology, 1997.
                                                                                                  PUBLIC SAFETY ELEMENT
                                                      15                                                  FEBRUARY 2, 2009
EMERGENCY RESPONSE AND ACTION
______________________________________________________________________________
Sound planning practices have been exercised during Mission Viejo’s development to ensure that
adequate services are provided for more common emergencies such as crime incidents, traffic
accidents, fires, and emergency medical care. Figure PS-6 identifies the location of the fire stations
and the major hospital in the City. Mission Viejo contracts with the County of Orange for its fire
and police protection needs. Information concerning fire service and police protection is included
in the City’s Public Facilities Element.
The City’s EOP designates the proper procedures that are to be followed in the case of a major
emergency. Emergency procedures include knowledge of the facilities within the City that are
available for emergency assistance. The City has designated City Hall as the Emergency
Operations Center (EOC). The EOC functions as the location for centralized direction and
control of emergency organizations for the general public.
The emergency shelters also offer emergency first aid, disseminate information, and serve as a
community information center where individuals can leave messages for friends and relatives.
An emergency response is also required in the case of a nuclear incident threat. The potential for
such a threat increases with the volume and variety of radioactive materials potentially generated,
stored, or transported in Mission Viejo and surrounding areas. As outlined in the City’s EOP, the
City’s reaction to a nuclear incident may involve various local, special district, State and Federal
agencies. The EOP identifies the actions necessary for the proper response to a potential nuclear
threat as well as the local agency responsibilities.
                                                                               PUBLIC SAFETY ELEMENT
                                           16                                         FEBRUARY 2, 2009

HAZARDOUS MATERIALS PLAN
______________________________________________________________________________
Emergency response procedures in the case of a disaster involving hazardous materials are outlined
in the City’s Emergency Operations Plan and the County’s Hazardous Waste Management Plan.
Such emergency procedures are directed by the County’s Fire Incident Command System. The City
will cooperate and assist in emergency operations as required under their EOP. Policies contained
in this Element serve to protect the City’s inhabitants from hazardous waste disasters through
implementation of the City’s EOP and the County’s Hazardous Waste Management Plan. The City
also has adopted a Hazardous Waste Facility Siting ordinance to establish uniform standards in
order to control the location, design, and maintenance of hazardous waste facilities. The City’s
zoning code also contains restrictions on the placement of hazardous waste facilities.
(See figure PS-6 Emergency Facilities)
                                                                              PUBLIC SAFETY ELEMENT
                                            17                                         FEBRUARY 2, 2009

Legend
     City Boundary
     Lakes
//j  Earthquake Induced Landslides
                  -
     Liquefaction
    Legend
      “   Mission Viejo City Boundary
         Orange County Boundary
         City Boundaries
          Faults
          Inferred Fault Location
LOS ANGELES
  COUNTY
                               !7
                                                   RIVERSIDE
                                                    COUNTY
                                      1.
                                  /
                             .1       ORANGE
                                      CQUNTh’ MISSION
                                               VIEJO
                                      I
                     PACIFIC
                      OCEAN
                                                            SAN DIEGO
                                                             COUNTY





