


































































































































































     Chapter 3
Circulation Element
This page left intentionally blank
                                                                                                                       aERAL PL
                                                                                                         k
                                                                                                                        2030
Chapter 3:                        Circulation
                                                                  CIRCULATION ELEMENT GOALS
 Element                                                          Local Transportation Routes
                                                                  CE Goal is Provide a system of roadways that meets the needs of
                                                                  the community through careful design of and attention to
                                                                  linkages between neighborhoods, schools, parks, employment
 INTRODUCTION                                                     centers, and activity nodes.
                                                                  CE Goal z: Improve the safety and efficiency of existing
The Circulation Element of the City of Vista General Plan         transportation facilities by providing complete and safe
                                                                  connections on roadways, sidewalks, and bikeways. Facilities
functions as a guide to policy makers, decision makers,           should be accessible to all users, with appropriate and necessary
the general public, and planners in Vista regarding the           amenities.
desired circulation patterns through the 2030 planning            Regional Transportation
                                                                  CE Goal 3: Support a regional transportation system that serves
period.     It establishes the policy foundation to guide
                                                                  existing and future travel between Vista and other population
future circulation-      and transportation- related    decision
                                                                  and employment centers in North San Diego County and the
                                                            It is larger region.
making to achieve the community' s Vision 2030.
                                                                  Truck Circulation
intended to assist the community in understanding the
different components of the transportation network and            CE Goal 4: Create a truck circulation system that provides
                                                                  effective transport of commodities while minimizing negative
goals for the      future that      coordinate the   circulation  impacts throughout the City.
system with planned land uses.                                    Public Transportation
                                                                  CE Goal 5: Encourage alternative forms of transportation to
Vista   relies on    a   diverse  multi -modal   transportation
                                                                  private automobiles that meet the needs of all City residents by
system consisting of roadways, rail service, bike facilities,     providing improved access to transit connections to employment
                                                                  and other activity centers.
and   pedestrian facilities to move people and            goods
                                                                  Bicycle and Pedestrian Facilities
locally and regionally. Vista seeks to enhance the safety,
                                                                  CE Goal 6: Develop an efficient bicycle and pedestrian circulation
access, convenience and comfort of all users of all ages          system that improves access and linkages in a manner that is
                                                                  human -scaled, bicycle- and pedestrian -oriented, and transit -
and abilities, including pedestrians (together with people        accessible, encourages use of these facilities for recreation, and
requiring mobility aids), bicyclists, transit users, motorists    provides alternatives to the personal automobile.
and freight drivers, through the design, operation and            Scenic Roadways
maintenance      of the    transportation   network   so  as  to  CE Goal 7: Preserve and enhance the identity and character of
                                                                  Vista along the City' s roadways.
create a connected network of facilities accommodating
each    mode     of   travel   that   is consistent  with   and   Parking
                                                                  CE Goal 8: Provide an adequate supply of well- designed and
supportive of the local community, recognizing that all           convenient parking facilities that meet the demands of the
streets are different and that the needs of various users         surrounding land uses and enhance the character of the
                                                                  community.
will need to be balanced in a flexible manner.
                                                                  Design
                                                                  CE Goal g: Enhance Vista' s community identity and unique
                                                                  character by strengthening the streetscape environment through
                                                                  conscientious attention to design considerations along scenic
                                                                  roadways, gateways, corridors, and at focal intersections.
  December 2011                                                                                                        Page 3 -1
                                                                                                        aERA L p(
                                                                                                      Cf'         R/Y
   Circulation Element
                                                                                                         2030
PURPOSE
The primary purpose of the Circulation Element is to define the transportation needs through the Circulation
Plan for Vista and to ensure policies that safely and efficiently accommodate future growth. The Plan
designates   future  road  improvements,    transportation   goals,  policies, actions, and   implementation
programs, and serves as the main tool of the Circulation Element. Vista will promote a balanced and multi -
modal transportation     system that serves the mobility       needs of all segments of the       population,
accommodates all travel modes, and promotes community economic development needs.
GOALS AND POLICIES
The following goals and policies are intended to ensure that Vista achieves the stated Vision 2o3o results and
that key implementing strategies of other elements are integrated into planning decisions.
The Circulation Element is based on a set of circulation -related goals and policies, which acknowledge the
changing economic, social, and environmental conditions in the City and surrounding regions, and the
anticipated future needs of the community. The circulation goals and policies are organized around the
following categories:
         Local Transportation Routes
         Regional Transportation
         Truck Circulation
         Public Transportation
         Bicycle and Pedestrian Facilities
         Scenic Roadways
         Parking, and
         Design
LOCAL TRANSPORTATION ROUTES
CE GOAL is Provide a system of roadways that meets the needs of the community
through careful design of and attention to linkages between neighborhoods, schools,
parks, employment centers, and activity nodes.
 December 2011                                                                                        Page 3 -2
                                                                                                                 L p(
                                                                                                                      RM
 Circulation Element
                                                                                                         Y.
                                                                                                          2030
       CE Policy i.i:   Implement the transportation improvements identified in this Circulation Element
       according to priority identified through the Capital Improvement Programming ( CIP) process.
       CE Pelicy 1. 2: Strive to maintain a vehicular Level of Service ( LOS) D or better throughout the City
       except for within areas designated for mixed -use development, or areas designated to be more
       bicycle /pedestrian friendly.
       CE Policy 3.. 3: Develop multi -modal level of service analysis standards to integrate with traditional
       vehicular LOS modeling tools.
       CE Pelicy 3.4 Require a multi -modal traffic impact analysis for any project within the Mixed Use
       land use designation that generates 2, 500 or more average daily vehicle trips.
       CE Pelicy 1. 5:  When a traffic analysis indicates that the LOS reaches " D" or below, the City will
       determine what improvements or operational changes are needed to maintain or improve the LOS.
       Such improvements will either be the responsibility of the project applicant, or the City will identify
       potential funding and prioritization for the necessary improvements through the CIP process.
       CE Policy 3.. 6: Make all feasible transportation improvements in order to meet the threshold LOS
       identified in CE Pelicy 1. 5 unless the City determines that the unacceptable LOS is a direct result of
       regional traffic or that the improvements necessary to achieve the threshold LOS: (       i) exceed the
       available funding sources; ( 2) are not compatible with the surrounding land uses; ( 3) are the result of
       a design that is contrary to other established City policies; or ( 4) if added benefits are gained for
       other modes such as biking and walking.
       CE Pelicy 1. 7: Develop circulation system standards for roadway classifications, right -of -way width,
       pavement width, design speed, capacity, maximum grades, and associated features such as
       medians and bicycle lanes.
       CE Policy 3.. 8:  Develop tools such as place -based street typologies to integrate with standard
       functional street classifications to ensure that all street design decisions are sensitive to the local
       land use context.
       CE Policy i.g:    Coordinate improvements to the City circulation system with applicable county,
       regional, state, and federal transportation plans and programs.
       CE Policy i.io: Require necessary conditions of approval on development projects to achieve LOS
       standards prescribed in this element. Develop a checklist for development and redevelopment
       projects to ensure the inclusion of infrastructure that provides for safe travel for all users and
       enhances project outcomes and community impact.
December 2011                                                                                          Page 3- 3
                                                                                                                   L p(
                                                                                                                        RM
  Circulation Element
                                                                                                            Y.
                                                                                                             2030
        CE Policy i.ii: Require all new development projects to participate in the City' s transportation fee
        programs. These fee programs will be designed to ensure that all development projects fund their
        fair share of the necessary long -term transportation improvements identified in this Element.
        CE POlicy 1. 12: Require all new development projects to either fund or install their fair share of all
        required feasible transportation improvements necessary to achieve a multi -modal LOS identified in
        this Element as mitigation for the direct impacts on the circulation network from the proposed
        project.
        CE Policy 3.. 3.3:  Periodically review and evaluate the City' s existing traffic mitigation fee programs
        and adjust fees if necessary to fund the improvements identified in this Element.
        CE POlicy 1. 3-4:   Review the design of new residential neighborhoods to ensure that " cut through"
        routes are minimized.
        CE POlicy 1. 3-5:     Provide flexibility in design of local streets in semi -rural areas to meet the
        topographic limitations of the area. Pedestrian facilities, which may be different from conventional
        sidewalks, should be provided where feasible.       Shared parking areas should be considered where
        topography permits, rather than requiring extra street width for parking lanes.
CE GOAL 2:        Improve the safety and efficiency of existing transportation facilities by
providing complete and safe connections on roadways,                            sidewalks,      and bikeways.
Facilities should be accessible to all users, with appropriate and necessary amenities.
        CE POlicy z. i: Maintain a pavement management system and maintenance program for all public
        roadways throughout the City.
        CE POlicy 2. 2: Develop a traffic signal management system and maintenance program for all traffic
        signals throughout the City.
        CE POlicy 2. 3:    Incorporate multi modal improvements into pavement resurfacing, restriping, and
        signalization operations where the safety and convenience of users can be improved within the
        scope of work.
        CE POlicy 2. 4:     Synchronize traffic signals on all major roads throughout the City and adjacent
        communities.
 December 2011                                                                                            Page 3- 4
                                                                                                            ER A L pL.
                                                                                                                       q' L
                                                                                                                   A
  Circulation Element
                                                                                                           2030
 4
        CE Policy z. 5: Schedule major roadway maintenance, construction, and repair activities that require
        eliminating or restricting one or more travel lanes during evening hours, or if evening hours are not
        feasible, then during non -peak periods.
        CE Policy 2. 6: Prohibit parking on all primary and major roadways, except in areas subject to special
        design criteria.
        CE Policy 2. 7:    Establish speed restrictions throughout the City that relate to the design and
        operating characteristics of the roadway and its classification and /or the surrounding land use
        context.
        CE Policy 2. 8:   Allow modifications to the Circulation Element Roadway Facility Designations in
        consideration of available right -of -way, the context of the roadway in comparison to its surrounding
        land uses, or the impacts or benefits of multiple modes of transportation.
        CE Policy 2. 9:    Adopt a traffic calming program identifying alternatives to slow traffic speeds,
        improve pedestrian and bicycle safety, and enhance use of the street by multiple users.
        CE Policy z. io: Limit driveway access on arterial streets to maintain desired capacity of the arterial.
        CE Policy z. ii: Provide directional assistance through the use of wayfinding signage to major civic
        facilities.
REGIONAL TRANSPORTATION
CE GOAL 3: Support a regional transportation
system that serves existing and future travel
between       Vista     and   other    population       and
employment          centers    in   North     San    Diego
County and the larger region.
        CE Policy 3. 3.: Support the periodic update of the
        San      Diego    Association   of    Governments'
         SANDAG' s)     Regional Transportation    Plan and
        the San Diego County Circulation Element.
        CE Policy 3. 2:     Actively promote the use of
                                                                                 SR -78 through Vista
 December 2011                                                                                          Page 3- 5
                                                                                                                Pz11+
  Circulation Element
                                                                                                        200
            MW
        Transnet funds for projects that benefit the City.
        CE Policy 3. 3: Maintain a proactive and assertive role with SANDAL, the California Department of
        Transportation ( Caltrans),  and San Diego County on regional transportation issues that affect the
        City.
        CE Policy 3. 4: Coordinate with the County of San Diego to ensure that the circulation improvements
        in the City' s Sphere of Influence area are consistent with the Vista General Plan roadway
        designations and policies.
        CE Policy 3. 5: Work with adjacent cities to ensure that the traffic impacts of development projects
        in these cities do not adversely impact the City and traffic impacts from Vista projects do not
        adversely impact neighboring cities.
        CE Policy 3 - 6:   Promote alternatives to driving alone during peak periods, such as carpooling,
        vanpooling,    bicycling, telecommuting, flexible work hours for employees, and transportation
        demand management (TDM) programs.
        CE Policy 3. 7: Coordinate with Caltrans on all plans, activities, and projects that may affect State
        facilities.
        CE Policy 3. 8:   Periodically update the City' s traffic model with land use data, traffic data, and
        information regarding improvements to the circulation network from neighboring communities.
        CE Policy 3. 9:   Identify regional funding sources and grant opportunities to grade- separate rail
        crossings in orderto improve pedestrian access, vehicular circulation, and safety.
TRUCK CIRCULATION
CE GOAL 4: Create a truck circulation system that provides effective transport of
commodities while minimizing negative impacts throughout the City.
        CE Policy 4. 1: Maintain primary truck routes on selected arterial streets to discourage the flow of
        truck traffic through residential areas.
        CE PolicY4. 2: Provide appropriately designed and maintained roadwaysfor primarytruck routes.
        CE Policy 4. 3:    Provide loading areas and access routes designed to avoid conflicts with non-
        commercial traffic.
 December 2011                                                                                        Page 3 -6
                                                                                                              L p(
                                                                                                                   RM
  Circulation Element
                                                                                                       2030
        CE Policy 4. 4:   Maintain specific truck routes for the safe and expeditious transport of hazardous
        materials, consistent with the City' s emergency operations plan.
PUBLIC TRANSPORTATION
CE GOAL 5: Encourage alternative forms of transportation to private automobiles that
meet the needs of all City residents by providing improved access to transit
connections to employment and other activity centers.
        CE Policy 5. 1: Coordinate with NCTD to continue to expand local rail and bus service to and within
        Vista. Particular emphasis should be placed on improving access to transit within the downtown
        core and high density residential areas to achieve the regionally accepted Smart Growth principles.
        CE Policy 5. 2:   Support the efforts of SANDAG and NCTD to double -track the SPRINTER line and
        allow for grade separation projects at major intersections in the City.
        CE Policy 5. 3:    Encourage NCTD to properly mitigate the noise and traffic circulation impacts
        associated with future expansion of transit service.
        CE Policy 5. 4:    Require construction of bus turnouts with shelters adjacent to new development
        where transit demand warrants such improvements.
        CE Policy 5. 5:   Coordinate with SANDAG to maintain the current Park and Ride facility and add
        additional facilities if the demand warrants.
        CE Policy 5. 6:     Coordinate with NCTD to maintain and upgrade transit stops to provide safe,
        attractive, and clearly identifiable stops throughout the community.
        CE Policy 5. 7: Ensure all roadway improvements are consistent with existing and planned Caltrans
        and NCTD facilities.
BICYCLE AND PEDESTRIAN FACILITIES
CE GOAL 6:          Develop an efficient bicycle and pedestrian circulation system that
improves      access     and      linkages   in  a   manner that      is  human -scaled,     bicycle-   and
pedestrian- oriented,         and     transit -accessible,  encourages use of these facilities for
recreation, and provides alternatives to the personal automobile.
 December 2011                                                                                       Page 3 -7
                                                                                                                 Pz11+
 Circulation Element
                                                                                                          200
       CE Policy 6. 3.:    Implement the bicycle plan and pedestrian plan improvements identified in this
       Circulation Element according to their identified priorities.
       CE Policy 6. 2:       Require   proposed    development to
       provide bike facilities within the right -of -way for Class II
       bikeways in the project vicinity on all arterial roadways
       where deemed appropriate.          Where Class II bikeways
       are not feasible, require Class III      bike routes to be
       provided as a temporary measure.
       CE Policy 6. 3: Require proposed developments, where
       feasible, to dedicate easements for Class I bikeways or
       hiking trails in the project vicinity where deemed
       appropriate.
       CE Policy 6. 4:       Require  proposed    developments to
       install sidewalks and wheelchair ramps that comply with Americans with Disabilities Act ( ADA)
       standards adjacent to all roadways within each development.
       CE Policy 6. 5:    Establish minimum design criteria for pedestrian circulation.   These design criteria
       may distinguish between urban and rural conditions.
       CE Policy 6. 6: Construct sidewalks and retrofit traffic signal light standards to include pedestrian
       crossing buttons, when feasible, on all primary and major roadways.
       CE Policy 6. 7: Require developers to provide facilities for pedestrian travel such as sidewalks, design
       developments to provide pedestrian access to the development via sidewalks, and avoid requiring
       that pedestrians use driveways to access development
       CE Policy 6. 8:      Design and retrofit bicycle facilities in accordance with the design standards
       identified in the City' s Bicycle Master Plan.
       CE Policy 6. 9: Retrofit light standards to include bicycle crossing buttons and, where feasible, use
       bicycle- sensitive traffic signal loop activation systems.
       CE Policy 6. 3.o: Prohibit motorcycles and other motorized vehicles from using the bicycle and trail
       system.
       CE Policy 6. 3.3.:   Establish and /or retain a street maintenance schedule for regular sweeping of
       streets, including bike lanes and multi -use paths.
December 2011                                                                                          Page 3 -8
                                                                                                                       L p(
                                                                                                                            RM
 Circulation Element
                                                                                                                2030
       CE Policy 6. 3.2:    Require developers and public agencies to install bicycle racks and other bicycle
       amenities where appropriate.
       CE Policy 6. 3.3: Enhance the City' s Safe Routes
       to School Program and support local school
       district efforts that improve walking and
       bicycling routes.       Seek   State  and   regional
       funding to construct improvements identified
       in  the    program     and   conduct    educational
       programs for Vista' s schools.
       CE Policy 6. 3.4:    Maintain and expand, where
       possible and appropriate, the system of non -
       motorized          connections        that       link
       neighborhoods to larger roadways, activity
       centers    and    nodes,   businesses, community
                                                                          Hiking trail along Buena Vista Creek
       services,   parks and     recreational facilities, and
       transit stops and stations.
       CE Policy 6. 3.5:   Coordinate with surrounding jurisdictions to ensure that trails, sidewalks, bikeways,
       and other non -motorized facilities connect to like facilities within those jurisdictions. Adjustments
       to  alignment,      width,  designation,   or design may be made to create appropriate regional
       connections.
       CE Policy 6. 3.6:    Utilize a wayfinding program and implement bicycle and trail facilities to link
       amenities that Vistans identify as important landmarks of community identity, including Rancho
       Guajome, the Moonlight Amphitheater, the Avo Theater, Rancho Minerva, Rancho Buena Vista, the
       Thibodo Ranch House, the Santa Fe Depot, the Antique Gas and Steam Engine Museum, Civic
       Center, Library, and Wave Waterpark.
       CE Policy 6. 3.7: Provide flexibility in the design of trail improvements to accommodate a wide range
       of users while considering the existing environmental conditions and community character within
       the trail corridor.
       CE Policy 6. 3.8: Complete breaks in sidewalks and non -motorized paths where they are missing,
       especially along commercial corridors and routes to schools. Prioritization shall be given to such
       connections in development of the Capital Improvement Program ( CIP).
December 2011                                                                                                 Page 3- 9
                                                                                                       aERAL
                                                                                                     Cf'        Pz11+
  Circulation Element
                                                                                                        200
        CE Policy 6. 3. 9:   Seek opportunities to provide connections between activity centers along
        easements and other areas where vehicles are not permitted.
        CE Policy 6. 20: Provide safe and adequate crossing facilities that minimize pedestrian exposure to
        vehicular traffic, such as curb extensions or refuge islands, wherever feasible.
        CE Policy 6. 23.: Enhance the walking environment and encourage pedestrian activity by providing a
        landscaped buffer, when feasible, between the edge of the travel way and sidewalk.
        CE Policy 6. 22: Use Planning and Designing for Pedestrians, Model Guidelines for the San Diego
        Region, ( June 2002, prepared for SANDAL) and Designing for Smart Growth —Creating Great Places
        in the San Diego Region ( June 2009, prepared for SANDAL) as references for designing public and
        private infrastructure and development that is pedestrian -friendly and improves access to transit.
        CE Policy 6. 23: Establish performance standards with measurable outcomes to assess safety,
        functionality, and use of the circulation system by multiple roadway users. Standards should be
        developed to address the following:
                 Mode shift from single- occupant vehicles to walking or biking
                 Reduction in the number of injuries and fatalities to bicyclists and pedestrians
                 Reduction in the number of vehicle miles traveled per capita
                 Increase in the number of streets with sidewalks, low design speeds, tree canopy, and street
                 furnishings
                 Increase in miles of bicycle lanes or other bikeway facilities
                 Increase in miles of sidewalks or other pedestrian facilities
SCENIC ROADWAYS                   SEMI -RURAL ROADS)
CE GOAL 7: Preserve and enhance the identity and character of Vista along the City' s
roadways.
        CE Policy 7. 3.:   Maintain the existing width of semi -rural roadways where feasible, but provide
        improvements to the right -of -way that would allow for safe pedestrian and bicycle travel.
        Pedestrian walkways should be constructed of materials appropriate to the surrounding area to help
        retain the existing character.
 December 2011                                                                                       Page 3 -10

                                                                                                             aERA L p(
                                                                                                          Cf'          RM
  Circulation Element
                                                                                                             2030
         CE Policy 7. 2:   Revise the City' s adopted Semi -Rural
         Street standard as necessary to allow for bicycle and
         pedestrian facilities as identified on the bicycle plan
          Figure CE -4), pedestrian plan ( Figure CE -5), and trails
         plan ( Figure CE -6).
         CE Policy 7. 3:  When planning capital improvements,
         consider the character of semi -rural roadways. Utilize
         the Semi -Rural Street Standard as applicable.
         CE Policy 7. 4:    Where possible, provide landscaped
         medians,    street    trees, and /or  landscaped   buffers
         along sidewalks to improve the appearance of the
         public rights -of -way. As necessary, existing trees should be removed and replaced.
CE GOAL 8:          Provide an adequate supply of well- designed and convenient parking
facilities that meet the demands of the surrounding land uses and enhance the
character of the community.
         CE Policy 8. 3.: Require developers to provide sufficient parking for proposed development on site.
         In downtown environments, encourage a combination of on- and offsite parking to meet parking
         needs and support community character.
         CE Policy 8. 2: Periodically update City code requirements based on the latest parking demand data
         sources.
         CE Policy 8. 3: Consolidate parking, where appropriate, to reduce the number of ingress and egress
         points onto arterials.
         CE Policy 8. 4: Encourage the shared use of parking where appropriate.
         CE Policy 8. 5: Exercise flexibility in the application of parking standards to support transit -oriented
         development.
 December 2011                                                                                            Page 3 -11
                                                                                                               aERA L p(
                                                                                                             Cf'         RM
   Circulation Element
                                                                                                                2030
DESIGN
CE Goal 9: Enhance Vista' s community identity and unique character by strengthening
the streetscape environment through conscientious attention to design considerations
along scenic roadways, gateways, corridors, and at focal intersections.
           CE Policy 9. 3.:  Implement distinctive treatments, such as water -wise landscaping, hardscape,
           signage, and public art, for gateways at all entry points into Vista, along key corridors, at focal
           intersections, semi -rural roads, and at public entries to important cultural and historic sites.
           CE Policy 9. 2:  Consider adopting fencing standards that provide continuity of appearance along
           semi -rural roadways.
           CE Policy 9. 3: Work with Caltrans and SANDAG to design and install native and /or drought -tolerant
           landscaping, fencing /walls, and signage for SR -78 that reflects Vista' s identity and character and
           helps to mitigate sound from the freeway upon adjacent uses.
CIRCULATION SYSTEM
The Circulation System within Vista has several components ranging from regional facilities, such as
freeways, to collector and local residential streets, bicycle and pedestrian paths and trails, and transit
facilities. The purpose of classifying roadways within the City' s circulation system is to assess the design,
function, and allowed uses of each roadway.
ROADWAY FACILITY DESIGNATIONS
The street network in Vista is defined by a classification system that describes the hierarchy of the
roadways. The categories of roadways are differentiated by width, function, and capacity. Figures CE- 3.A
through - iC identify typical mid -block cross -sections for each roadway classification. Cross -sections for
Freeway and Local classifications are not included since these are not Circulation Element roadways. Semi -
rural streets are not included as classified Circulation Element roadways, but they are characterized by the
surrounding neighborhood and community, with a typical width of 46 to 55 feet for rights -of -way ( ROWS)
and typical widths of 28 to 38 feet curb to curb between property lines, and are discussed later in this
Chapter. At some locations, multi -use trails and pedestrian paths are provided along semi -rural streets
instead of sidewalks to maintain the semi -rural character of the area.
  December 2011                                                                                              Page 3 -12
                                                                                      cL
      R/ W                                                                              I                                                                                R/ W
                                                                                  126'
                                                                                          T
                                                                                          o ,'
             10'         8'          12'           12'             12'                18'                  12'           12'            12'       L   8'    1
                                                                                                                                                                    10'
          PARKWAY SWULDER1         TRAVEL     I  TRAVEL    I   TRAVEL       I      RAISED         1    TRAVEL    1    TRAVEL    1    TRAVEL ]      SHOULDER PARKWAY
                                    LANE          LANE           LANE              MEDIAN               LANE            LANE           LANE
                                                                                     106'
                                                         6    LANE PRIME ARTERIAL
                                                                      RAISED MEDIAN)
0
NN
O
NF
0X
w                                                                                     CL
U
                 R/ W                                                                                                                                        R/ 10
J                                                                                 1101I
z
O
c
a
oz
a
                                                       11'             12'            1 Y'             12'           11'           11'       L 6'        8'
                    PARKWA  SHOULD     TRAVEL   1   TRAVEL   1     TRAVEL     1    RAISED      1    TRAVEL     1   TRAVEL    1  TRAVEL      IMLDER PARKWA
o                                        LANE        LANE             LANE         MEDIAN            LANE           LANE          LANE
a
                                                                                      9q,
w
w
0a
Q                                                          6      LANE URBAN MAJOR
a                                                                     RAISED MEDIAN)
z
w
00
NNNOO
QF
0O
rF
U
UFUw
O
a_
wOcD
 D
                                                                                                                                10             0            10             20           30
 z
                                                                                                                                                     SCALE:   1"=  20'
 Y
                                                                                                                                                                  FigureFigure CECE- - 1A1A
                                                               66- - lanelane PrimePrime ArterialArterial andand 66- - lanelane UrbanUrban MajorMajor CrossCross     -    - sections sections
This page left intentionally blank
                                                                    GL
      R/ W
                                                               100'   I                                                                   R/ W
                                      12'         12'               16'                  12'            12'         8'             10'
          PARKWAY SHOULDEXI       TRAVEL  1     TRAVEL   1       RAISED            1  TRAVEL      1 TRAVEL     JMLDER PARKWAY
                                    LANE         LANE            MEDIAN                 LANE          LANE
                                                                    80'
                                                   4     LANE             MAJOR
                                                   RAISED               MEDIAN)
                                                                    GL
           R/ W                                                       I                                                              R/ W
                                                                9q,
0
NF
                                      S'    12'            12'                 12'            12'     L S' L 8'             1 o'
               PARKWAY    PARKING BIKEI   TRAVEL      1  TRAVEL      1    TRAVEL       1    TRAVEL   1 BIKE PARKING      PARKWAY
C0                                 LANE    LANE           LANE               LANE            LANE      LANE
w
U
                                                                    1q,
J
ZO
c
a
0                                           4      LANE           COLLECTOR
                                          BIKE          LANE &                   PARKING)
UODa
w
w
i                                                                   CL
0
az               R/ W                                                                                                      R/ W
                                                                8q    i
Ja
cU
o
NN
0                       10'        8'       12'            12'                 12'            12'           8'       10'
i                    PARKWAY ' SHOOLDFR1  TRAVEL      1  TRAVEL      1    TRAVEL       1    TRAVEL   JSHOULDFR PARKWAY
U)                                         LANE           LANE               LANE            LANE
                                                                    69
0
r
U
UUF
 0                                          4      LANE           COLLECTOR
 a_
 O0w_
                                                                                                                 10              0             10             20            30
 z
                                                                                                                                        SCALE:   1 " = 20'
 Y
                                                                                                                                                        FigureFigure CECE - - 11 BB
                                                                        44- - lanelane MajorMajor andand 44- - lanelane CollectorCollector CrossCross      -     - sectionssections
This page left intentionally blank
                                                                                          GL
R/ W                                                                                                                                                                             R/ W
                                                                                  80
       10'
                     LPARKINGI
                             8' BIKE        S'                 IT                         IT                    12'                     5'             8'        L         10'
    PARKWAY                                      I        TRAVEL             1 TWO -WAY I                  TRAVEL                  1 BIKE 1 PARKING                  PARKWAY
                    I                  LANE                  LANE                     LEFT                    LANE                   LANE
                                                                                TORNTORN LANELANE
                                                                                         60'60'
                                               22 LANELANE COLLECTORCOLLECTOR
                             TWOTWO  - - WAYWAY LEFTLEFT TURNTURN LANE)LANE)
                                      BIKEBIKE LANELANE                      & &                        PARKING)PARKING)
                                                                                          GLGL
      R/R/ WW                                                                                                                                                            R/R/ WW
                                                                                  70,70,
                  10'10'               8'8'
             PARKWAYPARKWAY SHOULDEMSHOULDEM
                                                  LL           ITIT
                                                          TRAVELTRAVEL
                                                                                          10'10'
                                                                             11 TWO-TWO- WAY1WAY1
                                                                                                                12'12'
                                                                                                            TRAVELTRAVEL
                                                                                                                                           8'8'               10'10'
                                                                                                                                   1SHOOUER1SHOOUER PARKWAYPARKWAY
                                                             LANELANE                 LEFTLEFT                LANELANE
                                                                                TURNTURN LANELANE
                                                                                         50'50'
                                               22 LANELANE COLLECTORCOLLECTOR
                             TWOTWO  - - WAYWAY LEFTLEFT TURNTURN LANE)LANE)
                                                                                          GLGL
                 R/R/ WW                                                                                                                                   R/R/ WW
                                                                                  60'60'
                              10'10'                8'8'                  ITIT                       ITIT                     8'8'                 10'10'
                         PARKWAYPARKWAY     SHOOLDE SHOOLDE           TRAVELTRAVEL               TRAVELTRAVEL          SHOULDSHOULD           PARKWAYPARKWAY
                                                                        LANELANE                   LANELANE
                                                                                         ii
                               22         LANELANE                    LIGHTLIGHT                     COLLECTORCOLLECTOR
                                                                                                                                                                       1010           99              toto                 ZOZO            soso
                                                                                                                                                                                         SCALE:SCALE:     1"=1"=  20'20'
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 FigureFigure CECE      - - 1C1C
                                                       22- - lanelane CollectorCollector andand 22- - lanelane LightLight CollectorCollector CrossCross                                                                  -      - sectionsection
This page left intentionally blank
                                                                                                                 L p(
                                                                                                                      RM
  Circulation Element
                                                                                                         Y.
                                                                                                           2030
    Freeway:                       Provides regional, subregional, and intra -city access. Freeways such as
                                   SR -78 contain six lanes, with an estimated capacity of 3.4, 400 passenger
                                   cars per hour.
    Prime Arterial:                A 6 -lane divided roadway with a typical ROW width of 3. 26 feet and curb -
                                   to -curb width of 3.o6 feet. On- street parking shall not be allowed on
                                   Prime Arterials. Bicycle lanes or routes shall be provided within the
                                   shoulder on Prime Arterials. Sidewalks shall be provided within the
                                   parkway. Raised medians may be installed with orwithout landscaping.
    Urban Major:                   A 6 -lane divided roadway with a typical ROW width of 3.3.o feet and curb -
                                   to -curb width of 94 feet. On- street parking shall not be allowed on
                                   Urban Major Arterials. Bicycle lanes or routes shall be provided within
                                   the shoulder on Urban Majors. Sidewalks shall be provided within the
                                   parkway. Raised medians may be installed with orwithout landscaping.
    Major:                         A 4 -lane divided roadway with a typical ROW width of 3.00 feet and curb -
                                   to -curb width of 8o feet. On- street parking shall not be allowed on
                                   Major Arterials. Bicycle lanes or routes shall be provided on Major
                                   roadways. Sidewalks shall be provided within the parkway. Raised
                                   medians may be installed with orwithout landscaping.
    4 -Lane Collector:             An undivided roadway with a typical ROW width ranging from 84 to 94
                                   feet and curb -to -curb width ranging from 64 to 74 feet. Parking and /or
                                   bicycle lanes may be provided on 4 -Lane Collectors. Sidewalks shall be
                                   provided within the parkway.
    2- Lane Collector:             A divided roadway with a shared center left -turn lane and a typical ROW
                                   width ranging from 70 to 8o feet and curb -to -curb width ranging from 50
                                   to 6o feet. Parking and /or bicycle lanes may be provided on 2 - Lane
                                   Collectors. Sidewalks shall be provided within the parkway.
    2- Lane Light Collector:       A 2 -lane roadway with a typical ROW width of 6o feet and curb -to -curb
                                   width of 40 feet. A minimum eight -foot shoulder shall be provided that
                                   may serve as a parking lane, bicycle lane, or shoulder. Sidewalks shall be
                                   provided within the parkway.
PERFORMANCE CRITERIA
Each roadway classification is part of a citywide street network that provides mobility choices to Vistans.
Evaluating whether the roadways are meeting demand, and promoting a balanced transportation system
 December 2011                                                                                         Page 3 -13
                                                                                                                 L p(
                                                                                                                      RM
   Circulation Element
                                                                                                         Y.
                                                                                                          2030
requires establishing suitable performance criteria.      This criteria provides a means to quantify how the
circulation system accommodates existing and future traffic volumes, and meets the safety needs of non -
motorized users such as pedestrians, transit users, and bicyclists.
Each roadway classification has a design capacity measured in average daily trips (ADT) for vehicles. ADT
represents the level of daily traffic that each roadway type can carry. Level of service ( LOS) is a qualitative
measure that determines how a roadway or intersection operates. LOS is based on operational
characteristics such as traffic volume, capacity, delay, type of traffic control, and other factors. LOS is
expressed through a range from A to F, with LOS A representing free -flowing traffic, and LOS F representing
heavy congestion and delay.
In addition to vehicular LOS, the City shall support the use of emerging technologies, such as multi -modal
level of service analyses, to measure the performance of bicyclists, pedestrians, and transit users in addition
to motorists. Level of Service criteria and target performance measures can be qualitative and quantitative,
including measures of accessibility, connectivity, safety, and security. Development of these methods allow
for a systematic identification of impacts or benefits to alternative modes of transportation, recognizing that
adding alternatives to single- occupant vehicle modes is the way to reduce highway travel demand and
preserve roadway capacity.
The City has established LOS D as the threshold for acceptable operating conditions in designated areas.
Intersections and roadway segments operating at LOS D or better (LOS A, B, or C) are considered to operate
at acceptable levels of service. Intersections and roadway segments operating at LOS E or F are considered
deficient. Table CE -i lists the level of service thresholds for each roadway classification. In support of the
City' s goal of providing multiple transportation options, when a traffic analysis indicates that the LOS for a
street or intersection reaches " D" or below, the City will determine what improvements or operational
changes are needed to maintain or improve LOS while balancing alternative transportation needs. The City
will either require such improvements by the project applicant, or identify potential funding and
prioritization for any necessary improvements through the Capital Improvement Program ( CIP).
  December 2011                                                                                        Page 3 -14
                                                                                                                                          ER A L pL. q'(,
                                                                                                                                       VI        TA
    Circulation Element
                                                                                                                                        2030
Table CE -1. Circulation Element Roadway Classifications - Capacity and Levels of Service
                                                                                               ADT Level of Service
         Roadway
6 - Lane Prime Arterial ( divided)                                      36, 000        42, 000        48, 000           54, 000           6o, 000
6 - Lane Urban Major                                                    30, 000        35, 000        40, 000           45, 000           50, 000
4 -Lane Major Arterial ( divided)                                       24, 000        28, 000        32, 000           36, 000           40, 000
4 -Lane Collector (undivided)                                           15, 000        17, 500        20, 000           22, 500           25, 000
2 - Lane Collector with TWLTL'                                           9, 000        10, 500        12, 000           13, 500           15, 000
2- Lane Collector (divided)                                              5, 28o         6, 16o         7, 040            7, 920           8, 800
2 - Lane Semi- Ruralz                                                                                                                      7, 900
 TWLTL= Two -Way Left -Turn Lane ( striped center median)
2 Semi -Rural Streets - capacities identified are the maximum recommended volumes to maintain this classification. If volumes exceed this
capacity, either a classification modification should be considered or measures should be taken to reduce through traffic.
Intersection levels of service are based on a measurement of delay. Delay is calculated using the 2000
Highway Capacity Manual ( HCM) operations methodology. Table CE -2 summarizes the delay thresholds
established for intersection operations.
Table CE -z: Intersection LOS and Delay Ranges
                                                    DelayDelay
                                                           ( ( secondsseconds vehicle)
     LOS
                    SignalizedSignalized Intersections Intersections       Unsignalized Intersections
Source:  HCM.
  December 2011                                                                                                                    Page 3 -15
                                                                                                                 ER.AIL pL.
                                                                                                                            q' L
   Circulation Element
                                                                                                                2030
CIRCULATION PLAN
Development of the Circulation Plan began with an assessment of the existing circulation system; collection
of traffic count data; and an inventory of bike, pedestrian, and transit facilities. Existing traffic conditions
were modeled to determine where levels of service were acceptable ( LOS D and better) and deficient (LOS E
or F).   Future land uses and forecasted regional traffic were also integrated in the modeling efforts to
determine the future growth, demand, and capacity of the network. Study area intersections were chosen
based on intersecting roadway designations, peak hour traffic volumes, and areas exhibiting high
congestion.
Public workshops were held to collect community concerns and issues with the existing network.
Participants were provided the opportunity to discuss existing deficiencies or missing links in the pedestrian
and bicycling networks, as well as areas of opportunity and improvement.
A draft plan was developed through the process of analyzing existing and future conditions, reviewing
existing facilities and deficiencies, and considering community input.         Each proposed improvement was
examined to determine which improvements would be
feasible    and     appropriate,    and     refinements       were "
incorporated in the final Circulation Plan, illustrated in .,.
Figure CE -2..
The    goal  of the     Circulation    Plan   is  to   maintain   a
minimum LOS D on all roadway segments. To achieve
this   goal,    several    improvements to           the   existing
circulation   system      are  required.       Opportunities     to
improve the roadway network within Vista may arise by
upgrading      the    street   classifications     and    roadway
capacities of roads forecast to operate deficiently,
encouraging        other    modes      of   transportation       by
                                                                      Cycling, Hiking and Trails Visioning Workshop
improving       the    bicycle    network       and     promoting
development around transit and the SPRINTER stations,
and supporting smart growth development.
The Land Use and Community Identity Element of the General Plan includes a discussion on opportunity
areas ( OAs),     which identify locations targeted for revitalization and /or intensification of land use ( see
Chapter 2, "    Land Use and Community Identity Element," for more detailed information). The vision and
policies for each OA emphasize the principles of smart growth, promotion of sustainability, strengthening of
community identity, and creation of physical and social connections for the residents of and visitors to Vista.
Alongside the Circulation Plan' s goal of maintaining a minimum LOS D on all roadway segments, the visions
 December 2011                                                                                               Page 3 -16
                                                                                     r - --
                                                                                                                                               I
                                                                                                                                               I
                                                                                                   Osborne St                                  I
                                                     7J,                                                                                       I
                                                             to Fe A,.                                                                         I
                                                                                                        Barsb                                  I
                                                            I                           Z
                                                                                                                           N
                                                                                                                                               I
                                                                                                                                               I
                                                                                                                                               I
                                                                   W
                                                                          o ier   r
             OCEANSIDE
                                                  r                     w R. p.,    rananea St
                                               Pem
                              a
                           de
                        c'e`                      i
                       ea
                                                                                                                                                                     1
                                                                                                                                                                      1
                                                                                                                                                                        1
                                                                                                                                                           1            1
                                                                         W Oa(                                                        err
                                                                                                                                                            L^            1
                                                    m                                                                            Vale
                                                                                                                                                                           1
                                1 111
                                      Oliv
                   i                                                                                                          m`
                                                                                                                                      J
                                                                                                                                                                             I
                   r m                 VISTA                                                                        lad Pd Q                                               1
                                                                                                                                                                          1
                   IW                              U
                                                                                                                                                                         1
                                                                                                                                                                        1
                                                                                                                                                                      1
                                                                                                                                                                      1
                                                                                                                                                                    1
                                                                                                                                                                   I
                                                                                                                                                 1-            1
                                                                                                                                                               1
                                                                                                                                                 COUNTY OF
                                                                                                                                                 SAN DIEGO     1
                                                                                                                                                                I
                                                                                                                                                                 I
                                                                                                                                                                 I
                                                                                                                                                                 1
                                                                                                                                                                 I
                                                                                                                                                   m             I
                                                                                                                                                                 I
                                                        t •
                                                                       f
                                                                                                                                                  U
                                       a
                                                                                                                                                  m\
                                                                                                                                                 m\
                                                                                                                                                                                I
                                                                                                                                                                               I
                                                                                                                                                                               1
                                      iU
                                  i       OCEANSIDE
City Boundary
City Sphere of Influence                                       CARLSBAD
                                                                                 0.
6 -Lane Prime Arterial
                                                                                                   o *
6 -Lane Urban Major
4 Lane Major                                                                                       a
                                                                                                                               i          /
                                                                                                                                    SAN MARCOS                            N
4 -Lane Collector
2 -Lane Collector (w/ Two -Way Left -Turn Lane)                                             Park
2 -Lane Light Collector                                                                                           e
                                                                                                                           I/
Semi -Rural Street                                                                                       uons\ .
                                                                                                                           I.
                                                                                                                           J
Future Road Extension or Realignment
                                                                                                 Palomar W Pon Rd
                                                                                                                                                        Figure CE -2
                                                                                                                                                 Circulation Plan

This page left intentionally blank
                                                                                                                 Pz11+
                                                                                                         Y31k
   Circulation Element
                                                                                                         2030
and goals and policies identified in the Land Use and Community Identity Element should be considered
concurrently. This will ensure that roadway improvements that achieve acceptable levels of service also
consider impacts on the existing or intended character of the surrounding area and on all users.            For
instance, widening a roadway provides additional capacity for vehicular travel thus improving LOS and
reducing delays. However, the need for additional right -of -way may affect pedestrians by increasing the
crossing distance and also may affect the relationship of existing buildings to the street. In such cases,
features that improve the walking environment, such as curb extensions, marked crosswalks, or pedestrian
refuge islands may be beneficial; and implications to the existing built environment should be considered.
Therefore, whenever major improvements to the circulation system are proposed, the impact on adjacent
development should be considered and all options should be explored to maximize the efficiency of the
roadwaywhile protecting land uses, pedestrian and bicycle facilities, and the aesthetics of the roadway.
HORIZON YEAR 2030 CIRCULATION SYSTEM
Horizon Year 2030 traffic conditions were evaluated based on forecast volumes calculated by SANDAG
Series ii North San Diego County subarea traffic model.            The model was refined to reflect Circulation
Element Roadway Classifications and planned land use changes through 2030.
The forecast year 2030 peak hour intersection levels of service are summarized in Table CE -3. The majority
of intersections are forecast to operate at acceptable levels of service.      The following intersections are
forecast to operate at deficient levels of service ( LOS E or F) by year 2030:
         Emerald Drive / Olive Avenue ( a. m. peak)
         Emerald Drive / Hacienda Drive ( p. m. peak)
         North Melrose Drive / Olive Avenue ( a. m. and p. m. peak)
         Civic Center Drive / Eucalyptus Avenue ( p. m. peak)
         Civic Center Drive / South Santa Fe Avenue ( p. m. peak)
         Mar Vista Drive / Thibodo Road ( a. m. and p. m. peak)
         South Melrose Drive / Sunset Drive ( a. m. peak)
         South Melrose Drive / Live Oal< Road —   Longhorn Drive ( a. m. peak)
         South Melrose Drive / Sycamore Avenue ( a. m. peak)
         South Melrose Drive / Park Center Drive ( a. m. peak)
         Sycamore Avenue / Hibiscus Avenue ( p. m. peak)
         Sycamore Avenue / La Mirada Drive ( p. m. peak)
 December 2011                                                                                        Page 3 -17

                                                                                                              ER A L pL. q'(,
                                                                                                           VI            TA
    Circulation Element
                                                                                                           2030
Horizon Year 203o daily roadway traffic volumes are illustrated in Figure CE -3. Horizon Year 203o roadway
segment levels of service are summarized in Table CE -4. While the majority of roadway segments are
forecast to operate at acceptable levels of service, the following roadway segments are forecast to operate
at deficient levels of service ( LOS E or F) in Horizon Year 2030.
      Civic Center Drive:                SR -78 Westbound Ramps to East Vista Way
      Emerald Drive:                     Olive Avenue to West Drive
Table CE -3. Horizon Year 2030 Conditions -                  Peak Hour Intersection Levels of Service
                                                                                  AM                PM
                                 Intersection
                                                                          Delay      LOS
                                                                                          m          omm
1           Emerald Drive / Olive Avenue                                   76. 6      E       53. 3          D
z
            Emerald Drive / Vista Way                                      42. 6      D       48. 5          D
3           Emerald Drive / SR -78 WB Ramps                                 29. 4     C       29. 1          C
4           Emerald Drive / SR -78 EB Ramps                                 30. 0     C       35. 6          D
5           Emerald Drive / Hacienda Drive                                 38. 9      D       59. 3           E
6           N. Melrose Drive / North Avenue                                34. 9      C       33. 2          C
7           N. Melrose Drive / Olive Avenue                                62. 5      E       88. 4           F
8           Melrose Drive / W. Vista Way                                    39. 4     D       41. 2          D
9           S. Melrose Drive / SR -78 EB Off -Ramp                          14. 7     B       15. 4           B
10          S. Melrose Drive / Hacienda Drive                               35. 8     D       37. 8          D
11          S. Melrose Drive / Hacienda Court                               14. 7     B       17. 0           B
12          S. Melrose Drive / County Complex                               1g. 8     B       24. 6          C
13          N. Santa Fe Avenue / Bobier Drive                               28. o     C       31. 4          C
14          N. Santa Fe Avenue / W. Indian Rock Road                        15. 1     B       22. 2          C
1s          N. Santa Fe Avenue / Los Angeles -Townsite Drive                19. 2     B       27. 7          C
16         Vista Village Drive / Santa Fe Avenue                            37. 7     D       40. 8          D
17         Vista Village Drive / Olive Avenue                               19. 1     B       19. 1           B
18         Vista Village Drive / W. Vista Way                               29. 5     C       32. 7          C
  December December 20112011                                                                          PagePage 33- - 1818
                                                                                                    L p(
                                                                                                         RM
   Circulation Element
                                                                                      2030
                                                                   AM          PM
                                Intersection
                                                            Delay
19       Vista Village Drive / SR -78 WB Ramps               30. 0    C  40. 0          D
20       Vista Village Drive / SR -78 EB Ramps               26. 4    C  44. 1          D
21       Vista Village Drive / Hacienda Drive                21. 1    C  30. 0          C
22        S. Santa Fe Avenue / Main Street                   22. 2    C  32. 9          C
23        S. Santa Fe Avenue / Guajome Street                18. o    B  34. 8          C
24       Vista Way / Bobier Drive -   Foothill Drive         33. 2    C  42. 3          D
25       Vista Way / Vale Terrace Drive - Anza Avenue        43. 6    D  36. 3          D
26       Vista Way / Civic Center Drive                      27. 9    C  39. 4          D
27        Civic Center Drive / Eucalyptus Avenue             28. 4    C  87. 3           F
28        Civic Center Drive / S. Santa Fe Avenue            37. 3    D 110. 9           F
29        Civic Center Drive / SR -78 WB Ramps               15. 1    B  28. 2          C
30        Civic Center Drive / SR -78 EB Ramps               14. 3    B  25. 6          C
31        Sunset Drive / Crestview Road                      18. 5    B  15. 3          B
32        S. Santa Fe Avenue / Monte Vista Drive             29. 4    C  37. 7          D
33        S. Santa Fe Avenue / Mar Vista Drive               26. 8    C  30. 1          C
34        Mar Vista Drive/ Thibodo Road'                    167. 4    F 168. 3           F
35        S. Melrose Drive / Sunset Drive                    81. 6    F  37. 9          D
36        S. Melrose Drive / Buena Vista Drive               30. 4    C  28. 6          C
37        S. Melrose Drive / Live Oak Road - Longhorn Drive  59. 1    E  43. 1          D
38        S. Melrose Drive / Shadowridge Drive               48. 2    D  35. 6          D
39        S. Melrose Drive / Sycamore Avenue                132. 5    F  40. 2          D
40        S. Melrose Drive / Park Center Drive              147. 7    F  52. 6          D
41        Sycamore Avenue / SR -78 WB Ramps                  24. 2    C  25. 7          C
42        Sycamore Avenue / SR -78 EB Ramps                  30. 1    C  40. 8          D
43        Sycamore Avenue / Thibodo Road                     22. 6    C  52. 5          D
 DecemberDecember 20112011                                                       PagePage 33- - 1919
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ER A L pL. q'(
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   VI            TA
          Circulation Element
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   2030
                                                                                                                                                                       AM
                                                                                                                                                                                  d
                                                                                                                                          A
                                                                       Intersection
                                                                                                                                                                Delay
    44                  Sycamore Avenue / Shadowridge Drive                                                                                                      18. 3            B              14. 8               B
    45                  Sycamore Avenue / Hibiscus Avenue                                                                                                        23. 2            C              59. 9               E
    46                  Sycamore Avenue/ La Mirada Drive                                                                                                         25. 4            C              58. 6               E
    47                  Sycamore Avenue / Business Park Drive                                                                                                    20. 6            C              35. 2               D
    48                  Business Park Drive / Park Center Drive                                                                                                  17. 1            B              23. 5               C
    49                  Business Park Drive / Poinsettia Avenue                                                                                                  35. 8            D              39. 6               D
    50                  Palomar Airport Road / Business Park Drive                                                                                               25. 2            C              25. 3               C
    IUnsignalized IUnsignalized Intersection;Intersection; DeficientDeficient operating operating conditionsconditions areare shownshown inin boldbol
                                                                                                                                                  . d.
    TableTable CECE- - 4.4. HorizonHorizon YearYear 20302030 ConditionsConditions                                     —             — DailyDaily RoadwayRoadway LevelsLevels ofof ServiceService
                                                                                                                                                       Classification               LOS E
     Location                                                                          Segment                                                                                                          ADT                L•
                                                                                                                                                              Lanes               Capacity
                                                                                                                                                       Primary Arterial /
                                                  Park Center Drive to Sycamore Avenue                                                                                              60, 000            45, 80o               C
                                                                                                                                                           6 -Lane D
                                                                                                                                                       Primary Arterial /
                                                  Sycamore Avenue to Shadowridge Drive                                                                                              60, 000            25, 300               A
                                                                                                                                                           6 -Lane D
S. Melrose Drive
                                                                                                                                                       Primary Arterial /
                                                 Shadowridge Drive to Sunset Drive                                                                                                  60, 000           38, 60o                A
                                                                                                                                                           6 -Lane D
                                                                                                                                                        Urban Major/
                                                  Sunset Drive to SR -78 EB Off -Ramp                                                                                               50, 000           391200                  B
                                                                                                                                                           6 -Lane D
                                                                                                                                                        Urban Major/
                                                 SR -78 EB Off -Ramp to Olive Avenue                                                                                                50, 000            37, 700               C
                                                                                                                                                           6 -Lane D
N. Melrose Drive
                                                                                                                                                        Urban Major/
                                                 Olive Avenue to W. Bobier Drive                                                                                                    50, 000           38, 400                C
                                                                                                                                                           6 -Lane D
       December December 20112011                                                                                                                                                                            PagePage 33- - 2020

                                                                                                               aERA L p(
                                                                                                            Cf'                RM
        Circulation Element
                                                                                                                2030
                                                                         Classification      LOS E
     Location                                    Segment                                              ADT             LOS
                                                                                 Lanes      Capacity
                                                                         Primary Arterial /
                                S. Melrose Drive to Business Park Drive                      6o, 000 46, 600               C
                                                                             6 - Lane D
                                                                         Primary Arterial /
                                Business Park Drive to La Mirada Drive                       6o, 000 39, 400               B
                                                                             6 - Lane D
Sycamore Avenue
                                                                         Primary Arterial /
                                La Mirada Drive to Shadowridge Drive                         6o, 000 40, 100               B
                                                                             6 - Lane D
                                                                         Primary Arterial /
                                Shadowridge Drive to SR -78 EB Ramps                         6o, 000 50, 100               C
                                                                             6 - Lane D
                                                                           Urban Major/
                               W. Vista Way to Santa Fe Avenue                               50, 000 39, 200               C
                                                                             6 - Lane D
Vista Village Drive
                                                                           Urban Major/
                                Santa Fe Avenue to Civic Center Drive                        50, 000
                                                                                                     24, 100               A
                                                                             6 -Lane D
                                                                           Urban Major/
                                Civic Center Drive to Vale Terrace Drive                     50, 000 44, 300               D
                                                                             6 - Lane D
                                                                           Urban Major/
E. Vista Way                   Vale Terrace Drive to Bobier Drive                            50, 000 28, 000               A
                                                                             6 - Lane D
                                                                          Major Arterial /
                                North of Bobier Drive                                        40, 000 31, 200               C
                                                                             4 -Lane D
                                                                            Collector /
                                Emerald Drive to N. Melrose Drive                            25, 000 16, 1oo               B
                                                                              4 -Lane
W. Vista Way
                                                                         Primary Arterial /
                                N. Melrose Drive to Vista Village Drive                      6o, 000 17, 000               A
                                                                             6 - Lane D
                                                                          Major Arterial /
                                N. Melrose Drive to N. Santa Fe Avenue                       40, 000 28, 400               C
                                                                             4 -Lane D
Bobier Drive
                                                                          Major Arterial /
                                N. Santa Fe Avenue to E. Vista Way                           40, 000 21, 600               A
                                                                             4 -Lane D
      DecemberDecember 20112011                                                                            PagePage 33- - 2121
                                                                                                                    ER A L pL. q'(
                                                                                                                 VI            TA
        Circulation Element
                                                                                                                  2030
     Location
                                                                                   Lanes    Capacity
N. Santa Fe                                                                Major Arterial /
                                 Bobier Drive to Vista Village Drive                         40, 000 25, 600                B
Avenue                                                                       4 -1- ane D
                                                                           Major Arterial /
S. Santa Fe Avenue              Vista Village Drive to Civic Center Drive                    40, 000 32, 900                D
                                                                             4 -Lane D
                                                                           Major Arterial /
                                 Melrose to Crestview                                        40, 000 13, 900                C
                                                                             44- - Lane
                                                                                   L    D
Branding Iron Drive
                                                                           Major Arterial /
                                 Crestview Rd to SR -78 WB Ramps                             40, 000 321000                 C
                                                                             4 -Lane D
                                                                           Urban Major/
                                 SR -78 WB Ramps to S. Santa Fe Avenue                       501000  47, 60o                E
                                                                             6 -Lane D
Civic Center Drive'
                                                                           Major Arterial /
                                S. Santa Fe Avenue to E. Vista Way                           40, 000 36, 3. 00              E
                                                                             4 -Lane D
                                                                             Collector /
                                 Emerald Drive to S. Melrose Drive                           25, 000  91900                 A
                                                                                4 -Lane
Hacienda Drive
                                                                             Collector /
                                 S. Melrose Drive to Vista Village Drive                     25, 000 19, 200                C
                                                                                4 -Lane
                                                                             Collector /
                                Olive Avenue to West Drive                                   25, 000 24, 500                E
                                                                                4 -Lane
Emerald Drive
                                                                           Major Arterial /
                                West Drive to Hacienda Drive                                 40, 000 30, 600                C
                                                                             4 -Lane D
                                                                             Collector /
                                Sycamore Avenue to Park Center Drive                         25, 000 20, 500                D
                                                                                4 -Lane
                                                                             Collector
Business Park Drive              Park Center Drive to Poinsettia Avenue                      25, 000 18, 000                C
                                                                                4 -Lane
                                                                             Collector /
                                 Poinsettia Avenue to Palomar Airport Road                   25, 000 21, 900                D
                                                                                4 -Lane
      December December 20112011                                                                            PagePage 33- - 2222
                                                                                                                                                                                  ER A L pL. q'(,
                                                                                                                                                                               VI           TA
            Circulation Element
                                                                                                                                                                                2030
      Location
                                                                                                                                                 Lanes    Capacity
                                                                                                                                             Collector /
La Mirada Drive                                Sycamore Avenue to Poinsettia Avenue                                                                        1-5, 000 12, 700              D
                                                                                                                                        2 - Lane w /TWLTL
                                                                                                                                             Collector /
Shadowridge Drive                              S. Melrose Drive to Sycamore Avenue                                                                         25, 000  12, 80o              A
                                                                                                                                               4 -Lane
                                                                                                                                            Semi -Rural /
                                               S. Melrose Drive to Buena Vista Drive                                                                        7, 100   1-,900              A
                                                                                                                                               2 - Lane
Sunset Drive
                                                                                                                                            Semi -Rural /
                                               Buena Vista Drive to Civic Center Drive                                                                      7, 1-00  2, 60o              A
                                                                                                                                               2 -Lane
                                                                                                                                             Collector /
                                               Mar Vista Drive to Chaparral Drive                                                                          15, 000   7, 400              A
                                                                                                                                        2 - Lane w /TWLTL
Thibodo Road
                                                                                                                                             Collector /
                                               Chaparral Drive to Sycamore Avenue                                                                          15, 000   91000               A
                                                                                                                                        2 - Lane w /TWLTL
                                                                                                                                             Collector /
                                               Emerald Drive to N. Melrose Drive                                                                           25, 000  13, 900              A
                                                                                                                                               4 -Lane
                                                                                                                                             Collector /
Olive Avenue                                   N. Melrose Drive to Plymouth Drive                                                                          25, 000  18, 700              C
                                                                                                                                               4 -Lane
                                                                                                                                             Collector /
                                               Plymouth Drive to Vista Village Drive                                                                       15, 000  10, 900              C
                                                                                                                                        2 - Lane w /TWLTL
                                                                                                                                             Collector /
                                               S. Santa Fe Avenue to Cypress Road                                                                          15, 000  13, 500              D
                                                                                                                                        2 —Lane w /TWLTL
Monte Vista Drive
                                                                                                                                             Collector /
                                               Cypress Road to York Drive                                                                                  15, 000   6, 300              A
                                                                                                                                        2 - Lane w /TWLTL
     Notes:Notes: DD= =    Divided,Divided, UDUD
                                              = = Undivided,Undivided, TWLTL=TWLTL= TwoTwo      - - WayWay LeftLeft
                                                                                                                - - TurnTurn Lane.Lane.
     DeficientDeficient operatingoperating conditions conditions areare shownshown inin bold.bold.
       CivicCivic CenterCenter DriveDrive formerlyformerly EscondidoEscondido AvenueAvenue
       December December 20112011                                                                                                                                         PagePage 3-3- 2323

                                                                                                            ER A L pL. q'(,
  Circulation Element
                                                                                                         I
                                                                                                         r
                                                                                                           V TA
                                                                                                           2030
FUTURE ROADWAY EXTENSIONS OR REALIGNMENTS
The Circulation Plan identifies the following proposed roadway extensions and /or realignments to be
accomplished during the planning period. These proposed improvements are described below:
         Branding Iron Drive —This street segment, formerly named Escondido Avenue, would extend
        between South Melrose Drive and the SR -78 interchange at Civic Center Drive. A portion of this
        roadway is currently built, with an approximate 2, 400- linear foot section remaining to be
        constructed to form the connection. This roadway is designated as a Two -Lane Collector with a
        center left turn lane, which requires a 70400t wide right -of -way. The existing portion of Branding
        Iron Drive serves residential properties within the Carriage Hills neighborhood and surrounding
        areas.
        East Taylor Street —This street segment would create an east -west connection between the eastern
        end of E. Taylor Street (east of E. Vista Way) and Warmlands Avenue. E. Taylor Street currently
        extends approximately 2, 000 linear feet east of E. Vista Way, and an additional 1, 5oo linear feet of
        roadway must be constructed to form the connection at Warmlands Avenue. This roadway is
        designated as a Two -Lane Collector with a center left turn lane, which requires a 70- foot wide right -
        of -way. The existing portion of Taylor Street serves commercial and residential properties,
        providing access to Arcadia Avenue and E. Vista Way.
        Anza Avenue —This street segment would extend between the northern end of Anza Avenue and W.
        Taylor street, creating a north -south connection between neighborhoods served by W. Taylor Street
        and Bobier Drive /Anza Avenue. Anza Avenue currently extends approximately 65o linear feet north
        of Arcadia Avenue, and an additional 65o linear feet must be constructed to form the connection at
        W. Taylor Street. This roadway is designated as a Two -Lane Light Collector, which requires a 6o-
        foot wide right -of -way.
        Olive Avenue Overpass —This street segment would connect Olive Avenue overthe NCTD railwayto
        Orange Avenue and N. Santa Fe Avenue. Due to congestion at the existing rail crossing in the area
        of Olive Avenue /Vista Village Drive /Santa Fe Avenue, an alternative traffic route is recommended
        that would connect Olive Avenue to N. Santa Fe Avenue via a railroad overpass. This roadway is
        designated as a Two -Lane Collector with a center left turn lane, which requires a 70400t wide right -
        of -way.
        Guajome /Lado de Loma —Guajome         Street and Lado de Loma Drive currently extend through
        residential and commercial areas, serving as an alternate route between Vista Village Drive and S.
        Santa Fe Avenue. The existing streets follow a circuitous route, which is largely unimproved and
        includes substandard curves. The planned connection would include realigning and improving these
        roadways to meet accepted engineering standards.
 December 2011                                                                                         Page 3- 24

                                                                                                 r - -- - - - - - - - - - - - - -
                                                                                                                                                                                                     I
                                                                                                                           Osborne St                                                                 I
                                                                    Fe Ave ^                                                                                                                         I
                                                 o                                                                                  Barsby St                                                        I
            a
                                                 m •
                                                                I =                                                                                                    f `                           I
                                                                                                                                                                                     h               I
                                                 z >
                                                                                                                                                                                                     I
           O
                                                                                                                        Taylor St r                                                                  I
                                                                                                                                      r ••
                                                                                                                                          r a i      e
                                                                  6"*
                                                                         N,400                               21, 600
                                                                                 Bobier Or \
                   OCEANSIDE                                                                                                                             31, 200                          m
                                a
                                                  Pie•
                                                                                                                                                                                            EP \
                                                                                                                                           v
                                                                                               N                                                      28, 000 \\
                                                       i                         Angeles D z ,                                                                                 Foethill Or ••.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               1
                                                            a `° •'"•
                                                                       3      00
                                                                                  25,600
                                                                                                                                                                                                                I  i             1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  1
                                                                                                           G         o<             44, 300
                                                           ac
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      t^
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1
                                                         m
                                                                                                                ayt             j                                                ertace
                                L77S Olive Ave
                                                                         18' 7                                e100                       zta     Y                          ae  . ^•
                                            13, 900                           b 01900
                                                           37, 700
                          I_
                                                                                                                                                                  3
                          Iw                                           17, 000           X39,200                 32, 900                                                             Ti                                          i
              o                        16, 100                                                                                       936, 100                                             0
                                                                                                Oualom
                                                                                                                                                                    y0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               1
                 24, 500                                 r
                                                                                                                                                                 a                   e
                                             ace     a
                                                                            019' 200                                                                            v       6' 300 ,
                   West Dr                                                                                                       47,600dOae9`                                            Monte     Vista    Or
                                         9, 900
                                                                            c          32, 000
                                                                                                                                                         13, 500 %                      o
                                                                                                                                                                                        y
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           i
                                                                                                                                                                                                       COUNTY OF
                                                              39, 200 rn                                                                                             t/
                                                                                                                                                                                                       SAN DIEGO ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           1
                                                                                                                                                                      s
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             I
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             I
                                                                                13, 900 • °`                 a`                                                          4
                                                                                                            2, 600
                                                                                                                               Dr `                                                                       a
                                                                                Brandlr9                                                                     f•    j
                                      e \\
                                                                                                                                   4C 0
                                                                                                                                            dine                                                                                       1
                                                                                                               Oak                                          rhib tlo
                                                                                                                                                                 ~•
                                                                                                                                                       ti /
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       1
                                                                                600                                                                              9, 0G
                                           o° ,                                                         Z                                                                                w       ,
                                              OCEANSIDE
                                                                       i                                                         to
                                                                                                                                         12, 800
                                                                                 of                                         as  °                                              0, 10
                                                                                                                                                                                L
                                                             i'
                                                                                                                                                                      yb r` r '
                                                                1,                                                                                             40, 100 •
                                                                   t
                                                                                              25, 300
                                                                                                                                                                     a
                                                                                                                                                39,400
                                                                                                                                                                   12, 700
                                                                          I                                                                     20, 500
                                                                                                                         46, 600
                                                                                                                                              ss
                                                                   CARLSBAD ,                                                                      p
                                                                                            I                    45, 800
                                                                                                                                                          18,000 1
       City Boundary                                                                        I•                                                                               SAN MARCOS                                           N
       City Sphere of Influence
                                                                                    av
                                                                                         St•
                                                                              FaYa •• ••• .
                                                                                                          Park Oenr                                                I'
X, XXX Average Daily Traffic
                                                                                                                                                21, 900
       Sprinter Station                                                                                                                                       j
                                                                                                                                              Pd
                                                                                                                                  l"
                                                                                                                       P
                                                                                                                                                                                                               FigureFigure CECE     - - 33
                                                                              HorizonHorizon YearYear 20302030 WithWith ProposedProposed GeneralGeneral PlanPlan                                                    ( ( ADTs)ADTs)

This page left intentionally blank
                                                                                                                   L p(
                                                                                                                        RM
   Circulation Element
                                                                                                             2030
BICYCLE AND PEDESTRIAN CIRCULATION
Vista recognizes that a safe and effective bikeway and pedestrian network enhances the quality of life for
residents, visitors, and employees. As such, the City encourages bicycle and pedestrian travel as forms of
recreation and alternative means of transportation. The City' s major objectives in implementing the bicycle
and pedestrian circulation plans are to create connections between neighborhoods, replace missing links
within the transportation system, enhance safe routes to school, and support development of a well
connected     multi -modal transportation  network.    Future Capital Improvement Program projects will be
prioritized based on these objectives.
Bikeway Plan
Vista has developed a Bikeway Plan that takes into account different types of bicycling needs and habits.
For example, one category of cyclists includes slower recreational riders who travel at lower speeds, such as
families and children.    These riders generally prefer to ride on off -street trails and sidewalks.    A second
category of cyclists includes fitness and recreational riders who generally travel at higher speeds for long
distances.    These riders typically ride on major arterial roadways and on large, regional trails.        A third
category of cyclists includes commuter cyclists who travel at high speeds and prefer to take the most direct
route to their destination.   Generally, these riders travel on major arterial roadways. The City' s goal is to
provide a network of bikeways that accommodates all types of cyclists.
Bikeways are classified according to the location of the facility within the right -of -way.              Bikeway
classifications include:
     Class I Bikeway:             Bike paths provide for bicycle travel on a paved right -of -way completely
                                  separated from vehicular or pedestrian traffic.
     Class 11 Bikeway:            Bike lanes are striped and stenciled onto a vehicular street. Vehicles are
                                  prohibited from entering the bike lane except within zoo feet of making a
                                  right turn.
     Class III Bikeway:           Bike routes provide for shared use with pedestrian or vehicular travel and
                                  are identified only by posted signage. Class III bike routes typically share
                                  the road alongside vehicular traffic.
The City currently has approximately 24 miles of existing Class II bike lanes as detailed in Table CE -5.
 December 2011                                                                                           Page 3- 25
                                                                                                        ER A L pL. q'(,
                                                                                                       VI    TA
   Circulation Element
                                                                                                       2030
Table CE -5. Existing Class II Bike Lanes
hL      Street                    From                          To                Length ( miles)
W. Vista Way             City Limit               Melrose Drive                         2. 15
Vista Village Drive      W. Vista Way             Civic Center Drive                    0. 5
E. Vista Way             Civic Center Drive       Arcadia Avenue                        2. 25
Bobier Drive             City Limit               E. Vista Way                          2. 05
Olive Avenue             Grapevine Road           West of Melrose Drive                 o. 85
N. Santa Fe Avenue       Bobier Drive             Vista Village Drive                   1. 5
S. Santa Fe Avenue       Civic Center Drive       City Limit                            1. 25
Melrose Drive            Oceanside City Limit     Carlsbad City Limit                   6. 15
Sycamore Avenue          S. Melrose Drive         Green Oak Road                        1. 75
Shadowridge Drive        S. Melrose Drive         Sycamore Avenue                       1. 65
Longhorn Drive           Shadowridge Drive        S. Melrose Drive                      0. 5
Live Oak Road            S. Melrose Drive         Shadowridge Drive                     1. 0
Lupine Hills Drive       Live Oak Road            Shadowridge Drive                     2. 45
TOTAL                                                                                  24. 05
Proposed bikeway projects are selected and ranked by priority using several criteria, including:
           Regional connectivity
           Closing gaps in the bikeway network
           Connections with major destinations, such as employment centers, major shopping centers, transit
           centers, parks, recreational facilities, and cultural and historic features
           Completion of the bikeway network
           Availability of street width or right -of -way
 December 2011                                                                                    Page 3 -26
                                                                                                      L p(
                                                                                                           RM
  Circulation Element
                                                                                               2030
         Existing plans the City has to improve and /or widen streets
Table CE -6 identifies the proposed bikeway improvements by priority and ranking. These improvement
projects constitute the Bikeway Plan, which is illustrated in Figure CE -4.
 December 2011                                                                              Page 3 -27
                                                                                                        L p(
                                                                                                             RM
   Circulation Element
                                                                                                  2030
Table CE -6. Priority Bikeway Projects
 Street/ Path                      From
 First Priority
 Business Park Drive               Sycamore Avenue              Poinsettia Avenue
 E. Vista Way                      Taylor Street                City Limit
 Escondido Avenue                  E. Vista Way                 SR -78
 Eucalyptus Avenue                 Civic Center Drive           Beaumont Drive
 Melrose Drive                     Matagual Drive               Hacienda Drive
 Melrose Drive ( SB only)          South of Hacienda Court      North of Las Palmas Drive
 N. Santa Fe Avenue                Oceanside City Limit         Bobier Drive
 North Avenue /Los Angeles Drive /
                                   Oceanside City Limit         E. Vista Way
 Townsite Drive
 Inland Rail Trail                 Oceanside City Limit         Unincorporated San Diego County Limit
                                   Melrose Drive                Vista Village Drive
 Olive Avenue
                                   Bonita Drive                 Melrose Drive
 S. Santa Fe Avenue                Vista Village Drive          Main Street
 Santa Fe Avenue                   Broadway                     Escondido Avenue
 Shadowridge Drive                 Oceanside City Limit         Melrose Drive
                                   North of Green Oak Road      North of Watson Way
 Sycamore Avenue ( SB only)
                                   North of Business Park Drive North of Green Oak Road
 Vale Terrace Drive                E. Vista Way                 Foothill Drive
                                   WB SR -78 Ramp               Vista Village Drive
 W. Vista Way
                                   Melrose Drive                Vista Village Drive
 Second Priority
 Emerald Drive                     W. Vista Way                 Olive Avenue
 Foothill Drive                    E. Vista Way                 City Limit
 Grapevine Road                    W. Vista Way                 Olive Avenue
 December 2011                                                                                Page 3 -28
                                                                                                                 L p(
                                                                                                                      RM
   Circulation Element
                                                                                                          2030
 Street/ Path                             From                              To
  La Mirada Drive                         Sycamore Avenue                   Poinsettia Avenue
                                          Emerald Drive                     Grapevine Road
  Olive Avenue
                                          Melrose Drive                     Vista Village Drive
  Poinsettia Avenue                       City Limit                        La Mirada Drive
 Thibodo Road                             Vista del Mar                     Sycamore Avenue
 Third Priority
  Hacienda Drive                          Oceanside City Limit              Vista Village Drive
  Monte Vista Drive                       S. Santa Fe Avenue                City Limit
 Taylor Street                            N. Santa Fe Avenue                E. Vista Way
Pedestrian Plan
Pedestrian facilities provide access between residential, commercial, and recreational uses within the
community.      These facilities not only provide efficient circulation but also ensure safe access to desired
destinations.
Pedestrian facilities are categorized as either sidewalks or pedestrian paths, and range in width from five to
ten feet.    Pedestrian facilities can vary in material, including concrete asphalt, textured pavement, or
decomposed granite.       Suitable materials depend on the specific location of each facility, surrounding land
uses, and adjacent community character.
Pedestrian facilities shown in Figure CE -5 were ranked based on input from the community, implementation
feasibility, and available right -of -way. Table CE -7 lists future pedestrian facilities by priority.
 December 2011                                                                                         Page 3- 29
                                                                                         L p(
                                                                                              RM
   Circulation Element
                                                                                  2030
Table CE -7. Future Pedestrian Facilities
 Street/ Path                     From                  To
 First Priority
 California Avenue                W. Los Angeles Drive  N. Santa Fe Avenue
 Cedar Road                       W. Vista Way          North City Boundary
  Delpy Ditch                     Bobier Drive          East Vista Way
  E. Vista Way                    Vale Terrace Drive    Northern City Boundary
  Easement                        NSF                   Sports Park
  Elm Drive                       Foothill Drive        Warmlands Avenue
  Emerald Drive                   SR -78                Olive Avenue
 Civic Center Drive               SR -78                S. Santa Fe Avenue
  Eucalyptus Avenue               Citrus Avenue         Beaumont Drive
  Foothill Drive                  Monte Vista Drive     E. Vista Way
 Grapevine Road                   W. Vista Way          Olive Avenue
  N. Santa Fe Avenue              Bobier Drive          Northern City Boundary
  North Avenue                    N. Melrose Drive      Western City Boundary
  North Drive                     N. Melrose Drive      California Avenue
 Olive Avenue                     Emerald Drive         Vista Village Drive
 Townsite Drive                   N. Santa Fe Avenue    E. Vista Way
 Vale Terrace Drive               E. Vista Way          Foothill Drive
 W. Los Angeles Drive             N. Melrose Drive      California Avenue
 W. Vista Way                     Thunder Drive         N. Melrose Drive
 West Drive                       Emerald Drive         Cedar Road
 Second Priority
  Faraday Road /Park Center Drive Western City Boundary Business Park Drive
  Hacienda Drive                  S. Melrose Drive      Emerald Drive
  La Mirada Drive                 Sycamore Avenue       Poinsettia Avenue
 December 2011                                                                 Page 3 -30
                                                                                                                     L p(
                                                                                                                          RM
   Circulation Element
                                                                                                               2030
  Street/ Path                          From                                  To
                                                                                                                 A
  Loop                                  E. Indian Rock Road to W. Indian Rock Road to Woodrall Drive to East Drive
                                        to W. Indian Rock Road
  Maryland Drive                        Olive Avenue                           North Avenue
  Melrose Drive                         Southern City Boundary                 Northern City Boundary
  Poinsettia Avenue                     Business Park Drive                    City Boundary
  Sunset Drive                          SR -78                                 S. Melrose Drive
  Sycamore Avenue                       S. Melrose Drive                       S. Santa Fe Avenue
  Third Priority
  Buena Vista Drive                     Sunset Drive                           S. Melrose Drive
  Business Park Drive                   Sycamore Avenue                        Palomar Airport Road
  Hibiscus / Oleander Avenue            Sycamore Avenue                        Poinsettia Avenue
  Monte Vista Drive                     S. Santa Fe Avenue                     Foothill Drive
  San Clemente Avenue                   Foothill Drive                         Eastern Terminus
  Taylor Street                         N. Santa Fe Avenue                     Warmlands Avenue
  Thibodo Road                          Mar Vista Drive                        Sycamore Avenue
  Warmland Avenue                       Foothill Drive                         Vista Grande
Recreational Trails Plan
Trails provide walking, hiking, and bicycle paths that are used primarily for recreational purposes. Trails are
typically segregated from the roadway and urbanized areas, often to preserve a natural habitat and provide
a quiet public space for meandering and exercise. Trails may be used by pedestrians and bicyclists, but
motorized vehicles are prohibited.
Trails include two main classifications:
     Bike /Pedestrian Trail       Eight- to ten -foot paved or unpaved trail with two -foot shoulders
     Pedestrian Hiking Trail      Five- to eight -foot unpaved trail
 December 2011                                                                                             Page 3 -31
                                                                                                           ER A L pL. q'(,
  Circulation Element
                                                                                                       I
                                                                                                       r
                                                                                                         V TA
                                                                                                         2030
Access to bicycle trails shall be limited and be provided at specific trailhead locations. Trailhead locations
shall be marked with appropriate signage and allow for nearby parking. Table CE -8 lists future trail facilities
by priority. Priorities were ranked by the community. Trail facilities are shown in Figure CE -6.
Table CE -8. Future Recreational Trail Facilities
 First Priority
                                          Eastern City Limit                   Brengle Terrace Park
 Buena Vista Creek                        Brengle Terrace Park                 Wildwood Park
                                          Vista Village Drive                  Western City Limit
 Buena Vista Park Trails                  Internal Park Trails
 Guajome Regional Park to Rail Trail      Guajome Park Rail Trail
 La Mirada Canyon                         South Melrose Drive                  La Mirada Drive
 Oceanside /Escondido Rail Trail          North County Transit District (NCTD)
                                          Shadowridge Plaza                    Green Oak Ranch
 Upper Agua Hedionda
                                          Green Oak Ranch                      Buena Vista Park
 Second Priority
 Catalina Avenue                          Hardell Lane                         Canciones Del Cielo
 Edgehill Road                            Foothill Drive                       City Limit
 Third Priority
 Bub Williamson Park Loop                 Internal Park Loop
 Carlsbad Linkage                         Buena Vista Park west                City Limit
 Dawson Los Monos Canyon Reserve          Reserve                              City Limit
 Green Oak Ranch                          Green Oak Road                       Buena Vista Park
 Monte Vista Drainage Basin               S. Santa Fe Avenue                   Valley Drive
 Thibodo Road                             Mar Vista Drive                      Watson Way
 December 2011                                                                                       Page 3- 32
                                                                             r - --
                                                                                                                         II
                                                                                                                         II
                                                                                                                          I
                                                                                                                         II
                                                                                                                         II
                                                                                                                         II
                                                                                                                         II
                                                                                                                         I
                                                                                              NN                         I
                                                                                                               jj r.r.  II
                                                  I•
                                                          W
                       OCEANSIDE
                                              Pie           u
                                    a
                                 a
                                                                                                                                                              11
                                                                                                                                                                  11
                                                                                                                                                   L^L^
                                                    a
                                                                                                                                                                      11
                                                   m
                                                                                                                                                                         I
                                                  a
                                      VISTA                                                                                                          LL
                                                                                                                                                                     II
                            kw
                                                                                                                                                                  II
                                                                                                                                                                 II
                                                                                                                                                               II
                                                                                                                                                              II
                                                                                                                            tata
                                                                                                                                         DrDr            11
                                                                                                                                                        I
                                                                                                                           COUNTYCOUNTY OFOF
                                                                                                                                                         ll
                                                                                                                           SANSAN DIEGODIEGO              II
                                                                                                                                                           I
                                                                                                                                                           I
                                                                                                                                                           11
                                                                                                                                                            I
                                                                                                                                      YY                    I
                                                  S
                                                                                                                                                            I
                                                                                                                                    UU
                                      e
                                                                                                                                  mm\ \
                                                       C                                                                       roro\ \
                                                                                                                                                                              I
                                                                                                                                                                            11
                                                                                                                                                                            I
                                                                                                                                                                           11
                                            OCEANSIDE
           City Boundary
           City Sphere of Influence
            Future Extension
                                                                                    TrailTrail willwill bebe
                                                                                    unpavedunpaved
Bicycle Routes
 N Existing Class II                                  CARLSBAD CARLSBAD
                                                                        0.0.
         Proposed Class I                                                                                    i
    H
    N    Proposed Class 11                                                                                   SAN MARCOS
  MN     Proposed Class III
   0 Vista Transit Center
   Q Existing Park and Ride
        Sprinter Station
                                                                                                                                              FigureFigure CECE              - - 44
                                                                                                                                          BikewayBikeway PlanPlan

This page left intentionally blank
                                                                                                                                                II
                                                                                                                                                II
                                                                 t               i      Osborne Osborne StSt
                                                                                                                                                11
                                                                                                                                                II
                                                                                        ZIZI
                                                        H
                                                          7ar
                                                  J. —'
                                                           r
                        OCEANSIDE
                                                                                                                            EE\ \
                                                                                                                                  1111\ \
                                                                                                                                                                                    11
                                                                                                                                          11
                                                                                                                                                                                        11
                                                                                                                                          11• •
                                                                                                                    ramram
                                                                                                                                                                44 rr   Z.Z.
                                                                                                                                                                                            11
                                                                                                                                                                                          11
                               wE                                                                                                                                                        11
                                                                                                                                                                                       11
                                                                                                                           OO                                                        11
                                                                                                                                                                                    11
                                                                                   4.4.
                                                                                                                                                                                 11
                                                                                                                          MonteMonte 44 VistaVista         OrOr              11
                                                                                                                                                                           11
                                                                                                                                                                            I
                                                                                                 II                                                                          I
                                                                                                                                                 COUNTYCOUNTY OFOF
                                                                                                                                                                             ll
                                                                                                                                                 SANSAN DIEGODIEGO             11
                                                                                                                                                                                I
                                                                                                                                                                                I
                                                                                                                                                                                11
                                                                                                                                                        QQ                       I
                                                                                                                                                                                 I
                                                                                                                                                       mm
                                                                                                                                                                                 I
                                                                                                                                                     UU
                                                                                                                                                      IfIf
                                                                                                                                                                                                    I
                                                                                                                                                                                                  11
                                                                                                                                                                                                  I
                                                                                                                                                                                                 11
                                              OCEANSIDE
  o o
             City Boundary
             City Sphere of Influence
              Future Extension
                                                                                                                                   I%
Pedestrian Facilities
          Existing 5 -Foot Sidewalk
          Proposed 5 -Foot Sidewalk
          Existing 8- to 10 -Foot Sidewalk                                  0.0.
                                                          CARLSBAD CARLSBAD
          Proposed 8- to 10 -Foot Sidewalk
          Existing Pedestrian Path
          Proposed Pedestrian Path                                                                           SANSAN MARCOSMARCOS
                                                                                                                             /          /                                                 NN
  0 Vista Transit Center
  Q Existing Park and Ride
        Sprinter Station
        1/ 4 -Mile Radius of Sprinter Station
          Proposed 8 -10 Foot Sidewalks)
                                                                                                                                                              FigureFigure CECE                - - 55
                                                                                                                                                PedestrianPedestrian PlanPlan

This page left intentionally blank
                                                                             rr------
                                                                                                                                                                  II
                                                                                                                                                                  II
                                                                                            Osborne Osborne StSt                                                   I
                                                                                                                                                                  II
                                                                                                                                                                  II
                                                                                                                                                                  II
                                                                                                                                                                  I
                                                                                                                              NN                                  I
                                                                                                                                               jj   r.r.         II
                                                             W
                OCEANSIDE
                                                   i
                                                 e
                               a
                             a
                           ce`
                                                   i
                                                                                                                                                                                                         11
                        O°
                                                       D
                                                                                                                                                                                                             11
                                                       a
                                                                                                                                                                                            t^
                                                                                                                                                                                             t^
                                                                                                                                                                                                                11
                                    Olive Ave
                                                     m
                                                                                                                                                    EtEt                                                           I
                     1
                     IE
                                 ga
                                 O
                                     VISTA
                                                    U
                                                                                                                                                                                r--'
                                                                                                                                                                                  r--'     rLrL
                                                                                                                                                                                                          11
                                                                                                                                                                                                             11
                                                                                                                                                                                                            11
                                                                                                                                                                                                                11
                                                                                                                                                                                                         11
                                                                                                                                                                                                       II
                                                                                                                                                                                                     11
                                                                                                                                                                     tata
                                                                                                                                                                                DrDr              11
                                                                                                                                                                                                 I
                                                                                                                                                                    COUNTYCOUNTY OFOF
                                                                                                                                                                                                  ll
                                                                                                                                                                    SANSAN DIEGODIEGO              II
                                                                                                                                                                                                    I
                                                                                                                                                                                                    I
                                                                                                                                                                                                    11
                                                                                                                                                                                                     I
                                                                                                                                                                                                     I
                                                                                                                                                                             mm
                                                                                                                                                                                                     I
                                                                                                                                                                           UU
                                                                                                                                                                          mm\ \
                                         L •
                                                                                                                                                                        mm\ \
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        I
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      11
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      I
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     11
                                             OCEANSIDE
                                                                                                          GG cc
                                                                                                                    TrailTrail willwill bebe
                                                                                                                 11 unpavedunpaved
                                                                                      yy' '
                                                         CARLSBAD CARLSBAD
o o
    City Boundary
    City Sphere of Influence
                                                                           I
    Existing Trail                                                                                AA
                                                                                                                                             SANSAN MARCOSMARCOS
    Proposed Bike /Pedestrian Trail
    Proposed Hiking Trail
    Bicycle Trail Head
O   Sprinter Station
0   Vista Transit Center
                                                                                                                                                                                     FigureFigure CECE             - - 66
                                                                                                                                                                                          TrailTrail PlanPlan

This page left intentionally blank
                                                                                                                  Pz11+
   Circulation Element
                                                                                                          2030
TRANSIT
The City has an extensive, multi -modal network of public transit routes operated from the Vista Transit
Center. From the Transit Center, the North County Transit District ( NCTD) provides bus ( BREEZE) and light
rail ( SPRINTER) services throughout Vista, offering local and regional connections between Vista and
adjacent cities as well as connections to other transit providers, including the COASTER, Amtrak, Metrolink,
the County Transit System, and San Diego Transit and Trolley.
Bus Service
NCTD operates the BREEZE bus system, which provides routes
throughout north San Diego County, including connections
between    Vista,   Oceanside,     Del Mar, Escondido,    Ramona,
Fallbrook, and San Clemente in Orange County. Service is also
provided to the Camp Pendleton Marine Corps Base.
                                                                                        BREEZE
Light Rail Service
                                                   NCTD began operation of the light rail SPRINTER service in
                                                   20o8. The zz -mile long SPRINTER rail line provides east —
                                                   west regional mobility between Oceanside, Vista,         San
                                                   Marcos, and Escondido.      The SPRINTER has 3.5 stations
                                                   throughout the region, including two in Vista.     The Vista
                                                   Village  Station  connects   the   SPRINTER     to numerous
                                                   BREEZE lines and is a central transit hub in North San
            r -
                                                   Diego County.     The Civic Center Drive Station ( formerly
                                                   Escondido Station) is located adjacent to SR -78 and serves
                                                   southwestern Vista. Two additional stations serve the City,
                Vista Transit Center               including the Melrose Drive ( northwest Vista) and Buena
                                                   Creek ( southeast Vista)   Stations.  All stations have free
parking lots.   Once completed, the Inland Rail Trail ( shown on Figure CE -6) will follow the SPRINTER line
from Oceanside to Escondido.
Weekday service is provided every 3o minutes in each direction between peak periods and hourly on
weekends, providing additional mobility choices for residents and visitors in the area. Expansion of
SPRINTER service is considered a high priority project by NCTD and is included in the Regional
Transportation    Plan ( RTP) by SANDAL.       The expansion would include double tracking the existing
alignment. This expansion will increase frequency and service.
  December 2011                                                                                        Page 3- 33

                                                                                                               L p(
                                                                                                                    RM
   Circulation Element
                                                                                                        2030
Transit routes are identified in Figure CE -7.
Semi -Rural Character
The City is dedicated to preserving the semi -rural character of Vista.      One component of that goal is to
ensure that the road character reflects the scenic and aesthetic qualities of semi -rural neighborhoods when
appropriate.    Semi -rural streets are not included as classified Circulation Element roadways, but are
characterized by the surrounding neighborhood and community with a typical right -of -way width of 46 to 55
feet and typical width of 28 to 38 feet curb to curb between property lines per City' s adopted standard. At
some locations, multi -use trails and pedestrian paths are provided along semi -rural streets instead of
sidewalks to maintain the semi -rural character of the area.
Where feasible, the aesthetic characteristics of the scenic and semi -rural streets should be preserved, the
visual features along the route should be enhanced, and the existing widths and improvements should be
maintained.
Regional Roadways
SANDAG is responsible for overseeing San Diego County' s regional transportation system. SANDAG
coordinates planning and develops public policy for all modes of travel in the San Diego Region. The most
important transportation policies are contained in the Regional Transportation Plan ( MOBILITY 2030). This
document identifies the facilities, services, and programs necessary to meet the region' s increasing travel
needs through the year 203o and is based on the following seven policy goals:
     i.
         Mobility—Improve the mobility of people and freight
     2.  Accessibility—Improve accessibility to major employment and other regional activity centers
     3.  Reliability —Improve the reliability and safety of the transportation system
     4.  Efficiency—Maximize the efficiency of the existing and future transportation system
     5.  Livability—Promote livable communities
     6.  Sustainability—Minimize effects on the environment
     7.  Equity—Ensure an equitable distribution of the benefits among various demographic and user
         groups
The RTP outlines the Regionally Significant Transportation Network, which consists of the street and
highway network that provides accessibility between communities and within the region. Within Vista, the
following roadways are identified within the City' s Circulation Plan as well as on SANDAG' s Regionally
Significant Transportation Network:
 December 2011                                                                                       Page 3- 34

       Figure CE -7
Transit Route Map
This page left intentionally blank
                                                                                                               L p(
                                                                                                                    RM
   Circulation Element
                                                                                                       2030
         Melrose Drive —SR -76 to Rancho Santa Fe Road
         Oceanside Boulevard/ Bobier Drive —Hill Street to East Vista Way
         South Santa Fe Avenue /Mission Road /Mission Avenue —Vista Village Drive to Centre City Parkway
SANDAG' s Regional Comprehensive Plan ( RCP) provides a vision for the region based on smart growth
principles, and emphasizes the importance of interconnection and coordination between transportation and
land use.   A key implementation tool for achieving SANDAG' s smart growth goals is the Smart Growth
Concept Map ( 20o6), which identifies the locations of existing, planned, and potential smart growth areas in
the region. There are seven potential SANDAG Smart Growth Areas in Vista ( see Figure LUCI -3 in Chapter 2,
 Land Use and Community Identity Element "). SANDAG' s Smart Growth Areas have been incorporated in
Opportunity Areas, which are the areas in Vista that are targeted for mixed -use and transit -oriented
development. ( These locations are discussed in detail in Chapter 2.)  A goal of the Circulation Element is to
promote smart growth principles by coordinating transportation and land use plans and policies. This will
benefit the City and its residents by promoting multi -modal transportation options, such as improved
pedestrian facilities, better access to transit, and expansion of the bike facilities and recreational trails;
providing improved access and connections within and between neighborhoods, and to commercial uses,
community facilities, employment centers, and recreational, historical, and cultural features; and making
improvements that support mixed -use and transit -oriented development.
  December 2011                                                                                     Page 3- 35

                                                                   L p(
                                                                        RM
 Circulation Element
                                                            2030
                     This page intentionally left blank.
December 2011                                            Page 3 -36
      Chapter 5
Healthy Vista Element
This page left intentionally blank
                                                                                                                        tRAL P4
                                                                                                                      VISTA
                                                                                                                      2030
Chapter 5: Healthy Vista Element
INTRODUCTION
                                                               HEALTHY VISTA ELEMENT GOALS
Vista   Vision   203o   articulates  the  value  placed  on    COMMUNITY -BASED APPROACH TO HEALTH AND WELLNESS
community health, as evidenced by the numerous                 HV Goal 1: Work with community partners to improve overall
                                                               health and well -being of Vistans.
health -related components of the vision statement.
                                                               COMMUNITY FOOD SECURITY
What defines a healthy community? "              A healthy
                                                               HV Goal z: Increase community food security, which makes
community is one that embraces the belief that health          fresh produce and other safe, nutritionally sound, culturally
                                                               appropriate food available, accessible, and affordable to all
is more than merely an absence of disease; a healthy           residents.
community includes those elements that enable people           HEALTHCARE
to maintain a high quality of life and productivity ( U. S.    HV Goal 3: Encourage and support adequate access to quality
Department of Health and Human Services 2003.).           At   healthcare and medical and mental health services.
the   local  level, many of those elements may be              COMMUNITY COHESION
                                                               HV Goal 4: Understand and support the needs of the City' s
influenced by policies and decisions that can have both        diverse population.
a direct and indirect impact on the quality of a               HV Goal 5: Promote understanding of City government and
community' s built, natural, and social environments,          encourage active civic involvement in the community' s decisi
                                                               making process.
which influence the opportunities for residents to make
                                                               HV Goal 6: Support opportunities for public art and cultural
appropriate choices necessary for good health.                 enrichment.
The quality,     conditions,    and   design  of  the   built
environment have long been known to have an influence on public health. City planning in the United States
began to be formalized in the early twentieth century as a way to improve the living conditions in cities by
regulating the sanitary conditions, density, and access to light and air of tenement housing.                  However, in
recent years,     public  health   professionals have   begun to   understand       the    powerful     impact the       built
environment has upon health choices and outcomes, and community leaders and planners have started to
realize there are strong correlations between what makes a well- designed community for design' s sake and
what makes a well- designed community for health' s sake ( Feldstein 2007).
The relationship between the design of a community and public health is further demonstrated by the
following:
          People living in highly walkable, mixed -use communities are more than twice as likely to get more
          than 3o or more minutes of daily exercise as people who live in more auto -dependent
          neighborhoods ( Frank et al. 2005).
 December 2011                                                                                                       Page 5 -1
                                                                                                                     p('
                                                                                                                         14,
   Healthy Vista Element                                                                                     2030
         In  low- income   neighborhoods, each additional supermarket         increases  residents' likelihood of
         meeting nutritional guidelines by one -third ( Moreland et al. 2002).
         Neighborhood density is positively correlated with the number of minutes of physical activity
         residents get per day. As density increases, the amount of physical activity typical residents get
         each day increases ( Frank 2005).
         People who live within walking distance (e. g., 0. 25 mile) of a park are 25 percent more likely to meet
         the minimum weekly exercise recommendation of three times a week (Frank 2005).
         The presence of shared natural open space has been associated with stronger social ties among
         neighbors ( Kuo et al. 3. 998).
         Inclusion of public art plays a role in building civic dialogue and contributes to a more democratic
         society (McCoy 3. 997).
         Artists and other members of the " creative class" are vital to economic development and attracting
         and developing workers for "knowledge industries" ( Riddle 2002).
While public health and safety always have been fundamental considerations for jurisdictions when
developing goals and policies, general plans generally have not addressed community health directly.
However, because of an alarming increase in certain health risk factors over the last three decades, there is a
new urgency to involve all levels of government in promoting improved public health. The Healthy Vista
Element, which is new to Vista' s General Plan, demonstrates the city' s awareness of the role local
governments can have in improving public health and promoting healthier residents by taking a leadership
role in making community health and wellness priorities.
The Healthy Vista Element focuses on specific topics to improve overall community health and wellbeing
and address typical health disparities.      However, goals and policies that have an impact on community
health are located in each of the elements throughoutthe General Plan. For example:
         Community health can be improved through changes to the built environment. Land use patterns
         and densities have a direct impact on the ways that humans interact with their community, and
         have a significant influence on opportunities for healthful choices. The Land Use and Community
         Identity Element and Circulation Element address the ways in which the developed or improved
         portions of the City —including buildings, land uses, roads, trails, and parks —will be designed to
         promote increased physical activity, provide an adequate mix of land uses that support community
         health, and enhance community connections and social well- being. The Housing Element ensures
         that there is a variety of housing to meet diverse socio- economic needs of Vista' s residents.
         The Resource Conservation and Sustainability Element includes goals and policies to provide
         wellness and fitness programming and access to recreational opportunities, such as adult and youth
         sports and recreational activities, preschool activities, day camps, fitness and social programs
         tailored for seniors, Fit I Fun I Families Day, and other similar programs. It also includes goals and
         polices to reduce exposure to unhealthful and harmful air pollutants associated with respiratory
 December 2011                                                                                             Page 5 -2

                                                                                                               Pz' 1 ,
   Healthy Vista Element                                                                               2030
        diseases and to protect other natural resources, such as water quality, open space, agriculture, and
        passive recreation.
PURPOSE
The purpose of the Healthy Vista Element is to foster community health and well -being as priorities for all
Vistans. It does so by providing a strategy to incorporate health considerations into the City' s policies,
programs, decisions, and development activities, and to acknowledge and strengthen the relationship
between planning decisions and public health outcomes. The Healthy Vista Element:
    i.
        Identifies issues that affect community health and wellness.
     2. Sets the policy framework to improve community health. This includes identifying and tracking
        community health indicators for Vista; promoting healthful conditions and opportunities for
        choices; and taking a collaborative, community -based approach to health and wellness, including
        the involvement of residents, health care providers, and other community partners.
The topics addressed in the Healthy Vista Element include:
        Community -Based Approach to Health and Wellness
        Community Food Security
        Healthcare
        Community Cohesion
        Public Art
The Healthy Vista Element is not a State- mandated element; however, it is consistent with Section 65303 of
the State of California Government Code, which authorizes local jurisdictions to adopt other elements or
address additional topics when they relate to the physical development of the jurisdiction.
GOALS AND POLICIES
COMMUNITY -BASED APPROACH TO HEALTH AND WELLNESS
HV Goal is Work with community partners to improve overall health and well -being of
Vistans.
        HV Policy i.i: Continue and enhance the collaboration among the City and community partners
         such   as  health  care  providers, mental health   providers, public health   advocates, the Vista
        Community Clinic, the Vista Unified School District [ VUSD],    businesses, other governments and
 December 2011                                                                                       Page 5- 3
                                                                                                                Pz'
                                                                                                                    14,
 Healthy Vista Element                                                                                  2030
      agencies,    the   Boys  and   Girls Club,  the  YMCA,      neighborhood  organizations,   faith -based
      organizations, and other community partners) in identifying public health issues and developing and
      implementing a community -based approach to health and wellness in Vista.
      HV Policy 1. 2: Conduct health impact assessments ( HIAs) on key private and public development
      projects and consider the findings as a part of City decision -making.
      HV Policy 3.. 3:    Define health indicators and develop procedures to track community health
      information systematically for Vista. ( Consider working with the San Diego County Health and
      Human Services [ HHSA] to develop health indicators and health statistics, so that Vista' s progress in
      reducing chronic and preventable diseases can be measured within the context of the health and
      well -being of other jurisdictions throughout San Diego County, the State of California, and the
      United States.)
      HV Policy 1. 4: Participate in regional and /or county collaborative health and wellness initiatives,
      such as the Healthy People 2020 Initiative for San Diego County, Calf to Action for Childhood Obesity
       San Diego County), Walk San Diego, and /or other initiatives.
      HV Policy 1. 5:     Model best practices to promote a healthy community, such as providing an
      employee wellness program to educate and train employees on health and wellness activities
      designed    to   improve  overall  employee   health,  providing /managing an Employee Assistance
      Program ( EAP), and promoting bicycling to work, and encourage other local employers to do the
      same.
      HV Policy 3.. 6: Pursue the establishment of public events in Vista that promote community health
      and wellness.
      HV Policy 1. 7: Adopt and enforce tobacco control ordinances, such as the ban on smoking in parks
      and City -owned facilities.
      HV Policy 3.. 8: Encourage the establishment of tobacco free outdoor spaces, such as outdoor dining
      areas, employee break areas, private open space areas, and other privately operated outdoor
      facilities.
      HV Policy i.g: Pursue opportunities for new funding sources to enhance funding of alcohol related
      enforcement, prevention, and training efforts.
      HV Policy i.io: Develop a policy outlining standard restrictions, limitations, or conditions for new
      alcohol licenses or renewals considering, but not limited to, overconcentration of similar facilities
December 2011                                                                                         Page 5- 4
                                                                                                        ER A L pC.
                                                                                                                   q' 1,
   Healthy Vista Element
                                                                                                       VSTS
                                                                                                       2 Q 3 0
  IV
        and crime statistics in the surrounding area.       The policy should address both onsite and offsite
        alcohol sales.
        HV Policy i.ii: Strive to reduce problems associated with alcohol and drug abuse when developing
        or altering programs, policies, and practices.
        HV Policy i.iz: Map and promote Safe Routes to School within the City.
COMMUNITY FOOD SECURITY
HIV Goal 2:      Increase community food security, which makes fresh produce and other
safe,   nutritionally sound, culturally appropriate food available, accessible, and
affordable to all residents.
        HV Policy z. i: Encourage the creation and operation of community gardens, urban farms, and other
        small scale agricultural operations, especially in neighborhoods that do not have convenient access
        to grocery stores.
        HV Policy 2. 2: Identify existing and potential community garden sites on public property, including
        parks,     senior   and    community      centers,   public
        easements and      rights -of -way, and surplus property,-
        and continue to support existing community gardens
        on public property ( such as Alta Vista Gardens in
        Brengle      Terrace    Park)    and   create    additional =,
        community gardens.
        HV Policy 2. 3:   Consider setting a community garden
        goal or standard for Vista. ( Goal example: Vancouver
        set a goal of 2010 community gardens by zoio, and
        they exceeded it.      Standard example:      at least one                 Local agriculture
        community garden for every 3., 5oo households.)
        HV Policy 2. 4:   Support the continued operation of the farmers' market in the City at least once
        weekly.
        HV Policy 2. 5:    Promote access to large scale food distribution sites by allowing temporary or
        interim uses on commercially or industrially designated properties for the purpose of food
        distribution, as needed.
 December 2011                                                                                       Page 5- 5
                                                                                                                 p('
                                                                                                                     14,
  Healthy Vista Element                                                                                   2030
 IV
       HV Policy 2. 6: Support " farm -to- cafeteria" initiatives, such as encouraging schools and institutions
       to offer locally grown or produced foods in meal programs, and local restaurants to serve locally
       grown or produced foods.
       HV Policy 2. 7: Identify small food markets, grocery stores, supermarkets, green grocers, farmers'
       markets, and /or community gardens in underserved areas as a priority for economic development
       and neighborhood revitalization.
       HV Policy 2. 8:    Discourage restrictive covenants that keep new grocery stores from using a
       competitor' s abandoned site.
       HV Policy z. g: Limit drive -through food establishments around schools.
       HV Policy z. io:   Encourage the extension of transit service to neighborhoods without convenient
       access to grocery stores.
       HV Policy z. ii: Continue to support, provide, and expand, as possible, nutrition programs and food
       services for vulnerable populations, including children, the elderly, and low- income residents.
       HV Policy 2. 12:     Support community health programs to educate residents regarding simple,
       healthy meal choices and preparation.
HEALTHCARE
HIV Goal 3: Encourage and support adequate access to quality healthcare and medical
and mental health services.
       HV Policy 3. 3.: Evaluate the sufficiency of health care facilities ( primary and emergency) and health -
       related services ( such as medical and preventative care, substance abuse, mental health, and
       domestic violence) within or near Vista.
       HV Policy 3. 2: Support State licensed residential care programs and facilities that provide people in
       recovery and their families with a variety of support options, if not overly concentrated.
       HV Policy 3. 3: Encourage health care providers to locate along transit corridors to facilitate access
       to health care for transit -dependent members of the community.
       HV Policy 3. 4:   Continue to provide and enhance City programs and services for seniors, such as
       health insurance counseling advocacy program, Parkinson' s support, hearing screenings, blood
       pressure checking, and others as needed.
December 2011                                                                                          Page 5 -6
                                                                                                           EIR A L pC'
                                                                                                                       1
   Healthy Vista Element
                                                                                                          STS
                                                                                                          V
                                                                                                          2 Q 3 0
  IV
        HV Policy 3. 5:     Encourage increased access to care and services for seniors, such as expanded
        coordination of in -home and community services.
COMMUNITY COHESION
HV Goal 4: Understand and support the needs of the City' s diverse population.
        HV Policy 4. 3.:   Ensure that City decisions, such as those regarding land use, housing, parks and
        recreation, community facilities, economic development, infrastructure, and public safety, consider
        and accommodate, to the extent feasible, the diverse needs of its residents.
        HV Policy 4. 2: Examine racial, ethnic, and socio- economic disparities in access to healthful foods,
        physical activity facilities, healthcare, and /or other resources related to health and wellness and
        develop strategies to address these inequities.
HV Goal 5:          Promote understanding of City
government          and       encourage       active      civic
involvement        in     the   community' s        decision -
making process.
        HV Policy 5. 3.:   Encourage community members to
        participate      on    City   commissions,      boards,
        committees,                                         and
                         and   other   advisory   groups,
        volunteer.
        HV Policy 5. 2: Continue to provide the Vista Citizens Leadership Academy and reach out to those
        who may not typically get involved in civic activities.
        HV Policy 5. 3: Improve access to local government and participation in the civic and political process
        for persons with language, physical, or other barriers.
        HV Policy 5. 4:     Develop an outreach program in coordination with any other interested public
        agencies or non -governmental       organizations to facilitate public participation in the municipal
        planning and decision making process.
HV Goal 6: Support opportunities for public art and cultural enrichment.
        HV Policy 6. i: Support and provide opportunities for residents to participate in festivals and
        community events that celebrate Vista' s cultural diversity and heritage.
 December 2011                                                                                          Page 5 -7
                                                                                                           EIR A L pC'
                                                                                                                       1
                                                                                                          VISTA
   Healthy Vista Element                                                                                  2030
  IV
          HV Policy 6. 2: Encourage the inclusion of public art, such as murals and sculpture, into private and
          public projects throughout the City.
          HV Policy 6. 3: Continue to engage and involve the public in creating public art, identifying ideas
          for it, how it can be integrated into community life, and places to display it.
          HV Policy 6. 4: Consider adoption of a fee structure for new development for the purpose of
          funding public art projects within the community.
THE HEALTHY VISTA PLAN
The Healthy Vista Element includes goals and policies that can improve community health by encouraging
and supporting healthful behaviors and choices, and providing more healthful options and opportunities for
individuals. The Healthy Vista Plan provides a brief overview of information and key issues related to the
topics addressed in the goals and policies section of this element, including public health concerns at the
State, County, and subregional ( which includes Vista) levels, and an overview of how existing conditions in
the built, natural, and social environments have an impact on community health.
COMMUNITY -BASED APPROACH TO IMPROVED PUBLIC HEALTH
There are many factors that influence individual and community health. According to the Institute of
Medicine, individual factors such as genetics, age, and existing health conditions and access to healthcare
account for approximately 3o percent of health outcomes. The determinants that make up the remaining 70
percent of health outcomes include services and infrastructures other than healthcare ( such as parks and
recreational facilities, education, community centers, and transportation); living and working conditions
 such as housing, access to food, employment, and environmental quality); social, economic, and political
factors ( such as poverty, racism, social cohesion, and political participation); and individual behaviors that
may be affected by the other factors ( Human Impact Partners 203.0). This demonstrates the importance of
taking a holistic, community -based approach to improving public health and working with community
partners to make public health and wellness priorities for the community. It also demonstrates the need to
assess the status of health and wellness in Vista, develop health indicators that will be measured for Vista,
and identify the roles and responsibilities of community partners so that improvement can be evaluated and
tracked overtime.
Assessing Health Conditions in Vista
Chronic diseases, such as heart disease, cancer, and cerebrovascular diseases ( including hypertension and
stroke), are the leading causes of death and disability in the United States. According to the Centers for
 December 2011                                                                                          Page 5 -8
                                                                                                                   Pz' 1 ,
   Healthy Vista Element                                                                                   2030
Disease Control ( CDC), chronic diseases account for 70 percent of all deaths in the U. S., and also cause major
limitations in daily living for almost one out of io Americans ( CDC zooga).         Even with the significant
advances in medicine over the past several decades, the incidence of chronic diseases has worsened.          For
example, since 3.98o the prevalence of Type z diabetes has doubled, as has the asthma rate among children.
Obesity, which is a significant public health challenge that is linked to many chronic diseases, has increased
as well.  Obesity rates for adults have doubled and rates for children have tripled in the U. S. since 3.98o;
today, more than one -third of adults and 3.6 percent of children are now considered obese ( CDC zoogb).    The
CDC observes that " American society has become ' obesogenic,' characterized by environments that
promote increased food intake, nonhealthful foods, and physical inactivity" (CDC zoogb).
Although chronic diseases are among the most common and costly health problems, they are also among
the most preventable. Making healthful choices, such as being physically active, eating nutritious foods, and
avoiding tobacco use, can prevent or lessen the serious effects of these diseases ( CDC zoogc). For example,
regular physical exercise reduces the risk of premature mortality, coronary heart disease, diabetes, colon
cancer, hypertension, and osteoporosis; improves mental health conditions, such as depression and anxiety;
and, in conjunction with a healthful diet, plays an important role in preventing overweight and obese adults,
adolescents, and children ( CDC zoogd).
Chronic diseases account for the majority of the leading causes of death in the North Coastal Region of San
Diego County, of which Vista is a part. ( The North Coastal Region is one of six regions in San Diego County
that were created by the HHSA for the purpose of collecting and analyzing community data.) The top ten
leading causes of death in the North Coastal Region of San Diego County (2007) are as follows:
     i.  Cancer
     2.  Heart Disease
     3.  Cerebrovascular Diseases ( Hypertension, Stroke)
     4.  Chronic Lower Respiratory Diseases
     5.  Alzheimer' s Disease
     6.  Accidents
     7.  Diabetes
     8.  Suicide
     g.  Chronic Liver Disease /Cirrhosis
     io. Influenza /Pneumonia ( CDPH 2007)
During the planning period the City will work with community partners to conduct an HIA that will include an
existing conditions profile in order to understand baseline conditions and predict and track change, evaluate
 December 2011                                                                                           Page 5- 9
                                                                                                                  Pz'
                                                                                                                      14,
   Healthy Vista Element                                                                                  2030
potential health impacts and needs, and develop evidence -based recommendations to guide additional
policies and the preparation of a community -based action plan.
Community Health Indicators
There are numerous health indicators and /or objectives that are tracked by public health professionals and
agencies to assess the general health of the public. Healthy People 2010 is a set of specific and measurable
health objectives to help the nation achieve two key goals: ( i) increase the quality and years of healthy life
and ( 2) eliminate health disparities ( Healthy People 203.0). Healthy People 2010 was coordinated by the U. S.
Department of Health and Human Services and builds on over two decades of federal initiatives; identifying
ten leading health indicators, providing 467 objectives in 28 focus areas, and including ten -year targets to
support its two overarching goals. The ten leading health indictors include: physical activity, nutrition and
overweight /obesity, tobacco use, substance abuse, responsible sexual behavior, mental health, injury and
violence, environmental quality, immunization, and access to health care. It is intended to be used by states,
counties, cities, professional organizations, and others to help develop programs to improve community
health throughout the nation through local implementation. The Healthy People 2010 initiative is in the
process of being updated to Healthy People 2020, which will reflect assessments of major risks to health and
wellness over the past ten years, new information, changing priorities, and new ten -year targets.
Healthy People 2ozo: Health Indicators for San Diego County ( May 2009) was prepared by the Division of
Public Health Services in the County of San Diego Health and Human Services Agency as a way to document
the County' s progress in meeting the national Healthy People 2010 objectives. It tracks the national health
indicators and objectives and also provides relevant data at the County, regional, and local levels that can be
used by the City to gauge and track the health of Vistans over time.
The City will work with community partners to develop health indicators and procedures to track community
health information systematically, so that Vista' s progress in reducing chronic and preventable diseases and
improve overall community health and wellbeing can be measured within the context of other jurisdictions
throughout San Diego County, the State of California, and the United States.
COMMUNITY FOOD SECURITY AND ACCESS TO HEALTHFUL FOOD
Vista can promote a healthier community by increasing food security ( also known as community food
security, or CFS), which is making safe, nutritionally sound, culturally appropriate food accessible and
affordable to all residents.  CFS also involves creating and /or supporting local, regional, and family -scale
farmers and linking consumers and growers. Methods to promote CFS include: community -supported
agriculture, farmers' markets, community gardens, farm -to- cafeteria initiatives, and encouraging the
development and growth of smaller, locally serving markets that carry healthful food alternatives and fresh
produce.
 December 2011                                                                                         Page 5 -10
                                                                                                                       ER A L pC.
                                                                                                                                  q' 1,
                                                                                                                      VISTA
   Healthy Vista Element                                                                                              2030
This Healthy Vista Element identifies a goal and policies to
increase residents' access to healthful food choices and
their opportunities to       make   healthful  choices.     These
include providing adequate access to grocery stores and
fresh    produce,-  facilitating the establishment of new
grocery stores at the neighborhood level,- discouraging the
proliferation of liquor stores and other establishments that
don' t offer fresh produce or healthy food options,- allowing
and     encouraging    community       gardens     and   farmer' s
marl<ets,- and supporting community health programs to
educate residents regarding simple, healthy meal choices                  Vista Farmers Market increases access to
and preparation.
                                                                                    healthful food choices.
HEALTHCARE
Access to healthcare is an obvious determinant of the health of individuals and a community. However,
there are many factors that influence how access is defined and measured, and the degree to which access
impacts any one person' s overall health. The location of healthcare facilities in a community, such as
hospitals, emergency trauma /acute care facilities, and medical and mental health clinics, certainly have an
influence on access. However, location does not determine the degree to which the facilities will be used by
the general population.       Other factors, such as transportation to and from facilities, awareness of facilities
and services, availability of insurance, perceived or real language barriers, and personal preferences
regarding physicians all have an impact on the degree to which available healthcare facilities will be used.
The City does not have a hospital within its boundaries.           However,
the Tri -City Medical Center, which is a full- service healthcare facility,
is located just west of Vista in Oceanside.        Vista Community Clinic
 VCC) is a private, non -profit community health center that operates
three clinic locations in Vista and two in Oceanside.        VCC indicates
that it has experienced extraordinary growth over the past several
years because of steady population growth and increased demand
for services ( VCC zoio).       In addition to many private physicians,
dentists, and other healthcare providers, the City is also home to
facilities that represent major healthcare providers in the region.
During public outreach for the General Plan update, community
members expressed the desire for healthcare facilities located closer
to   their  neighborhoods      and  improved    transportation    access to
                                                                                  1 -
existing facilities. While many of the factors described above are
                                                                                      One of Vista' s medical centers
 December 2011                                                                                                    Page 5 -11
                                                                                                                          p('
                                                                                                                              14,
   Healthy Vista Element                                                                                         2030
beyond the scope of the City to impact directly, this Healthy Vista Element includes a goal and policies that
are intended to encourage community -based consideration of the adequacy of healthcare services and to
help overcome some of the barriers to access.
COMMUNITY COHESION
Opportunities for interaction       at all  levels —individual,   neighborhood, and citywide —build community
cohesion and contribute to satisfaction with and connection to community, which is also a determinant of
health.    Understanding the changing demographics in Vista, strengthening community connections, and
promoting opportunities for community involvement and civic dialogue, will foster a shared sense of
community, build civic pride, and promote social and physical wellbeing.
Diverse Needs of Citizens
Vista is a culturally, ethnically, and socio -economically diverse community, and its demographics are
projected to continue to change.         The following provides an overview of demographic trends that are
important for the City to consider when it evaluates programming and service provision. (               Note: The 3. 990
statistics are from the U. S. Census.       The 2o3.o estimates are from SANDAG' s Current Estimates, dated
August 203.0, which are based on a variety of sources, including the State Department of Finance. The 2030
estimates are from SANDAG' s 2050 Regional Growth Projections, dated February 203.0.)
          The ethnic makeup of the City is changing.          In 3. 99o, 66. 8 percent of Vista' s residents were Non -
          Hispanic White, and 24. 7 percent were Hispanic or Latino. By 203.0, 44. 3. percent were estimated to
          be Non -Hispanic White, and 44. 4 percent were Hispanic or Latino. In 203.o, approximately 3o
          percent spoke Spanish at home. According to 203o projections, 35. 5 percent will be non - Hispanic
          White, and 52. 4 percent will be Hispanic or Latino. The African American and Asian populations will
          remain relatively stable. In 3. 990, 4. 3. percent were African American and 3. 6 percent were Asian; by
          2030, 3. 8 percent will be African American and 4. 5 percent will be Asian.
          The population is aging. In 3.990 the median age was 29. 7. By 203.0, it had increased to 33. 3.. The
          percentage of seniors ( age 65 and older) dipped slightly between 3.990 and 203.0, from 3.2. 2 percent
          in 3.990 to 9. 5 percent in 203.0. However, seniors are estimated to account for 3.5. 2 percent of the
          population in 2030.
          The proportion of children will be decreasing. Between 3.990 and 203.0 the percentage of children
          3.7 years old and younger remained constant, at 27 percent in both 3.990 and 203.o. By 2030, the
          percentage is estimated to decrease to 24. 7 percent of the total population.
The changing demographics in Vista will need to be considered as the City plans for future service delivery
and programming, communicates with and provides opportunities for involvement by its citizens, and
engages community stakeholders in improving community health. For example, an aging population will
require programming and services that support the needs of seniors, such as continuing the Vista Sherriff's
 December 2011                                                                                                 Page 5 -12

                                                                                                                   Pz' 1 ,
   Healthy Vista Element                                                                                   2030
Senior Volunteer Program, YANA ( You Are Not Alone),          and the Recreation and Community Services
Department' s programming geared to senior citizens. Also, according to several recent studies, racial and
ethnic minorities and people with low socio- economic status are at greater risk of ill health ( Bell and Rubin
2007).   The City has a Community Development Block Grant ( CDBG) Citizens Advisory Committee and
charged it with the task of providing recommendations for social services projects that will benefit Vista' s
low and moderate income residents. Other opportunities to address the City' s changing demographics are
noted below.
Civic Engagement and Involvement
The City values community input and encourages residents to
actively participate and influence the future of Vista. Studies show
that when residents are involved in local decision -making, that
involvement increases their ability to understand and appreciate the
needs and interests of all members of the community and increases
voter participation. The City provides many opportunities for citizen
participation on commissions, boards, and committees, such as the
Community Outreach Committee, Planning Commission, Traffic
Commission,      Parks   and Recreation   Commission,    Youth   Advisory           Visioninq Workshop
Commission, Senior Citizens' Affairs Commission Arts Commission, and the Trails Group. The Vista Citizens
Leadership Academy is a free program offered by the City to give citizens an understanding of their City
government. An increasing Hispanic and Latino population means that the City will need to develop more
effective outreach methods, as language may be a barrier to participation and /or many residents do not
have experience interacting with their City government. Community gardens also provide opportunities for
social networking.
Public Art and Enrichment Opportunities
Public art, festivals, community events, and other methods to celebrate Vista' s rich history and culture also
contribute to a healthy community by supporting pride in the City and celebrating diversity. Public art is
recognized as a means of meeting citywide goals of the Healthy Vista Element of the General Plan. Surveys
have identified Vista as an active art community attractive to authors, artists, musicians, and thespians.
Public art helps to create a sense of community pride and identity by illustrating what already exists in the
City. We create community through the use of public art. Installation of public art will:
 December 2011                                                                                          Page 5 -13
                                                                                                              ER A L pC.
                                                                                                                         q' 1,
                                                                                                            VISTA
   Healthy Vista Element                                                                                    2030
  IV
          Improve the City' s image and identity by calling attention to the fine
          livability qualities of Vista.
          Call attention to the history and character of Vista, particularly the City' s
          climate and botanical beginnings as well as the diverse ethnic nature of the
          community.
          Link distinct areas of the community.
          Create economic benefits through aesthetic enhancement of the City' s {
          public spaces.
          Add beauty and visual interest to shopping centers, green ways, and public
          spaces.
                                                                                            4m MLmM
                                                                                                  Sculpture
          Expand opportunities for residents to experience public art.
          Introduce children to artistic expression (with its proven educational benefits).
Since 3.98o, extensive research by universities and public policy institutes studying Cultural Economic
Development has shown that evidence of healthy arts and cultural resources enhance a community' s overall
image and:
          Attract the creative workers needed in science and technology industries.
          Attract healthy community growth and development with resulting increase in property values.
          Cause development of cultural tourism.
          Attract external investors.
Community arts reflect community needs, assets, and priorities. Service to community is an important
quality,- some public art efforts can be specific to crime reduction or increased literacy. Other efforts are
celebratory, commemorative, or healing. Expanding arts programs connect schools, neighborhoods, senior
programs, and the community at large. New relationships developed through community cultural work
broaden the perspectives and capacities of those involved.
U. S. arts -based programs have made a significant and sustained
impact on their communities. Community arts programs succeed
in the areas of:
          Beautification
          Quality of life
          Community animation
          Conflict resolution
          Public safety
                                                                                            Mural
 December 2011                                                                                            Page 5 -14
                                                                                                                 Pz' 1 ,
   Healthy Vista Element                                                                                2030
         Economic development
         Community revitalization
Vistans place considerable value on the arts, as evidenced by the City' s Public Arts Commission' s success in
promoting and supporting public display and appreciation of art in Vista. In addition to murals and
sculpture, the City boasts several galleries and performing art venues. As an added benefit, the Vista Art and
Sculpture Walking Tour not only highlights public art, it also supports physical activity by encouraging
residents and visitors to discover Vista' s treasures by walking.
 December 2011                                                                                        Page 5 -15
                                                                      p('
                                                                          14,
 Healthy Vista Element                                        2030
                       This page intentionally left blank.
December 2011                                              Page 5 -16
  Chapter 6
Noise Element
This page left intentionally blank
                                                                                                                              tp AL p('!
                                                                                                                           2030
Chapter 6: Noise Element
INTRODUCTION
The quality of life in a city can be impacted by the
                                                              NOISE ELEMENT GOALS
level of noise experienced by those who live, work,
                                                              NE Goal is Protect people who live, work, and recreate in the
and   recreate   there.   The   purpose    of the  Noise
                                                              City from excessive transportation noise with an emphasis on
Element is to identify problems and noise sources             protecting residential neighborhoods and other noise -sensitive
                                                              receptors ( i. e., picnic areas, recreation areas, playgrounds,
threatening community safety and comfort, and to
                                                              active sports areas, golf courses, parks, residences, motels,
establish policies and programs that will limit the
                                                              hotels, schools, churches, libraries, and hospitals).
community' s exposure to excessive noise levels. It           NE Goal z: Protect people who live, work, and recreate in the
addresses both existing and foreseeable future noise          City from unwarranted and excessive levels of noise, with
abatement issues. The Noise Element is intended to            special emphasis on protecting residential neighborhoods from
                                                              intrusive noise.
identify noise -sensitive land uses and noise sources,
define areas of noise impacts, present noise contour
maps, and establish policies and programs to protect the community from excessive noise and reduce
negative impacts from those noise sources.
RELATED PLANS AND PROGRAMS
Vista is subject to various federal, state, and local laws, regulations, and policies regarding noise. The extent
to which these apply depends on the type of project being evaluated. For example, Federal Highway
Administration ( FHWA) noise regulations and standards apply only to roadway projects in the City that use
federal funding. The following is a list of laws, regulations, policies, or agencies with noise standards that
may apply to the City. For additional information refer to the Noise Background Report, which is an
addendum to the City of Vista General Plan.
          Federal Noise Control Act Of '1972
          United States Environmental Protection Agency (USEPA)
          United States Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD)
          Federal Highway Administration ( FHWA)
          Federal Transit Administration ( FTA)
          Federal Aviation Administration ( FAA)
          California Environmental Quality Act Law and Guidelines ( CEQA)
          California Noise Insulation Standards (Title 24)
   December 2011                                                                                                         Page 6 -1
                                                                                                            ERA t P(
                                                                                                             WA
   Noise Element
                                                                                                           2030
  IN
         California Division of Aeronautics Noise Standards
         City of Vista General Plan
         City of Vista Noise Control Ordinance
         County Code of Regulatory Ordinances
GOALS AND POLICIES
The following goals and policies, when coupled with those in the Land Use and Community Identity Element
and the Circulation Element, are intended to protect residents from unwarranted and offensive noise and its
intrusion into residential neighborhoods. Terms used are defined in " Existing Noise Conditions" below.
NE Goal is        Protect people who live, work, and recreate in the City from excessive
transportation noise with an emphasis on protecting residential neighborhoods and
other noise -sensitive receptors ( i. e.,        picnic areas, recreation areas, playgrounds, active
sports     areas,    golf   courses,    parks,    residences,     motels,    hotels,    schools,    churches,
libraries, and hospitals).
         NE Policy i.i: Discourage new noise -sensitive land uses from locating, and existing noise -sensitive
         land uses from expanding, in areas adjacent to roadways where noise levels are 65 dB CNEL or
         above.
         NE Policy 1. 2: Require California Title 24 building code noise insulation with minimum 25 dB noise
         reduction for new development where existing /future roadway noise levels are 65 db CNEL or
         above.
         NE Policy 3.. 3: Encourage the use of open and green spaces between noise -sensitive land uses and
         roadways that create noise levels of 65 dB or above.
         NE Policy 1. 4: Require developers to implement noise abatement that meets Caltrans' acoustical
         criteria if new developments cause increases in traffic volumes that result in roadway or rail noise
         levels of 65 dB CNEL or above at existing or planned future noise -sensitive receptors.
         NE Policy 1. 5:   Coordinate with Caltrans to construct noise attenuation devices to reduce and /or
         avoid impacts from SR -78 where necessary and feasible, should a widening project occur.
         NE Policy 3.. 6: Work with transit providers to minimize noise associated with transit operations.
December 2011                                                                                          Page 6 -2
                                                                                                        VAL
                                                                                                      YJ&TOk
  Noise Element
                                                                                                       2034
       NE Policy 1. 7:    Encourage noise -compatible land uses and incorporate noise -reducing design
       features within transit oriented, mixed -use development near rail corridors.
       NE Policy 3.. 8: Support establishment of quiet zones near areas where rail crossings intersect public
       roads to minimize the noise impacts of train horns.
       NE Policy 3.. g: Work with NCTD to eliminate freight train usage of the SPRINTER rail line during late
       night hours.
NE Goal 2:    Protect people who live, work, and recreate in the City from unwarranted
and   excessive      levels  of   noise,   with    special   emphasis      on    protecting     residential
neighborhoods from intrusive noise.
       NE Policy z. i: Require that new equipment and vehicles purchased by the City comply with noise
       performance standards consistent with available noise reduction technology.
       NE Policy 2. 2: Adopt and apply the Noise and Land Use Compatibility Matrix and the Interior and
       Exterior Noise Guidelines as guidelines to establish acceptable noise standards for various uses
       throughout the City.
       NE Policy z. 3: Require new development to minimize noise impacts upon adjacent uses through site
       and building design, setbacks, berms, landscaping, and /or other noise abatement techniques.
       NE Policy 2. 4: Apply the State' s Title 24 noise insulation standards to the construction of multi-
       family housing, residential portions of mixed -use development, new single -family developments,
       and conversion of existing apartments into condominiums.
       NE Policy 2. 5: Require that an acoustical analysis be prepared by a qualified acoustical engineer in
       instances where noise -sensitive uses are proposed in noise impacted areas.
       NE Policy 2. 6:    Encourage the design and construction of mixed -use structures to minimize
       commercial noise within the residential components of the development by locating the residential
       component of the development away from noise -generating sources such as mechanical
       equipment, entertainment facilities, gathering places, loading bays, parking lots, driveways, and
       trash enclosures.
       NE Policy 2. 7:   Encourage residential developments within mixed -use developments and located
       adjacent to commercial or retail and entertainment -related uses to notify potential residents that
       they may be affected by noise from these uses.
December 2011                                                                                       Page 6 -3
                                                                                                                    VAL
                                                                                                                  YJ&Tolk
   Noise Element
                                                                                                                   2034
SETTING
As Vista has grown from its beginnings as a rural, agricultural community, the noise environment has
changed.    Land uses within Vista now include varying densities of residential development ( primarily low –
medium density, single -family), varying intensities and types of businesses and commercial development,
the Vista Business Park, public and private schools, churches, government facilities, and open space and
recreation  venues.     Vista' s semi -rural residential development pattern is still prevalent in the eastern and
northern portions of the City. However, a noisier, more urban environment is now emerging in Vista, and
Land Use and Community Identity ( LUCI) Element policies promote revitalization of certain commercial
corridors into mixed -use activity centers.        At these mixed -use activity centers, residents, shoppers, and
businesspeople alike may be exposed to higher noise levels due to traffic and human activity.
Traffic noise from State Route ( SR) 78,
which bisects the City, the SPRINTER,
and the nightly freight train operating
on the rail line have the largest noise
impact upon the community.               The
major      arterials —including        North
Melrose    Drive, South     Melrose    Drive,
Sycamore Avenue, Vista Village Drive,
East Vista     Way, West Vista         Way,
Bobier Drive, North Santa Fe Avenue,
South Santa Fe Avenue, Civic Center
Drive, Hacienda Drive, Emerald Drive,
Business Park Drive, La Mirada Drive,
Shadowridge      Drive,    Thibodo     Road,
Olive Avenue, and Monte Vista Drive —
also     contribute      to     the     noise
environment      of    the    City.      The              School dismissal time at Rancho Buena Vista High School
locations,   types,   and    densities   and
intensities of land uses, in conjunction with noise from transportation- related and other noise sources,
create the ambient noise conditions, or setting, of Vista.
EXISTING NOISE CONDITIONS
The following section provides an overview of existing noise conditions that impact the City, and forms the
basis for goals, policies, and programs to mitigate undesirable levels of noise.            To better understand how
noise is perceived by people, a summary of noise terminology is provided.                     This is followed by the
December 2011                                                                                                   Page 6 -4

                                                                                                               WA
   Noise Element
                                                                                                            2030
identification of noise -sensitive land uses and descriptions of the major sources of noise within Vista.   Noise
sources are categorized and described as transportation related and non -transportation related.
NOISE TERMINOLOGY
Noise is generally defined as unwanted sound. Sound is technically described in terms of the loudness
 amplitude) and frequency ( pitch) of the sound. The standard unit of measurement for sound is the decibel
 dB).   Because humans do not perceive all frequencies equally well, measured sound levels at certain
frequencies are weighted to correspond to the sensitivity of the human ear. This frequency weighting is
known as A- weighting, and sound levels that are adjusted in this way are given in units of A- weighted
decibels ( dBA). Table NE -1 describes typical A- weighted noise levels for various noise sources.
Noise in our daily environment fluctuates over time.          Some fluctuations are minor, while others are
substantial.   Some noise levels occur in regular patterns; others are random.        Some noise levels fluctuate
rapidly, while others fluctuate slowly. Some noise levels vary widely, while others are relatively constant.
Various noise descriptors, which are described below, have been developed to describe time -varying noise
levels.
         Equivalent Sound Level ( Leq): Leq represents an average of the sound energy occurring over a
         specified  period.
                              In effect, Leq is the steady -state sound level that in a stated period would
         contain the same acoustical energy as the time -varying sound that actually occurs during the
         same period. The i -    hour A- weighted equivalent sound level ( Leq[ h]) is the energy average of the
         A- weighted sound levels occurring during a i h     -our period. It is used as the basis for exterior
         property line noise limits per the City' s noise ordinance ( Vista Municipal Code [ VMC] Chapter
         8. 32), and is also the basis for the noise abatement criteria ( NAC) used by Caltrans and the
         FHWA.
         Community Noise Equivalent Level ( CNEL): CNEL is an average sound level during a 24 -hour
         day. CNEL is a noise measurement scale, which accounts for noise source, distance, single
         event duration, single event occurrence, frequency, and time of day. Human reaction to sound
         between 7: 00 p. m. and io:oo p. m. is as if the sound were actually 5 dBA higher than if it
         occurred from 7: oo a. m. to 7: 00 p. m. From io: oo p. m. to 7: oo a. m., humans typically perceive
         sound as if it were io dBA higher due to the lower background level.               Hence, the CNEL is
         obtained by adding an additional 5 dBA to sound levels in the evening from 7: 00 p. m. to 10: 00
         p. m., and 10 dBA to sound levels in the night before 7: oo a. m. and after 1o: oo p. m. Because
         CNEL accounts for human sensitivity to sound, the CNEL 24 -hour figure is always a higher
         number than the actual 24 -hour average.
         Day -Night Level ( Ld„):    Ldp is also an average sound level during a 24 -hour day. The difference
         between CNEL and Ldp is that CNEL considers the 24 -hour day divided into three periods, while
         Ldp uses two periods. Ldp is obtained by adding an additional 10 dBA to sound levels in the
         evening from 10: 00 p. m. to 7: oo a. m. The two measurements are very close and are generally
December 2011                                                                                           Page 6 -5

                                                                                                             VAL
                                                                                                        YJ&TOk
    Noise Element
                                                                                                           2034
                accepted as equivalent in community noise studies. Ld, is the measure used by the EPA and
                many states for a community noise descriptor, while CNEL is commonly used in California.
 Table NE -1.                  Typical A- Weighted Noise Levels
                                                         110                 Rock band
                  Jet fly -over at 1, 000 ft
                                                         100
                 Gas lawn mower at 3 ft
                                                         90
            Diesel truck at 50 ft at 50 mph                             Food blender at 3 ft
                                                         80          Garbage disposal at 3 ft
               Noisy urban area, daytime
                 Gas lawn mower, 100 ft                   70         Vacuum cleaner at 10 ft
                        Commercial area                                Normal speech at 3 ft
                   Heavy traffic at 300 ft               60
                                                                       Large business office
                    Quiet urban daytime                  50           Dishwasher next room
                 Quiet urban night -time                 40       Theater, large conference room
                                                                            background)
               Quiet suburban night -time
                                                         30                    Library
                  Quiet rural night -time                          Bedroom at night, concert hall
                                                                            background)
                                                          20
                                                                    Broadcast / recording studio
                                                          10
      Lowest threshold of human hearing                   0     Lowest threshold of human hearing
 Source:Source: CaltransCaltrans 19981998
DecemberDecember 20112011                                                                            PagePage 66- - 66
                                                                                                          YJ&Tok
    Noise Element
                                                                                                            2030
The nature of decibel scales is such that individual decibel ratings for different noise sources cannot be
added directly to give the sound level for the combined noise source. Instead, the          combined noise level
produced by multiple noise sources is calculated using logarithmic summation.               For example,   if one
bulldozer produces a noise level of 8o dBA, two bulldozers would generate a combined noise level of 83 dBA.
For another example, assume that a house is located at the intersection of two streets. If the traffic on the
heavily traveled street ( by itself) generated 6o dBA and traffic on the lightly traveled street ( by itself)
generated 5o dBA, the combined noise level caused by traffic on both streets would be 6o. 4 dBA.
People generally perceive a io -dBA increase in a noise source as a doubling of loudness. For example, an
average person would perceive a 7o dBA sound level as being twice as loud as a 6o dBA sound. People
generally cannot detect differences of i to z dBA between noise levels of a similar nature in a community
environment ( e. g.,   an increase in traffic noise compared to existing traffic noise).   However, under ideal
listening conditions, some people can detect differences of z or 3 dBA. Under normal listening conditions,
most people would readily perceive a 5 dBA change in sounds of a similar nature. Note that when the new
sound is of a different nature than the background sound ( e. g., backup alarms compared to quiet residential
sounds), most people can detect changes as low as i dBA.
When distance is the only factor considered, sound levels from isolated point sources of noise typically
decrease by about 6 dBA for every doubling of distance from the noise source. When the noise source is a
continuous line ( e. g., vehicle traffic on a highway), sound levels decrease by about 3 dBA for every doubling
of distance. In traffic studies, an attenuation rate of 4. 5 dBA per doubling of distance is often used when the
roadway is at ground level and features of the intervening ground are effective in absorbing sound ( e. g.,
ground vegetation, scattered trees, and clumps of bushes).        When the roadway is elevated, 3 dBA of noise
attenuation per doubling of distance is used because the sound -absorbing effects of the intervening ground
are limited.
Noise levels can also be affected by several factors other than the distance from the noise source.
Topographic features and structural barriers that absorb, reflect, or scatter sound waves can affect the
reduction of noise levels.      Atmospheric conditions ( e. g., wind speed and direction, humidity levels, and
temperatures) can also affect the degree to which sound is attenuated over distance.             As a result, the
existing noise environment can be highlyvariable depending on local conditions.
NOISE -SENSITIVE LAND USES
Noise -sensitive land uses are generally defined as locations where the presence of noise could adversely
affect the use of land.     These typically include residences, schools, hospitals, libraries, golf courses, and
passive recreation sites. In Vista, several noise -sensitive land uses are located directly adjacent to the City' s
highest noise generators, which are discussed below.
December 2011                                                                                            Page 6 -7
                                                                                                              VAL
                                                                                                           YJ&TA,
    Noise Element
                                                                                                             2030
ROADWAY NETWORK
The existing noise environment within the City is dominated by traffic -related noise along the roadway
network. Noise measurements were conducted July 28 and 29, zoog, on the local roadway network within
Vista. Noise levels ranged from 59 to 7o dBA throughout the City at the time of the measurements.
Some variables that affect the amount of noise emitted from a road are speed, volume, and type of traffic
 e. g., heavy trucks versus cars). Another variable affecting the overall measure of noise is a perceived
increase in sensitivity to vehicular noise at night. SR -78 is the loudest roadway in the City because of its high
traffic volumes (approximately 3.40, 000 annual average daily traffic [AADT]). ( Caltrans zoo7)
Existing traffic volumes were used to calculate the 6o, 65, and 7o dBA CNEL contours on roadway segments
throughout the City. The existing noise contours were mapped for the baseline year zoog and are found on
Figure NE -3.. The major arterials, SR -78, and the rail line represent the major sources of noise. The current
modeled roadway segments and the distance to each contour are detailed in the Background Study, a
companion document to this General Plan.
The LUCI Element indicates that the planning area will accommodate additional future growth,
accompanied by an increase in citywide traffic volumes.          Increases in traffic volumes represent the major
anticipated measurable new noise sources in the community over the long term. Potential future ambient
noise levels can be estimated by modeling. Figure NE- 2 depicts projected year 2o3o noise contours based
upon future traffic levels. As this figure shows, noise levels may be expected to rise in areas where roadways
will experience the greatest increase in traffic volumes overtime.
RAIL
The North County Transit District ( NCTD) completed
construction       and  initiated commuter      rail   service
between Escondido and Oceanside in March 2oo8 ( the
SPRINTER).      The service uses an existing rail alignment
that was previously used          exclusively for periodic                            AL
 several times per week) freight operations.         In Vista,
the rail   line  is adjacent to and   parallels portions of
Oceanside Boulevard, Melrose Drive, and South Santa
Fe Avenue.      The SPRINTER connects passengers from
northeastern San Diego County cities with the popular _
Coaster commuter rail line as well as Amtrak.             The
SPRINTER rail line has two stations located in the City,
                                                                                       SPRINTER
and two stations just outside the city boundaries, one to
the east and one to the west.       Approximately 34 daily weekday trips and 25 daily weekend trips in each
December 2011                                                                                            Page 6 -8
                                                             HAW
                                                         unn   t• nw
                                                             Ifs'
                                     1!Itzr2r • .                               I
     Oceanside
                                                                                                             rth
                                                                                                               h County,
                                         W: Botiier. Dr
                                                                        Q-
                                                                                  Mar Rd 1•
                                               Nip o
                                                                                                               Area
                                                                                  w
                                                                                                Catalina Ave
                                                                                                                    wa lse
                                                                                            TUT
                                                                                                                        1•
                                  UL
                                                                                         4•     1r,
FD
     Carlsbad
                                                                                                                     e
                                                                                                   78
                                                                           Dr
                                                        Y•"
        Vista City Boundary
                                                                              f
        Vista Sphere of Influence
   L
D       70 dBA CNEL
3
        65 dBA CNEL                                                N al
        60 dBA CNEL
   Rail
o C'    70 dBA CNEL
        65 dBA CNEL
a
        60 dBA CNEL
Y
                                                                                                                Figure NE -1
                                                                                                  Existing Noise Contours

This page left intentionally blank
                                                                                                              I
                                     c
                                       4.
                                                                                                                       B`onslall
                                                                                             J
                                          N Santa Fo
                                                     c                                                        I
                                                       e
                                                                                                              I__
     Oceanside                                             TaY] or St
                                                                                           EgaYlo_,S          I
                                                  J .rn
                                                                                          Arcadia Ave
                                                                                      A                                North County
                                                                           11
                                                                                          Palomar  PI
                                             W. Bobier. Dr
                                                                                    a  IY                                      Metro
                                                                                                       Mar Rd
                                                                                                                              Planning
                                                                                                                                Area
                                                                                                  w                       i
                                                                                                      A.
                                                                                                                             i
                                                                                                                            i
                                                                                                                         I
                                                                                                                          I
                                                                                                                          I
     Carlsbad
                                             tl *  ridge
                                                                                                                                 Sawn
                                                                                                                               M a rc os-
                                                            r ---          A,A,- Dr /
   I       Vista City Boundary
           Vista Sphere of Influence
   L
Vn
3          70 dBA CNEL
           65 dBA CNEL                                                N al
           60 dBA CNEL
                                                                                                                                    N
    Rail +
o=         70 dBA CNEL
           65 dBA CNEL
                                                                                                                            0      k      1
a
           60 dBA CNEL                                                                                                            Miles
Y
                                                                                                                                Figure NE -2
                                                                                                                  Future Noise Contours
This page left intentionally blank
                                                                                                                  @RAZ
                                                                                                              YJ&Tok
   Noise Element
                                                                                                                2034
direction are scheduled between the hours of 4: 0o a. m. and 9: 3o p. m. Because the SPRINTER use of the rail
line is not static, it is likely that it will increase over time as more people use it, the region becomes more
built -out, and pressuresto reduce vehicle milestravelled (VMT) increase.
Two sets of noise measurements were conducted as part of the environmental analysis process for the
Oceanside -Escondido         rail  project ( the   SPRINTER).     Measurements conducted in 3.996 by Ogden
Environmental and Energy Services estimated 24 -hour ambient noise levels ( based on short -term
measurements) ranged from 53. to 63 dBA Ld,,.              The noise measurements were replicated by another
consulting firm (    ISE)    in   2006  for a  re- assessment of potential  noise impacts.     This  second    set   of
measurements differed only slightly from the previous study; estimated 24 -hour ambient noise levels at the
same locations ranged from 53. to 63 dBA Ld,,. Measurements were conducted on July 28 and 29, 2009,
which measured the SPRINTER noise level at approximately 63. dBA Ld„ 1 ( 62 dBA CNEL) at a distance of
approximately 50 feet from the rail centerline.
The existing rail schedule for the SPRINTER was used to calculate the 60, 65, and 7o dBA CNEL contours on
the railway alignment throughout the City, as shown on Figure NE -3.. Table NE -2 shows the distance to each
contour for the current alignment. Noise contours for the rail line at build -out of this planning period are
depicted on Figure NE -2. The SPRINTER rail cars and horn were designed to travel through neighborhoods
and adhere to Vista' s noise ordinance. Although frequency of SPRINTER trains may increase within the
planning period, no adverse increase in noise levels is anticipated for SPRINTER operations.
Table NE -2. SPRINTER Noise Contour Distances
                                     6o dBA CNEL               65 dBA CNEL             70 dBA CNEL
                                    Contour ( feet)           Contour (feet)          Contour (feet)
Freight trains use the SPRINTER line in the late evening and early morning hours, three to five times per
week, Sunday through Thursday. NCTD preempts the SPRINTER on Friday and Saturday nights. Although
the freight horn noise level was not measured for this study, the City receives a considerable amount of
complaints from residents, who report that the freight train horn can be heard for miles, representing a
substantial nuisance and quality of life issue for Vistans.
1 Measurement was conducted from 12 p. m., July 28, 2009, to 12: 00 p. m., July 29, 2009, using one ( 1) Rion NL -21
type 2 sound level meter.
December 2011                                                                                               Page 6 -9

                                                                                                               VR A L P(,
                                                                                                                          q'[ r
    Noise Element
                                                                                                           TA
                                                                                                              2030
AIRPORTS
The nearest airport is McClennan- Palomar Airport, which is primarily a public -use ( i. e., smaller civil aircraft)
facility, located along Palomar Airport Road, within the City of Carlsbad, approximately 1 mile southwest of
the southwestern corner of Vista. Oceanside Municipal Airport is also in the vicinity, located approximately
6. 5 miles west of the City.         The  nearest    major   commercial   airport  is  San   Diego   International
Airport /Lindbergh Field, approximately 33 miles south. Military aircraft flights ( fixed -wing as well as
helicopters) also originate from Marine Corps Base Camp Pendleton, which is located approximately io
miles north of the City. Although Vista experiences aircraft flyovers typical of a city located near a major
metropolitan region, airport noise does not represent a substantial part of the City' s noise environment.
The McClellan -Palomar Airport is owned and operated by the County of San Diego. According to the Airport
Land Use Compatibility Plan ( ALUCP) for the McClellan -Palomar Airport, portions of the southwestern
region of the City are located within the Airport Influence Area ( AIA).   The AIA encompasses areas adjacent
to the airport that could be impacted by noise levels exceeding California State Noise Standards or where
height restrictions would be needed to prevent obstructions to navigable airspace. The noise contour map
for the McClellan -Palomar Airport, found in the Background Report, shows both the 6o and 65 dBA CNEL
contours. Although neither of these contours extends within the City boundary, certain portions of Vista
could be affected by lower levels of aircraft flyover noise.
 NON -TRANSPORTATION NOISE SOURCES
Industry
Industrial and manufacturing facilities are also noise producers that may affect sensitive land uses, because
of their potential to create a relatively high level of noise within their immediate operating environments.
The scope and degree of noise impacts generated by industrial uses are dependent upon various critical
factors, including the type of industrial activity, hours of operation, and the site' s location relative to other
land uses.
The City does not have large -scale industrial or manufacturing land uses, but it does have some light
industrial and smaller -scale manufacturing uses, particularly within the business park area in the southern
portion of the City. Due to the distance from sensitive receptors and the development standards included in
the Vista Business Park Specific Plan, noise from industrial activities has not been an issue.
December 2011                                                                                           Page 6 -10
                                                                                                           @RAZ
                                                                                                       YJ&Tok
    Noise Element
                                                                                                         2034
Other Noise Sources
There are a variety of non -transportation noise sources within the City, both stationary and periodic.
Schools and recreational activities can be sources of nuisance noise for sensitive receptors located in the
immediate vicinity. There are 33. operating public schools within the Vista Unified School District- 9 private
K - 12 schools, and 23 preschools. Each of the school sites features associated fields and playgrounds, and a
number of City parks offer active recreational opportunities. Commercial establishments can also produce
unwanted sources of noise. These include periodic loading and unloading operations, noise from restaurants
and live music venues, use of pneumatic auto repair tools, and noise from mechanical equipment. Although
much of Vista' s commercial operations are low -scale and low- intensity, larger commercial activities such as
those found in the North County Square Specific Plan in the eastern portion of the City require care be taken
to ensure the associated noise is not intrusive to nearby residential areas.
Vibration is another source of noise. The most common sources of vibration in the Vista planning area are
construction equipment, transit vehicles, and other large vehicles. Several land uses types are sensitive to
vibration and therefore have lower vibration thresholds. These include, but are not limited to, theaters and
amphitheaters, hospitals, libraries, vibration -sensitive research operations, residential areas, schools, and
offices.
Periodic noise also can be disruptive to Vista' s quiet residential neighborhoods. These noise sources include
use of landscaping maintenance equipment, construction noise, barking dogs, and loud music. This type of
 nuisance noise" is especially annoying when it occurs in the early morning or late night hours.
THE NOISE PLAN
Vista will continue to be a community that retains its quiet, small -town character, while accommodating
redevelopment of underutilized and aging areas of the City, and continued revitalization of its core.      The
Land Use Element proposes changes to land use designations in targeted areas of the City that will require
attention to sensitive design in order to avoid increasing exposure of people to sources of noise. Therefore,
implementation of the General Plan during the planning period will focus on three main efforts: ( i)
maintaining areas deemed currently acceptable in terms of noise exposure, ( 2) mitigating impacts from
existing sources of noise on existing sensitive land uses, and ( 3) implementing planning policies and zoning
to ensure that new development is both protected from unwarranted noise and does not contribute to
unacceptable levels of noise within the community.
LAND USE COMPATIBILITY AND NOISE
Table NE -3 below provides guidance for the acceptability of certain types of development within specific
CNEL noise contours and will act as criteria for assessing the compatibility of proposed land uses in
December 2011                                                                                        Page 6 -11
                                                                                                            @RAZ
                                                                                                          YJ&TOk
    Noise Element
                                                                                                           2034
corresponding land use designations. Table NE -3 depicts " normally acceptable," " conditionally   acceptable,"
 normally unacceptable,"      and "  clearly unacceptable" exterior noise levels for those uses and land use
designations.    The primary purpose of this noise /land use compatibility matrix is to identify potential
conflicts between proposed land uses and the noise environment. The Citywill utilize it as part of the criteria
for assessing the compatibility of proposed development. The matrix is usually used at the General Plan or
zoning levels of approval, as well as for CEQA analysis.
Table NE -4 provides the interior and exterior noise guidelines for various types of uses and developments.
The noise guidelines will function as City policy for new land uses and acceptable noise levels for
development of new land uses.           In addition, the provisions of the State of California Noise Insulation
Standards ( California Administrative Code, Title 24) will be enforced to specify that the indoor noise levels
for multi -family residential living spaces shall not exceed 45 dB CNEL ( or Ld„) due to the combined effect of
all noise sources. The State requires implementation of this indoor standard when the outdoor noise levels
exceed 6o dB CNEL ( or Ld„).        Title 24 requires that this standard be applied to all new hotels, motels,
apartment houses, and dwellings, other than detached single -family dwellings. As a matter of policy, the
City also will apply this standard to new single -family developments, mixed -use developments, and
condominium conversions where appropriate.
An acoustical analysis, prepared by a qualified acoustical engineer, should be required in instances where
noise -sensitive uses are proposed in noise impacted areas.         The acoustical analysis will verify that the
structure has been designed, and /or mitigation measures have            been proposed, to limit noise to the
prescribed maximum allowable levels for interiors and exteriors.
December 2011                                                                                          Page 6 -12

                                                                                                   VAL
                                                                                                YJ&TA,
  Noise Element
                                                                                                  2034
Table NE -3. Noise and Land Use Compatibility Matrix
      Vista General Plan                                           Day-Night Noise Level ( Ldn)
                                              Uses
   Land Use Designations                                             6o                            8oz
                                                              s55         65      70      75
   Rural Residential ( RR)                                       A
   Open Space Residential ( OSR)
                                                                        B
   Low Density ( LD)             Residential Single Family
                                                                                      C
   Medium Low Density ( MILD)
                                                                                                  D
   Medium Density ( MD)
                                                                   A
                                                                           B
   Medium High Density ( MHD)    Multiple Family, Duplex,
                                 Mobile Home Park
   High Density ( HD)                                                                 C
                                                                                                  D
                                                                   A
                                 Mixed -Use Residential,                     B
   Mixed Use ( MU)               Commercial, and Office
                                 Development                                                  C
                                                                                                       D
                                 Professional and Private          A
                                 Offices, Daycare,
   Commercial Office ( CO)                                                   B
                                 Neighborhood- Serving Retail
                                 and Restaurants, Board
   Commercial Neighborhood                                                                      C
                                 Rooms, Conference Rooms,
    C N)
                                 Theatres, Auditoriums,
                                 Concert Halls, Meeting Halls
                                                                        A
                                 Schools, Parks, Playgrounds,
                                                                             B
                                 Fire Stations, Courthouses,
   Civic Activity (CA)
                                 Libraries, Municipal Storage
                                                                                            C
                                 Yards
                                                                                                       D
December 2011                                                                                 Page 6 -13
                                                                                                                       VR A L P(,
                                                                                                                                  q'[ r
   Noise Element
                                                                                                                   TA
                                                                                                                     2030
       Vista General Plan
                                                   Uses
                                                                                 Day-Night Noise Level ( Ldn )
                                                                                                                  In
    Land Use Designations                                                         6o
                                                                        s55               65       70
                                                                                     A
                                                                                                          B
    Commercial Service ( CS)
                                      Community Serving Retail
                                      and Restaurants
    General Commercial ( GC)                                                                                         C
                                                                                     A
    Commercial Industrial Service
     CIS)                                                                                                 B
                                      Manufacturing, Kitchen,
    Industrial General ( IG)          Warehousing                                                                    C
    Research Light Industrial ( RLI)
                                                                                     A
                                      Golf Courses, Outdoor                                          B
    Open Space / Parks ( OS)          Spectator Sports,
                                      Amusement Parks                                                              C
A = Normally Acceptable, B = Conditionally Acceptable, C = Normally Unacceptable, D = Clearly Unacceptable.
Source: Based on California Governor' s Office of Planning and Research ( 2003); Modified for the City of Vista.
December 2011                                                                                                    Page 6 -14
                                                                                                                      VR A L P(,
                                                                                                                                 q'[ r
    Noise Element
                                                                                                                  TA
                                                                                                                    2030
Table NE -4. Interior and Exterior Noise Guidelines
                                                                                      Maximum Noise Level
                                  Land Use                                                Ldn or CN EL, dBA)
 E=                   h&                    JEMP                                  Interior','
                                                                                       45
                                                                                                          Exterior
                                                                                                              653
   Residential —Single Family, Multi- family, Duplex
                                                                                                              653
   Residential— Nursing Homes, Hospitals                                               45
   Private Offices, Church Sanctuaries, Libraries, Board Rooms, Conference             45
   Rooms, Theaters, Auditoriums, Concert Halls, Meeting Halls, etc.
                                                                                                              654
   Schools                                                                             45
   General Offices, Reception, Clerical, etc.                                          50
   Bank Lobby, Retail Store, Restaurant, Typing Pool, etc.                             60
   Manufacturing, Kitchen, Warehousing, etc.                                           65
                                                                                                              654
   Parks, Playgrounds, etc.
 FCourses, Outdoor Spectator Sports, Amusement            Parks, etc.
                                                                                                              704
Notes:
1 Noise standard with windows closed. Mechanical ventilation shall be provided per UBC requirements to provide a
habitable environment.
Z Indoor environment excluding bathrooms, toilets, closets, and corridors.
3Outdoor environment limited to rear yard of single -family homes, multi -family patios and balconies (with a depth of 6
feet or more) and common recreation areas.
4 Outdoor environment limited to playground areas, picnic areas, and other areas of frequent human use.
 LAND USE PLANNING TO ADDRESS NOISE
During the planning period the City will develop and implement planning policies, guidelines, and standards
that minimize people' s exposure to excessive noise, with special emphasis on protecting residential
neighborhoods from intrusive noise.           Implementation of the Downtown Specific Plan, the Land Use and
Community Identity Element, and the Circulation Element will maintain the single -family character of the
community while providing opportunities for redevelopment to occur. The land use changes expected over
the planning period are primarily in targeted areas of Vista. Increases in density and intensity of land uses
are planned for the opportunity areas discussed in the Land Use and Community Identity Element.
December 2011                                                                                                   Page 6 -15

                                                                                                            WA
   Noise Element
                                                                                                         2030
Implementation of the Downtown Specific Plan and changes to many of the land uses in the opportunity
areas will involve a new type of land use for the City of Vista —mixed -use development.
Mixed -use development projects often include both residential uses located above or in proximity to
commercial uses and stand -alone multi -family residential uses, especially in areas served by rail and bus
transit, along major roadways, and the SPRINTER corridor. Noise generated by commercial uses can include
maintenance activities, public address systems, vehicles, live music and entertainment, outdoor eating
areas, parking lots, loading operations, and trash collection, as well as pedestrian and business patron noise.
A unique challenge presented by mixed -use development is that such uses desire locations along busy street
corridors and within activity centers; at the same time, State- mandated interior noise requirements for
residential uses must be met within the residential portions of such use. Through the discretionary review
process, the City will ensure that noise from the commercial portions of mixed -use developments is not
transferred to the residential units.
December 2011                                                                                        Page 6 -16

       Chapter 7
Public Safety, Facilities,
 and Services Element
This page left intentionally blank
                                                                                                                         aE?,AL PL l+
                                                                                                                          2030
Chapter 7: Public
                                                                   PUBLIC SAFETY, FACILITIES, AND SERVICES ELEMENT GOALS
Safety, Facilities,
                                                                   PUBLIC SAFETY
                                                   and
                                                                   PSFS Goal t: Reduce crime and opportunities for crime, and protect
                                                                   persons and property from criminal activity.
Services Element                                                   PSFS Goal z: Prepare for and provide adequate and effective
                                                                   emergency response services to respond to natural and human -made
                                                                   emergencies and disasters, and acts of terrorism.
                                                                   PSFS Goal 3: Reduce damage, losses, and the risk to the community
                                                                   caused by seismic and other geologic hazards.
INTRODUCTION                                                       PSFS Goal 4: Reduce damage, losses, and the risk to the community
                                                                   from flooding, other forms of severe weather, dam inundation, and
                                                                   other hydrologic hazards.
Quality of life and economic opportunity for Vista' s
                                                                   PSFS Goal 5: Protect life, property, and the environment from
residents, workforce, and visitors are directly influenced         structural, wildland- urban, and wildland fire damage.
by the level of safety experienced in their homes,                 PSFS Goal 6: Provide for the safe use and disposal of hazardous
                                                                   materials and wastes to protect life and property from exposure.
neighborhoods,      businesses,     parks,  and   schools,    and
                                                                   PSFS Goal 7: Protect persons and property from hazards related to
while circulating through the community, whether in a              airport operations.
vehicle, on a bicycle, or on foot. An important function           PSFS Goal 8: Promote disaster -resistant development.
of local government is the protection of persons and               PUBLIC FACILITIES AND SERVICES
                                                              The  PSFS Goal g: Continue to provide sanitary sewer facilities to
property from natural and human -made hazards.                     accommodate the safe, efficient, and cost -effective disposal of
Public Safety, Facilities, and Services Plan describes the         waste, commensurate with existing and proposed development.
manner in which the City will protect people, structures,          PSFS Goal to: Continue to provide drainage facilities to adequately
                                                                   collect surface runoff to mitigate flooding and improve water quality.
infrastructure, public facilities, and       natural  resources
                                                                   PSFS Goal tt: Continue to ensure that the City has an adequate, safe,
from natural and human -made hazards.             The types of     and reliable water supply to meet the existing and planned needs of
                                                                   the community.
hazardous incidents most likely to occur in Vista are
                                                                   PFSF Goal tz: Continue to provide fire protection and related
groundshaking        and    the    secondary     effects    from
                                                                   emergency services to protect persons and property from fire and
earthquakes,- storm -related incidents that could cause            other community hazards.
                                   and   landslides,               PSFS Goal 13: Through coordination with State, County, and local
flooding of local creeks,-                             wildfires,
                                                                   Emergency Medical Services Association, provide local control and
hazardous      materials release,    and terrorism     or other    oversight of pre -hospital emergency medical care through Advanced
                                                                   Life Support Services.
domestic threats.
                                                                   PSFS Goal 14: Continue to provide an adequate level of law
The adequacy, quality, and availability of the City' s public      enforcement services to protect persons and property from criminal
                                                                   activity and provide a safe community environment.
facilities and services provide the framework for a safe
                                                                   PSFS Goal 15: Provide and maintain public facilities, including the Civic
community, quality of life, and achievement of the                 Center, maintenance and warehouse facilities, as well as City
                                                                   welcome signs and other community identifiers, to serve the citizens
community Vision 2030. Vista is nearly built out and will          of Vista and meet their existing and anticipated needs.
not      require    significant     expansion     of    utilities, PSFS Goal 16: Provide and maintain public infrastructure and utilities
infrastructure,    facilities,  or   associated    services     to that support existing and planned land uses and development in a
                                                                   cost -effective and responsible manner.
 December 2011                                                                                                           Page 7 -1
                                                                                                              E1k A t
                                                                                                         C7ti
                                                                                                                      p( L
                                                                                                           XISTok
   Public Safety, Facilities, and Services Element                                                            2030
accommodate new growth in undeveloped areas.              However, the development and intensification of land
uses called for in the Opportunity Areas of the Land Use and Community Identity Element will require
improvements to water, sewer, and storm drain systems, along with the more " visible" improvements to the
circulation infrastructure. In addition, much of the City' s existing infrastructure is aging and either is or will
be in need of improvement or replacement over the course of the General Plan' s planning period. Providing
adequate public facilities and services is not only critical for the health, safety, and welfare of the
community, it also is an important factor in attracting new businesses to Vista and supporting private
investment.
PURPOSE
The primary purpose of the Public Safety, Facilities, and Services Element of the General Plan is two -fold
and complementary:
     i.
          To identify and reduce the risk to life and property from natural and human -made hazards in or near
          the City that pose potential danger to the safety and welfare of the community; and
     2.   To ensure that public facilities and services support the existing and planned future development
          within Vista, and are provided in an efficient, cost -effective, and environmentally sustainable
          manner that are considered as an integral part of the City' s development review and decision -
          making process.
The Public Safety, Facilities, and Services Element fulfills the requirements of the State' s mandated safety
element by addressing public safety hazards, including: seismic and other geologic hazards, flooding and
other hydrologic hazards, fires and fire -related hazards, hazardous materials and sites, crime, airport safety,
and emergency preparedness.
The State' s General Plan Guidelines also require general plans to address public facilities and services and
ensure they are coordinated with planned development and growth. While the Guidelines suggest that
these subjects be addressed in land use and circulation elements, the City has chosen to augment the
General Plan by adding a Facilities and Services component to the Safety Element, which replaces the
previous Community Facilities Element.
GOALS AND POLICIES
PUBLIC SAFETY
The following goals and policies are intended to ensure that Vista reduces the possibility of damage and
losses to life, property, critical facilities, infrastructure, City -owned facilities, and the environment; and
reduces economic disruption and social displacement resulting from natural and human -made hazards and
 December 2011                                                                                             Page 7 -2
                                                                                                           ER A t
                                                                                                      C7ti
                                                                                                                  p( L
                                                                                                       XISTok
   Public Safety, Facilities, and Services Element                                                         2034
disasters. They also highlight the importance of being prepared for, and able to respond to, such hazardous
incidents if or when they occur. The public safety goals address appropriate land use planning, development
standards, building standards, community education and outreach, interagency coordination, and continued
monitoring of research and changes in regulations related to hazard management and new safety hazards.
The goals and policies consider: seismic and geologic hazards, flooding and other hydraulic hazards,
structural fires and wildfires, hazardous materials and waste, crime, airport -related hazards, emergency
preparedness and response, and disaster -resistant development.
Criminal Activity
PSFS GOAL 1:           Reduce crime and opportunities for crime,                and  protect    persons    and
property from criminal activity.
         PSFS Policy i.i:    Encourage developers and builders to incorporate building and site design
         techniques that reduce crime, such as utilizing Crime Prevention through Environmental Design
          CPTED) design strategies.
         PSFS Policy 1. 2: Increase safety and security in public places —such as parks, recreation facilities,
         sidewalks, transit stops and facilities, and trails —by providing adequate lighting, maintaining
         landscaping to maximize visibility and reduce hiding places, and conducting regular police and
         volunteer (crime watch) patrols.
         PSFS Policy 3.. 3: Maintain public property and rights -of -way to enhance community identity and
         pride and mitigate the perception of blight or crime.    Examples include providing and maintaining
         attractive landscaping and streetscape features; installing public art; removing graffiti immediately;
         and removing trash, debris, weeds, etc. from public areas with ongoing maintenance of those public
         areas.
         PSFS POlicy i.4: Enhance communications between law enforcement and Vista' s youth and support
         programs that deter youth -related crimes.
         PSFS Policy 1. 5:  Continue to support the Community Oriented Policing concept to reduce and
         prevent crime and improve and strengthen neighborhoods by resolving community problems in an
         interactive and proactive partnershipwith residents.
         PSFS Policy 3.. 6: Develop a formal policy addressing the City' s review of licenses for the sale of
         alcohol.
 December 2011                                                                                         Page 7 -3

                                                                                                               E1k A t
                                                                                                          C7ti
                                                                                                                       p( L
                                                                                                           XISTok
  Public Safety, Facilities, and Services Element                                                              2034
        PSFS P014 1- 7: Restrict approvals of new liquor stores or other retailers that sell alcohol for off -site
        consumption in target areas ( e. g., high crime areas, near schools, etc.).
Emergency Preparedness and Response
PSFS GOAL z:           Prepare for and provide adequate and effective emergency response
services to respond to natural and human -made emergencies and disasters, and acts of
terrorism.
        PSFS Policy z. i: Continue to participate in the development and updating of the Multi- Jurisdictional
        Hazard Mitigation Plan ( HMP) for San Diego County and participating jurisdictions.
        PSFS Policy 2. 2:    Continue to implement the hazard -related goals, objectives, and actions of the
        HMP, including ensuring consistency between the HMP; the General Plan; and the plans, programs,
        and regulations of implementing City departments.
        PSFS Policy 2. 3:     Maintain compliance with the federal National Incident Management System
         NIMS) and State Standardized Emergency Management System ( SEMS).
        PSFS Policy 2. 4: Update City Emergency Operations Plans to include coordination with Countywide
        Operations Plans.
        PSFS Policy 2. 5:    Periodically update the Continuity of City Government Plan to ensure the City
        continues its essential operations in case of a natural or human -made disaster or catastrophic event.
        PSFS Policy 2. 6: Continue to participate in the North County Dispatch Joint Powers Authority.
        PSFS Policy 2. 7:    Provide and support community education, outreach, and training programs to
        increase public awareness of natural and human -made emergencies and disasters; and increase
        citizens' ability to be prepared for, and self- sufficient after, emergency and disaster situations, when
        they may initially be on their own ( e. g., water and food storage, first aid, family emergency plans,
        etc.).
        PSFS Policy 2. 8: Identify and pursue funding opportunities to develop and implement emergency
        and disaster preparedness activities and programs.
        PSFS Policy 2. 9: Identify and post emergency evacuation routes on the City' s website and in public
        locations.
        PSFS Policy 2. 10: Identify and maintain emergency shelters.
 December 2011                                                                                             Page 7 -4
                                                                                                             ER A t
                                                                                                        C7ti
                                                                                                                    p( L
                                                                                                         XISTOk
  Public Safety, Facilities, and Services Element                                                            2034
Seismic and Geologic Hazards
PSFS Goal 3:      Reduce damage, losses, and the risk to the community caused by seismic
and other geologic hazards.
       PSFS Policy 3. 3.: Require a site -specific geotechnical report, prepared by State -licensed personnel as
       a condition of project approval for development within areas of known or suspected geologic hazard
       on site.
       PSFS Policy 3. 2: Design critical facilities that will function after a major earthquake.
       PSFS Policy 3. 3: Encourage seismic strength evaluations of critical facilities in Vista, such as schools
       and public infrastructure, to identify vulnerabilities and develop actions to upgrade them to meet
       current seismic standards.
       PSFS Policy 34 Identify seismically inadequate buildings and develop or support programs to assist
       in the seismic upgrading of buildings to meet building and safety codes, including investigating
       funding opportunities and possibilities for cost -sharing.
       PSFS Policy 3. 5: Discourage development in areas of known slope instability and /or high landslide
       risk.
       PSFS Policy 3. 6: Promote earthquake preparedness within the community by providing information
       and participating in earthquake awareness programs.
       PSFS Policy 3. 7: Review the requirements of the Alquist -Priolo Earthquake Fault Zoning Act at least
       once yearly to determine if any State updates to seismic hazards' mapping recognize any active
       faults within the City or its Sphere of Influence ( SOI) and, if so, undertake actions to implement the
       City' s regulatory responsibilities.
       PSFS Policy 3. 8:    Review the Seismic Hazards Mapping Act at least once yearly to determine of
       secondary seismic hazards have been delineated with the City or SOI and, if so, undertake actions to
       implement the City' s regulatory responsibilities.
       PSFS Policy 3. 9: In areas subject to mudflows and located near development, and where wildfires
       have removed stabilizing vegetation, implement measures to reduce the likelihood of inundation
       from mudflows, including but not limited to:
             a.  Cleaning out existing debris basins priorto rain events; and
December 2011                                                                                            Page 7 -5
                                                                                                            ER A t
                                                                                                       C7ti
                                                                                                                   p( L
                                                                                                        XISTok
  Public Safety, Facilities, and Services Element                                                           2034
            b.  Applying slope stabilization measures, including but not limited to hydroseeding, using
                erosion control blankets, and creating flow paths that direct flow on the slopes into
                stabilized channels and debris basins.
Hydrologic Hazards
PSFS Goal 4: Reduce damage, losses, and the risk to the community from flooding, other
forms of severe weather, dam inundation, and other hydrologic hazards.
       PSFS Policy 4. 1: Continue to participate in the Federal Emergency Management Agency' s ( FEMA)
       National Flood Insurance Program ( NFIP) and enforce sound floodplain management standards.
       PSFS Policy 4. 2:    Require that all new development ( including construction, filling, grading, and
       dredging) within floodplains and special flood hazard areas identified by FEMA' s Federal Insurance
       Administrator ( FIA) and /or the City' s Floodplain Administrator comply with the City' s Flood Area
       Construction Regulations Ordinance and all other applicable regulations.
       PSFS Policy 4. 3: Disallow sensitive land uses, including but not limited to hospitals, schools, nursing
       homes, retirement communities, and day care centers, none of which will be allowed within the ioo-
       year floodplain.
       PSFS Policy 4. 4: Ensure that any alterations of the natural floodplain, stream channels, and natural
       protective barriers do not impede or unnaturally redirect floodwaters, increase flood hazards in
       other areas, or result in increased flood damage.
       PSFS Policy 4. 5: Evaluate and make improvements to inadequate storm drain systems, including
       channels, drains, catch basins, pipes, and inlets, to ensure capacity for maximum runoff flows.
       PSFS Policy 4. 6: Work with the San Diego County Flood Control District (SDFCD) to ensure that the
       SDFCD' s flood and stormwater control facilities are well maintained within the City' s SOI and
       capable of accommodating, at a minimum, ioo -year floods.
       PSFS Policy 4. 7: Identify surface water drainage obstructions for all parts of the City and develop
       and implement mitigation actions.
       PSFS Policy 4. 8:    Require incorporation of design features that reduce the amount of impervious
       surface ( e. g., paved areas) within new public and private developments, consistent with Regional
       Water Quality Control Board standards and the City' s Jurisdictional Urban Runoff Management
       Plan.
 December 2011                                                                                          Page 7 -6
                                                                                                          E1k A t
                                                                                                     C7ti
                                                                                                                  p( L
                                                                                                      XISTOk
  Public Safety, Facilities, and Services Element                                                         2034
       PSFS Policy 4. 9:     Support or undertake creek corridor restoration projects that manage flooding
       while restoring native plant species, wildlife habitats, and watersheds.
       PSFS Policy 4. 3.o: Discourage the construction of critical and essential uses and infrastructure, and
       high occupancy buildings and uses, within designated dam inundation areas.
Structural Fires and Wildfires
PSFS Goal 5: Protect life, property, and the environment from structural, wildland- urban,
and wildland fire damage.
       PSFS Policy 5. 3.: Require development or projects within very high, high, or moderate fire zones, as
       designated by the City' s Fire Hazard Severity Zones Map, to comply with regulations and /or
       implement measures to mitigate the risk to life and structures from intrusion of fire from wildland
       fire exposures and fire exposures from adjacent structures, and to mitigate structure fires from
       spreading to wildland fuels. This may include, but is not limited to:
            a.   Preparing fire protection plans.
            b.   Creating and maintaining defensible space and vegetation management.
            c.   Planting and maintaining fire -resistant landscaping.
            d.   Using fire -resistant building materials and construction techniques.
            e.   Ensuring adequate water supply and fire flow.
            f.   Providing adequate circulation, emergency access, and property addressing and road
                 identification.
       PSFS Policy 5. 2: Periodically update fire hazard studies and Fire Hazard Severity Zones Maps, and
       update or develop regulations and codes as appropriate.
       PSFS Policy 5. 3: Conduct community -wide awareness and education efforts concerning defensible
       space planning, maintenance, ignition- resistant construction, and landscaping techniques, with a
       focus on the areas within the Very High Fire Hazard Severity Zone.
       PSFS Policy 5. 4: Through the development review process, ensure that water main capabilities are
       adequate to meet fire flow requirements to the satisfaction of the Vista Irrigation District and Fire
       Department for all new development.
       PSFS Policy 5. 5:    Pursue funding to implement fire protection measures at the City- and project -
       specific level.
December 2011                                                                                         Page 7 -7
                                                                                                         ER A t
                                                                                                    C7ti
                                                                                                                p( L
                                                                                                     XISTok
  Public Safety, Facilities, and Services Element                                                        2034
       PSFS Policy 5. 6:     Work with the Vista Fire Protection District and the County to ensure that
       development within fire hazard areas in the SOI complies with site design and property
       maintenance standards to reduce the risk of wildfires.
       PSFS Policy 5. 7: Maintain the City' s Vegetation Management Program to reduce wildfire hazards in
       urban and semi -urban areas within Vista. Thinning, pruning or removal of native vegetation under
       this program shall require approval of the Fire Marshal and the appropriate resource agencies if not
       permitted under existing agreements.
Hazardous Materials and Wastes
PSFS Goal 6:       Provide for the safe use and disposal of hazardous materials and wastes to
protect life and property from exposure.
       PSFS Policy 6. 3.:   Continue to require Hazardous Materials Business Plans ( HMBPs) according to
       Chapter 6. 95 of the Health and Safety Code ( Section 25500).
       PSFS Policy 6. 2: Continue to enforce provisions under the zoning ordinance regulating the location
       of facilities that use, produce, or store hazardous materials or wastes.
       PSFS Policy 6. 3:    Educate residents about waste -disposal options and the consequences of illegal
       disposal in order to reduce the generation of household hazardous waste and the amount of such
       waste that is disposed of inappropriately.
       PSFS Policy 6. 4:      Require all businesses that generate, handle, use, or dispose of hazardous
       materials or wastes to post placards in compliance with National Fire Protection Association ( NFPA)
       section 704 requirements.
       PSFS Policy 6. 5:    Promote the continued operation of the Household Hazardous Waste collection
       facility to serve the citizens of Vista.
Airport -Related Hazards
PSFS GOAL 7: Protect persons and property from hazards related to airport operations.
       PSFS Policy 7. 3.: Evaluate new development proposals within the Airport Influence Areas ( AIAs) of
       the McClellan -Palomar and Oceanside Municipal Airports to ensure that they comply with the
       applicable compatibility criteria and policies of the respective Airport Land Use Compatibility Plans
        ALUCPs).
December 2011                                                                                        Page 7 -8
                                                                                                               ER A t
                                                                                                          C7ti
                                                                                                                      p( L
                                                                                                           XISTok
  Public Safety, Facilities, and Services Element                                                              2034
       PSFS Policy 7. 2:     Periodically review and comment on updates to the ALUCPs of the McClellan -
       Palomar Airport and the Oceanside Municipal Airport to ensure that proposed airport operations do
       not negatively affect people or property within Vista, especially if the safety zones for either airport
       are extended into Vista as a result of increased airport operations.
Disaster -Resistant Development
PSFS Goal 8: Promote disaster -resistant development.
       PSFS Policy 8. 3.: Develop and implement a program to retrofit buildings within the City that do not
       meet current building and safety codes.
       PSFS Policy 8. 2: Coordinate with San Diego County and Caltrans to identify and correct any
       structural deficiencies of bridges or overpasses within Vista.
       PSFS Policy 8. 3:     Enhance Geographic Information Systems ( GIS) capabilities to identify hazard -
       prone areas and hazard -prone structures, infrastructure, and facilities. The database should include
       the following information:
            a.    Lowland areas where seismically induced liquefaction or related phenomena are a
                  significant risk to construction
            b.    Ridgelines or other high areas where seismically induced ridgetop shattering is a concern
            c.
                  Slopes at risk of landslides, including seismically induced landslides
            d.    Areas in potential landslide runout zones
            e.    Drainages with the potential to generate mudslide /debris flow events
            f.    Areas where geologic hazards involving seismically induced slope failure, landslides,
                  ridgetop shattering, and expansive soils could occur
       PSFS Policy 8. 4: Evaluate development standards and building codes to determine if higher levels
       of built -in hazard protection ( such as fire protection, fire resistance, earthquake resistance, etc.) are
       appropriate     for  new     development    types,  uses,  densities,  and  intensities identified   in  the
       Opportunity Areas of the Land Use and Community Identity Element.
       PSFS Policy 8. 5:     Continue the practice of having departments provide information pertaining to
       hazard reduction requirements and measures through the pre -application and development review
       process.
December 2011                                                                                              Page 7 -9
                                                                                                            E1k A t
                                                                                                       C7ti
                                                                                                                    p( L
                                                                                                        XISTOk
   Public Safety, Facilities, and Services Element                                                          2034
PUBLIC FACILITIES AND SERVICES
The following goals and policies are intended to ensure that public facilities and services are provided to
protect the health, safety, and welfare of citizens; and support existing and planned development in a
responsible, cost -effective manner, and environmentally sustainable         manner.    The  goals and  policies
address: sanitary sewers, storm drains, water lines, emergency medical services, police and fire stations, the
circulation system, parks and recreation facilities, and government facilities.       They also emphasize the
importance of assessing their adequacy and prioritizing and funding construction and regular maintenance
through the annual      Capital Improvement Program ( CIP) process.       The CIP describes the City' s public
infrastructure improvement plan, including capital projects, funding mechanisms, and scheduling to manage
the physical development of the community.
Sanitary Sewer System
PSFS Goal g:         Continue to provide sanitary sewer facilities to accommodate the safe,
efficient, and cost -effective disposal of waste, commensurate with existing and proposed
development.
          PSFS Policy 9. 3.:   Periodically update the Sewer Master Plan when necessitated by changes in
          District conditions and /or State regulations.
          PSFS Policy 9. 2:     Utilize updated management tools to efficiently manage operations and
          maintenance ( O & M) and capital improvement projects, and more equitably assess rates and
          connection fees.
          PSFS Policy 9. 3:   Implement prioritized projects for inclusion in the CIP within the recommended
          time frames to address all known deficiencies and minimize sanitary sewer overflows (SSOs).
Drainage Facilities
PSFS Goal so:        Continue to provide drainage facilities to adequately collect surface runoff
to mitigate flooding and improve water quality.
          PSFS Policy io.i: Ensure that the storm drain system is adequate to accommodate intensification
          and /or redevelopment of uses as identified in the Land Use and Community Identity Element.
          PSFS Policy 3.0. 2: Develop and periodically update a Drainage Master Plan, including Storm Drain
          Master Plans ( SDMPs) for each of the watersheds.
 December 2011                                                                                         Page 7 -10
                                                                                                         E1k A L
                                                                                                    C7ti
                                                                                                                 p`
                                                                                                      XISTok
  Public Safety, Facilities, and Services Element                                                        2034
       PSFS Policy 3.o. 3:   Monitor, maintain, and update as appropriate established minimum standards
       and design criteria for the safe and efficient collection of surface runoff.
       PSFS Policy io. 4: Implement prioritized projects from the SDMPs for inclusion in the CIP.
Water Supply
PSFS Goal 11:     Continue to ensure that the City has an adequate, safe, and reliable water
supply to meet the existing and planned needs of the community.
       PSFS Policy ii.i:     Coordinate with the Vista Irrigation District ( VID) to update its Urban Water
       Management Plan during the regular update cycle.
       PSFS:   11. 2:  Coordinate with VID to conduct assessments of water supply to determine if water
       supplies are adequate to serve the demand generated by projects.
       PSFS Policy 3.3.. 3: Promote water conservation programs and use of recycled water to reduce Vista' s
       demand for potable water.
Fire Protection and Emergency Medical Services
PSFS Goal sz:         Continue to provide fire protection and related emergency services to
protect persons and property from fire and other community hazards.
       PSFS Policy iz.i: Ensure that the Vista Fire Department has sufficient capacity, stations, personnel,
       and equipment to meet planned needs within the City and the Vista Fire Protection District.
       PSFS Policy 3. 2. 2: Achieve an 8: 55- minute total response time go percent of the time.
       PSFS Policy 3.2. 3:   Periodically update the Standards of Response Cover Analysis to evaluate the
       response time standard, staffing, station locations, and equipment placing relative to call loading,
       access impediments, and community risks and expectations.
       PSFS Policy 3. 2. 4: Evaluate the possible impact of a change in development type, density, and use
        especially mixed -use, which is a combination of residential and commercial uses in the same
       structure or on the same site) proposed in the Opportunity Areas of the Land Use and Community
       Identity Element on the VFD' s ability to provide adequate protection.
 December 2011                                                                                       Page 7 -11
                                                                                                              E1k A t
                                                                                                         C7ti
                                                                                                                      p( L
                                                                                                          XISTOk
  Public Safety, Facilities, and Services Element                                                             2034
       PSFS Policy 3. 2. 5: Place all utility and other service wires underground, with highest priority given to
       areas of Vista that are most prone to wildfire hazards ( especially the eastern and southern portions
       of the City and SOI).
PFSF Goal 13:      Through coordination with State, County, and local Emergency Medical
Services Association,         provide local control and oversight of pre -hospital emergency
medical care through Advanced Life Support Services.
       PSFS Policy 3.3. 3.: Maintain service levels in compliance with State and County protocols.
       PSFS Policy 3.3. 2:    Conduct community -wide awareness and education efforts for healthy living,
       disaster planning, public health issues, and injury prevention.
       PSFS Policy 3.3. 3: Implement injury reduction programs as feasible. Provide information on the 93.3.
       system and where /howto obtain CPR training.
       PFSF Policy 3.3. 4: Permit private ambulance providers to ensure safe practice, minimize Code Three
       travel in the City and District, and identify available ambulance resources.
       PFSF Policy 3.3. 5: Encourage and support AED ( Automated External Defibrillation) programs.
       PFSF Policy 3.3. 6: Present and support CPR training throughout the City workforce and community.
       PFSF Policy 3.3. 7:    Ensure EMS personnel are well trained to provide emergency medical care,
       thorough education, continuous quality improvement, testing and National certifications.
       PFSF Policy 3.3. 8: Provide and /or oversee emergency medical ground transport.
       PFSF Policy 3.3. 9: Provide and maintain Paramedic Assessment engines seven days a week.
       PFSF Policy 3.3. 3.o: Assure compliance with policies, procedures and protocols for medical control as
       established by San Diego County EMS.
       PFSF Policy 3.3. 3.3.: Ensure secure patient record keeping that complies with the Health Insurance
       Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA) and confidentially regulations.
Law Enforcement
PSFS Goal 14:       Continue to provide an adequate level of law enforcement services to
protect persons and property from criminal activity and provide a safe community
environment.
December 2011                                                                                            Page 7 -12
                                                                                                                   VR A L P(,
                                                                                                                              q' J'
  Public Safety, Facilities, and Services Element                                                                2034
        PSFS Policy 3.4. 3.:       Ensure that the City maintains acceptable ratios of law enforcement personnel
        per population.
        PSFS Policy 3.4. 2:          Continue to     provide  facilities that
        support community policing and expand opportunities as
        they arise.
        PSFS    Policy     3.4. 3:     Continue   to   support   contractual
        agreements between the Community Oriented Policing
        and Problem Solving ( COPPS) staff and the SDCSD.
        PSFS Policy 3.4. 4:        Develop a program in conjunction with
        the SDCSD to require a development impact fee or other
                                                                                           Sheriffs Substation
        method to ensure that, through the development process for
        future projects, project applicants would contribute their fair share in order for SDCSD to provide
        adequate staffing levels within the City. The program will also establish the fee amount that will be
        proportional to a future project' s impact on police protection services.
Other Public Facilities
PSFS Goal 15:             Provide       and    maintain      public    facilities, including the Civic Center,
maintenance and warehouse facilities, as well as City welcome signs and other community
identifiers, to serve the citizens of Vista and meet their existing and anticipated needs.
        PSFS Policy 3. 5. 3.:      Provide public facilities that increase the efficiency and effectiveness of City
        operations and service delivery, and provide user -friendly citizen access.
        PSFS Policy 3.5. 2: Maintain the quantity and quality of public facilities to serve the long -term needs
        of Vista' s citizens, including consideration of population size and demand.
        PSFS Policy 3.5. 3: Design and construct new public facilities utilizing green building techniques and
        achieve Leadership in Energyand Environmental Design ( LEED) certification.
        PSFS Policy 3. 5. 4: As older public facilities are renovated, design and construct the renovations to
        incorporate green building techniques.
 December 2011                                                                                                 Page 7 -13
                                                                                                            tit At
                                                                                                       C7ti
                                                                                                                   p(. 1ti
                                                                                                        XISTok
  Public Safety, Facilities, and Services Element                                                           2034
Coordinated Planning and Financing for Public Facilities and Services
PSFS Goal      16:    Provide and       maintain public infrastructure and utilities that support
existing and planned land uses and development in a cost -effective and responsible
manner.
       PSFS Policy 3.6. 3.: Determine public infrastructure and utility needs to implement the General Plan
       and prioritize them through the City' s CIP.
       PSFS Policy 3.6. 2: Evaluate existing public infrastructure and utilities to determine deficiencies and
       identify ongoing maintenance and /or replacement needs, and prioritize and implement them
       through the CIP and O & M investment.
       PSFS Policy 3.6. 3:   Ensure that capital improvements and public facilities and services required to
       accommodate planned future growth are provided without unduly adding to the burden borne by
       taxpayers and that the improvements built will directly benefit the new users.
       PSFS Policy 3.6. 4:    Ensure that private development provides its fair share of the cost of public
       services, improvements, and operations through the application of development impact fees,
       assessment districts, and /or other appropriate means.
       PSFS Policy 3.6. 5: Allow for or establish capital facility financing mechanisms that include, but are
       not limited to:
           a.    Development Impact Fees
            b.   Multi- or Single- Purpose Improvement Assessment Districts
           c.    Non -Profit Public Benefit Corporations
           d.    Redevelopment Agencies
           e.    Development Agreements
           f.    Proposition ATransportation Funds
           g.    Proposition L Sales Tax
            h.   Grants
            i.   Bonds
       PSFS Policy 3. 6. 6:    Utilize the sales tax revenue from Proposition L, the       Vista Vital Services
       Restoration and Protection Measure, to fund community priorities as per input from citizens and
       direction from the Sales Tax Oversight Committee.
December 2011                                                                                          Page 7 -14
                                                                                                            E1k A t
                                                                                                       C7ti
                                                                                                                    p( L
                                                                                                        XISTok
   Public Safety, Facilities, and Services Element                                                          2034
           PSFS Policy 3. 6. 7:     Utilize Redevelopment Agency revenues to fund public infrastructure
           improvements within the Redevelopment Area to eliminate blight and attract private investment to
           the City.
           PSFS Policy 3.6. 8:      Continue offering incentives ( such as reducing impact fees, providing
           Development Impact Fee credits to assessment districts for infrastructure improvements, etc.) on a
           case -by -case basis for proposed commercial or industrial development that can demonstrate the
           abilityto significantly mitigate development impacts through improvement to the economic base of
           the City, such as sales tax, transient occupancy tax, and job creation.
THE PUBLIC SAFETY, FACILITIES, AND SERVICES PLAN
The Public Safety, Facilities, and Services Plan provides a brief overview and key issues related to the topics
addressed in the Goals and Policies section of the Public Safety, Facilities, and Services Element. Additional
information regarding public safety, facilities, and services can be found in the Background Report.           In
addition, it includes figures that provide information to augment the policies and guide City actions and
decision -making.
The Plan has been organized to follow the structure of the Goals and Policies section.       The Public Safety
section focuses on the methods the City will take to reduce impacts on the community from identified
hazards, while the Public Facilities and Services section focuses on the facilities and associated services the
City provides and how they are evaluated, prioritized, and funded. Although several topics overlap, the
Public Safety and the Public Facilities and Services sections are intended to complement each other.
PUBLIC SAFETY
Crime Prevention
Vista has an average crime rate when compared to the other 3.7 incorporated jurisdictions within the County.
Comparisons of FBI Index crime rates per 3., 00o population ( which include homicide, rape, robbery,
aggravated assault, burglary, larceny, and motor vehicle theft) places Vista at slightly below the median rate
in 2004 and at the median rate in 2oo8 ( Burke 2009). Of the 3.8 incorporated cities in San Diego County,
Vista ranked eighth ( at 3574 per 3., 000) in 2004 and ninth ( at 33..75 per 3., 000) in 20o8; however, it is
important to note that although Vista' s ranking dropped from eighth to ninth in that four -year period, the
City' s crime rate actually fell by 3.3. percent during that same time period. In both 2004 and 2oo8, the most
common crimes in Vista were larceny -theft ($400 and under), larceny -theft (over $400), motor vehicle theft,
and residential burglary.
 December 2011                                                                                         Page 7 -15
                                                                                                             ER A t
                                                                                                        C7ti
                                                                                                                    p( L
                                                                                                         XISTok
   Public Safety, Facilities, and Services Element                                                           2034
Emergency Preparedness and Response
The effectiveness of a community' s emergency preparedness and response can affect the severity of the
consequences of any given disaster event. Effective emergency preparedness and response is necessary to
avoid or minimize the loss of life and property as a result of natural and industrial disasters; to reduce the
social, cultural, environmental, and economic costs of disasters; and to assist in the rapid recovery from
disasters.
Vista is a participant in the Multi- Jurisdictional HMP for San Diego County ( February zoio). The HMP is a
countywide plan that identifies risks posed by natural and human -made disasters and ways to minimize
damage from those disasters.       The HMP was prepared to meet FEMA and State of California Office of
Emergency Services and Security requirements as authorized by the Federal Disaster Mitigation Act of 2000
 DMA z000).    The stated purposes of the HMP are as follows: enhance public awareness and understanding,
create a decision tool for management, promote compliance with state and federal program requirements,
enhance local policies for hazard mitigation capability, provide inter -jurisdictional coordination of
mitigation -related programming, achieve regulatory compliance, and pre -qualify jurisdictions for mitigation
grants.
After review of localized hazard maps and a summary of potential hazard -related exposure /loss, the City
identified the top five hazards in the HMP as follows:
         Wildfire: a significant amount of the community is exposed to the potential for loss secondary to
         extreme fire conditions in undeveloped core and interface areas.
         Earthquake: the potential exists for a large loss of life and property as well as prolonged disruption
         of governmental and commercial continuity.
         Flooding: the City contains several significant floodplains and is subject to wide -spread flooding.
         Hazardous Materials Release: in addition to SR -78 and a railway that is used for freight, the City is
         home to a large industrial park with fixed facilities.
         Terrorism or other Manmade Events: government infrastructure facilities, including a Regional
         Court and Jail Detention Facility, present potential targets for acts of domestic terrorism.
Based on the five priority hazards that were identified in the HMP, a committee of City staff developed eight
hazard -related goals.   For each goal, one or more objectives were identified, and actions were provided to
implement the goals and objectives.       One of the strategies to achieve the City' s goals was to update the
appropriate elements of the       General    Plan.  The HMP lists existing departments in Vista and their
responsibilities related to hazard planning and mitigation. The departments include the Fire Department,
the Community Development Department, and the Public Works Department.
 December 2011                                                                                          Page 7 -16
                                                                                                               E1k A t
                                                                                                          C7ti
                                                                                                                       p( L
                                                                                                           XISTok
   Public Safety, Facilities, and Services Element                                                             2034
All agencies that participate in any emergency are required to have and maintain appropriate training and
certification,   and  must  operate   under  the  National   Incident  Management       System ( NIMS)   and    the
Standardized Emergency Management System ( SEMS). NIMS was established by the federal Department
of Homeland Security as a unified approach to incident management. In California, NIMS is implemented at
the state level through SEMS. The intent is to improve the efficiency and effectiveness of responders from
different jurisdictions when responding to natural disasters and emergencies.
The General Plan update provides an opportunity to implement the goals of the HMP. The Public Safety,
Facilities, and Services Element does not replace the City' s HMP, but instead supports it by building on the
priorities and goals identified in the HMP and expanding them as appropriate to include additional hazards
that are required to be addressed by local jurisdictions in their safety elements. During the planning period
the City will continue to implement the actions identified in the HMP.          It will also update the HMP as
appropriate to address goals and policies identified in the Public Safety, Facilities, and Safety Element and
any additional hazards that are identified over the course of time through the state' s hazard mapping
efforts, other state or federal requirements, and information that is identified through City evaluation and
analysis, such as local hazard mapping through the GIS process. The City will also maintain adequate NIMS
and SEMS training and compliance.
Seismic and Other Geologic Hazards
Because of its location within a seismically active region in the western foothills of the San Marcos
Mountains, seismic hazards are a primary concern for Vista. Although it is difficult to predict when an
earthquake might occur or how severe the magnitude may be, the Uniform California Earthquake Rupture
Forecast, Version z ( 20o8) indicates a 97 percent probability of a magnitude ( M) >_ 6. 7 event in southern
California   in the  next 3o years.   The State of California     recognizes two broad categories of hazards
associated with    earthquake events: (  i) primary seismic hazards, which include surface fault rupture and
groundshaking; and ( 2) secondary seismic hazards, which include corollary results of groundshaking, such as
seismically induced landslides, liquefaction, and other types of seismically induced ground failure.
Primary Seismic Hazards
There are no active faults within Vista as listed under the Alquist -Priolo Earthquake Fault Zoning Act as of
the date of adoption of this Public Safety, Facilities, and Services Element; therefore, the risk of surface fault
rupture in Vista is considered low at this time. However, several faults do exist within the general vicinity of
the community, as shown in Figure PSFS -3..       The nearest active fault is the Rose Canyon Fault, located
approximately iz miles west of Vista under the Pacific Ocean. Although not considered a serious threat due
to distance and historical magnitude, an earthquake large enough to pose a safety threat could occur and
result in moderate groundshaking. Although seismic groundshaking risks are substantially higher in areas
 December 2011                                                                                            Page 7 -17
                                                                                                             VR A L P(,
                                                                                                                        q' Y
   Public Safety, Facilities, and Services Element                                                          2034
close to the state' s major faults, a moderate to major fault on any of the major faults in the South Coast
region or inland areas could result in potentially damaging groundshaking in the City and SOL The State
continues to revise and update its Earthquake Fault Zoning Maps, and there is some potential that at a
future date active faulting may be recognized within Vista. Therefore, the Public Safety, Facilities, and
Services Element includes policies that support the City' s responsibility in implementing the Alquist -Priolo
Act' s safeguards in the event that active faulting is identified within the City or SOI in the future.
Secondary Seismic Hazards
The State has not conducted seismic hazards mapping in San Diego County as of the date of adoption of this
Public Safety, Facilities, and Services Element. Consequently, there are no State -delineated seismic hazard
zones for liquefaction, landslides, or othertypes of seismically induced ground failure within Vista or its SOI,
and therefore the severity of these types of hazards is uncertain. However, information prepared for the
General Plan update indicates that unconsolidated alluvial deposits along larger drainages and in valley
bottoms may be liquefiable ( see Figure PSFS -z). In addition, steeper slopes on the City' s west, south, and
north edges and within the SOI may be at some risk of seismically induced landslides; and risks of rock falls
or slides could be exacerbated in areas where ridgetop shattering or related types of seismically induced
bedrock damage occurs. Although State delineation of secondary seismic hazards zones under the Seismic
Hazards Mapping Act has not been extended into northern San Diego County, this area eventually will be
covered. In the event that secondary seismic hazards zones are identified in Vista and /or SOI when mapping
is conducted, the City will implement its responsibilities to enforce the Seismic Hazards Mapping Act.
Other Geologic Hazards
Elevations in Vista range from about 200 feet above mean sea level ( AMSL) to about 600 feet AMSL. As
shown in Figure PSFS -3, slopes are fairly gentle (< 15 percent) in most of the City, although slopes of as much
as 25 - 40 percent occur along some of the principal drainages and approaching the San Marcos Mountains at
the eastern edge of the SOL The high point on the San Marcos ridgeline has an elevation of 1, 674 feet
AMSL. Maximum slope gradients along the San Marcos rangefront are as much as 40 percent.
Vista is situated on well- drained, loamy soils, most of which may be highly erodible, and some of which are
moderately to highly expansive ( U. S. Soil Conservation Service 1973). Figure PSFS -4 depicts the soils types
that underlie the City and SOL Although little information specific to risks is available, analysis conducted
for this General Plan update indicates that Vista' s soil and geologic conditions should not pose a significant
constraint to development in Vista, and soil stability should be achieved in most areas utilizing conventional
grading techniques. However, further evaluation and mitigation may be necessary on a project -by- project
basis in steeper areas of the City, when cut slopes are planned in areas of thick surficial deposits, if
 December 2011                                                                                           Page 7 -18
                                    Lake
                                                                                                        a
                                    Elsinore    s, f                                                      va
              Mission
             Viejo
                                                               Riverside              County
                                               o' e`
      Orange
                             A.I.   A\
      County                                                        Temecula
                                                     Fallbrook \                                    r;,
                                               s ,
                                  Oceanside
                                     G                Vista
                                                                                                                     r
                                          Carlsbad                      Escondido          t
                                         G
                                                                             kr
                                                                        e/
                                              Encinit s
                                             G
                                                 i'
                                                   Solana                             y
                                                                              Poway '
                                                   Beach                     G
                                                                                             San           Diego
                                                                                                 County
                                            1
                                                                                   G
                                                                                    Santee       P7   a            J
                                                                                             ri %
                                                                                                f   !                 T
                                                                 San
                                                                 Diego
                                                                                La Mesa _
                                                                                                             a
                                                                               G .
                                                  or
                                                   3
                                                                  LBeach
                                                     d
                                                                                                               N
       Major Fault                                                                                0                     o]
SOURCE: National Soil Survey
Center USDA -NRCS
                                                                          Mexico                              Miles
                                                                                                    Figure PSFS -1
                                                                                       Regional Active Faults
This page left intentionally blank
                                                                                            Kt                                                         f
                                                                                                                                                I•
                                                                  r _                OS60RNEST
               1'                                 J
                             Z r•     r"
                                                 Tsa
                                                                                 i
                                                                                          78                                               r
0
F
                                                                                                                        l
                                                                                                                  Y
                       EXPLANATION _
    MAP UNITS
                                                                                         sN OwaioGED
  d
        icanyon   G8 Auive 4dpdplBin       and
                                  floor doposits                             j                                    1
  x°      r ,i" RSgI      epvs, ls -                                                                                      r
                                                                                     7
          6   Landslide deposits - •
  gI °:
                                                                               g         L.
  nSanpaga Fmmatlgn
              Poke Loma Fonnalbn
                                                              r -
              Luwrdl Fnrinalmn                              1        l \:,•     .  _  -
                         u (                                                                                                                 N .,
      Rocks of the Peninsular Ranges Batholith:
                                                                                                                                         y
  G           Leucdpradvdig rite or Lake Hodges ` '                                                    L fib•
      Oka] Tgnaljte, h, ndivided                                        I
              Geopro, widrvldrtl
                                                                          t-
                                                                                                    r-
                                                                                                         1 .' • ' :"..:
                                                                                                                  S
    SYM BOLE                                                                                                                              Miles -
                  Contac!— Contac! between geologic
                  units; doped Where wncaeled.
                  FaUR -- SolM where acaus7elylocafed;                                                                   Vista City Boundary
                  dashed where appmrdmaWy IocaleA; dolled
                  where ccwr:ealed. Mow and number indicate
                  alrodion and angle of alp or Mutt ptege.                                                      C2       Vista Sphere of Influence
        i         Strike end do of heda-    nchrmd. • "
                  Sin"   and dipdbad        honeentel
                                                                    01                                           SOURCE: USGS Department of Conservation
                                                                                                                                  Figure PSFS -2
                                                                                                                              Geologic Setting

This page left intentionally blank
                                                                                                                                                                                Lrift
                                                                                                                                to
                                                          N Santa F
                    Oceanside                                         w                                                                          Iwo
               1
                                                                                                                    E , aylor St
                                                                                                                                                 I                            f
                       y  -
                       T
            i1    r                                                                                  Q            Arcadia Ave _
                                                                                                     Q
                                                                                                                  Palomar      PI          d
                                                              W Bobier or
                                                                                                          a                                   d
                                                                                                                                                                                    r
                                                                                                          U>                Monte Mar Rd       m
                                                                                                      obier Dr    Foo
                                                  North Ave          vJ E.-                                            tyrr r
                                                                                                                                               O
                                                                                                                                                                                        I
                                                                                                                                                                  1•
                                                                                                                                                   Catalina Ave
                                                                                                                                      ale Ter      F            J
                                                                                                                                                                  1
                                                   Olive Ave
                                                                                                                                                    0
                                                                                                                                                          o
                                                                                                                                                                a
                              K               o             c
                                                                                                                                                                                I
                                                                                                                                                                a
  b;
                                                O°
                                                                                                                              Or
                              n                                                                ems,\
                                                     4
                              m
                               7
                                                                                                 n
                                                                                                                          m°           Dr
                                                                                                                                                                  1
         f
     r ,                                                                                          O
                                                                                                                          m Monte   Jtsta
                                                                                                                                            Dr
                                 0
                                                                                          tpf Vista or
                                                                                                                                                              North County
                                                                                                                                                         Metro Planning
                                                                                                                                                                           Area
n                                         it 1
                                                                                                                        Rd
D
3
3                                                            ha0•° -
                                                                     1idge OrF%
                                                                                                                 m
v
                                                                                            L.   Mirada .      y
       Carlsbad                                                                                                         a
                                                                L
                                                                                                                          Mirada Dr/
                                                                                            ore
                                                      1                             Sy °a                                                                                   an
                                                                                                                                                                         Marcos
          Vista City Boundary                                                5
  C2 Vista Sphere of Influence                   j       `                    Aspe° t' ay
  Slope ( %)
                                               A
          0_ 15                                                                                            1v     t
                                                                                                                                                                           N
          15 - 25
v
          25-
          40+
                 40                                                     I, .
                                                                                                                                                                    0      A          1
3
                                                                                                                ow
  SOURCE: USGS Department of Conservation                                                                                                                                 Miles
                                                                                                                                                                      Figure PSFS -3
                                                                                                                                                                     Slope Analysis

This page left intentionally blank
                 Tujunga-
              Salinas -Elder
                  s1001)
                                                                                       Sesame-
                                                                                     Rockoutcrop -
                                                                                       Cleneba
                                                                                                 SanMiguel-
                                                                                            Friant- Exchequer
                                                                                                    s1013)
                                                                    I
                                                                    I
                                                                    I
                                                                                 Rockoutcrop-
                                                                                   LasPosas
                    LasFlores- (                                                     s1012)
                       Antich
                       s1019)
                                                                           r '
                                                  Vista- Fallbrook-
                                                      Cieneba
                                                        s1011)
                                                                               I
                                                                               I
N
a
 E
o
461
                                                                               j
                                                f ti                  r
o                                                                                 SanMiguel- Friant-
                                 Sesame -Rock '                                   Exchequer( s1013)
 E
                                   outcrop -
                                Cieneba( s1010)
 m
0
N
N
O
 N
                                                                            Ramona-
                                                                                               N
                                                                        Placentia- Linne-
                                                                        Greenfield( s999)
y            Vista City Boundary
 o -
     L       Vista Sphere of Influence
                                                                                     0                     1
 o   SOURCE: National Soil Survey Center
     USDA -NRCS                                                                              IVIIIe5
1Y
                                                                                       Figure PSFS -4
                                                                      Soil Types and Locations
This page left intentionally blank
                                                                                                               ER A L
                                                                                                          C7ti
                                                                                                                      p`
                                                                                                           XISTok
   Public Safety, Facilities, and Services Element                                                             2034
groundwater seepage and /or other conditions are observed during grading, or where wildfires have removed
stabilizing vegetation.
Topography and semi -arid Mediterranean climate ( typified by heavy seasonal rainfall) such as those which
occur in Vista, often create conditions prone to debris flows.     Research conducted for this General Plan
update indicates the risks appear to be low for the City, although some higher level of risk is probable in
steeper areas.
Hydrologic and Flooding Hazards
Flooding represents a high -priority safety issue for Vista as
stormwater flows into the City' s creeks and travels westward
into a series of lagoons before emptying into the Pacific Ocean.
Primary areas of flooding have historically occurred along the
Buena Vista and Agua Hedionda Creeks, which are within the
ioo- and 5oo -year floodplain boundaries, as shown on Figure
PSFS -5. These creeks have been impacted by encroachment of
development       and  the   adjacent   east —
                                             west    SR -78;  the
urbanization of areas along these creeks has resulted in their
channelization in some areas in order to protect the lives and            Lined portion of Buena Vista Creek
property of residents from flood hazards.
Per FEMA' s Flood Insurance Rate Map, most of Vista is within Flood Zone X, which means that Vista has a
less than 0. 2 percent annual chance of flooding within most areas.      Areas within Zone X do not require
mandatory flood insurance because hazards related to flooding in these areas are not considered to pose a
serious threat. Areas of the Buena Vista and Agua Hedionda Creeks are within the FEMA- designated ioo-
year floodways and floodplains and 5oo -year floodplains, and are associated with Flood Zones AE, AH, AO,
and A; these zones are required to be covered by FEMA' s flood insurance.
Dam failure represents another potential risk for flooding in Vista ( see Figure PSFS -5).     According to the
information prepared for the HMP, failure of Maerkle Dam ( also known as Squires Dam), which is located
west of Vista in the city of Carlsbad, could result in inundation of property located adjacent to Agua
Hedionda and Buena Creeks within southern Vista and east of the City in the SOL Dam inundation has the
potential to cause property damage and the need for evacuation. Although much of the dam inundation
area is coterminous with the ioo -year floodway and floodplain and the 500- year floodplain, potential
flooding due to dam inundation extends beyond those areas to include Buena Vista Park.
Vista will continue to enforce existing regulations created to reduce the impacts of flooding within the City,
such as the Flood Area Construction Regulations, which include standards that are applied to a variety of
 December 2011                                                                                            Page 7 -19

                                                                                                               ER A t
                                                                                                          C7ti
                                                                                                                      p( L
                                                                                                           XISTOk
   Public Safety, Facilities, and Services Element                                                             2034
types of projects, including utilities projects, residential subdivisions, manufactured homes, and recreational
vehicles. These regulations apply to flood -prone, mudslide, or flood -related erosion areas throughout the
community. Also, Vista will continue to implement its Flood Area Construction Regulations and may update
them if additional information or need is presented.
Fires and Wildfires
Fire hazards, specifically wildfire hazards, are a primary concern
to the public safety of Vista and the SOI due to a variety of
factors, including: the generally dry climate; location within a
semi -rural setting; the abundance of dry, low -lying dry brush and
chaparral on the hillsides in the City and SOI; the frequency of
high wind velocity from Santa Ana winds; and the steep terrain in
portions of the City and SOL Wildfires are of special concern in
communities that are located in the Wildland -Urban Interface
 WUI)    which is commonly described as the area where human
development meets and intermingles with undeveloped wild land                        Dry brush near homes
and /or vegetative fuels. This results in creation of a wildfire hazard area that poses significant risks to life,
property, and infrastructure.
WUI areas are located within the City boundaries. In addition, according to the 2005 Community Wildfire
Protection Plan prepared for the Vista Fire Protection District (VFPD), which provides fire protection services
to the SOI, WUI areas have been identified within the jurisdiction of the VFPD.          The dominant vegetation
within the VFPD jurisdiction is California chaparral, which is a prime fuel source for wildfire. ( Anchor Point
2005)
Pursuant to Assembly Bill ( AB) 337 ( passed as a result of the Oakland Hills fire in 3.993.) and Government Code
sections 53.3.75 - 53.3.88, CAL FIRE is required to work with local fire authorities to identify very high fire
severity zones (VHFHSZ) within local responsibility areas throughout each county in the state. As a result of
remapping efforts by CAL FIRE and VFD, Figure PSFS -6 identifies the current fire hazard classifications for
the City, SOI, and surrounding area.
Fire Hazard Severity Zone Maps are intended to be used for implementing wildland -urban interface building
standards for new construction; natural hazard real estate disclosure; 3.00 -foot defensible space clearance
requirements around buildings; property development standards, including road widths, water supply, and
signage; and consideration in general plans. After the 2003 southern California wildfires, the State passed
legislation requiring that any new building located in any VHFHSZ or within any WUI Fire Area designated by
the enforcing agency must comply with all sections of Chapter 7A of the revised California Building Code
 December 2011                                                                                            Page 7 -20
                                                                                                                   Gopher
                                               0                              Lower
                                                                         San Luis HA,
                                                                              903. 10
                                                                    e; °
                                                                                                   e
          Loma Alta Creek
                HA, 904. 10
                                     Cyeek
                              a Alta
                                               Buena                       ee
                                     Vista Creek HA,
                                               904.20
                                                                                                       1
J
J
                          m
                                         Agua
3                 j             Hedionda Creek
                                     HA, 904. 30
6 '''
                                                     p'.''=+ y1? /
l 6/
                                                                       i
                       edioyi
                                        11// - 1ii
s[     M Vista City Boundary                       100Year Floodway
             Vista Sphere of Influence             100Year Flood Plain
      E
             Dam Inundation                        SOOYear Flood Plain                               San Iv1a'"C0s
l3
             Waterways                                                                             j
                                                                                                   j/      0              1
Y
      Source: Watersheds - Calwater, 1999; Waterways and
      Dam Inundation - SanGIS, 2004.
                                                                                                                   Miles  j
                                                                                                            Figure PSFS -5
                                                                                      Hydrologic and Flooding Hazards

This page left intentionally blank
            Figure PSFS -6
Fire Hazard Severity Zones
This page left intentionally blank
                                                                                                             E1k A t
                                                                                                        C7ti
                                                                                                                     p( L
                                                                                                          XISTok
    Public Safety, Facilities, and Services Element                                                          2034
  2007), which includes minimum standards for ignition- resistant construction, methods, and design in these
fire hazard zones.
Hazardous Materials and Wastes
Hazardous materials and wastes are those that pose a potential threat to human health, as they have the
capacity to cause serious illness or death. As defined by the State of California ( 22 CCR 66263.) and the
Resource Conservation and Recovery Act ( RCRA) of 3.976 ( 40 CFR Part 263..3), a hazardous material or waste
is a substance that is toxic, ignitable or flammable, reactive, and /or corrosive.      The distinction between
hazardous materials and hazardous wastes is that wastes are typically used ( spent) hazardous materials.
Hazardous materials and wastes are a potential hazard to people and the environment if they are misused,
released into the ground or atmosphere improperly, or discarded illegally in landfills. Various types of
businesses and other entities within Vista that use, produce, store, transport, treat, or dispose of hazardous
materials include, but are not limited to, the following: automobile service and repair facilities; gas stations;
construction firms; manufacturing firms; research and development firms; painting contractors and paint
suppliers; dry cleaning businesses; schools, hospitals, and medical facilities; and trucking firms. Commercial
uses, including dry cleaners, gas stations, and automobile service and repair facilities, are located along the
main business corridors in Vista, such as East Vista Way, North and South Santa Fe Avenue, and North and
South Melrose Drive. The majority of the industrial and research and development uses are located in south
Vista, although several sites exist on North Melrose Drive.
The various businesses in Vista that use and transport hazardous materials are regulated by the Hazardous
Materials Division ( HMD) of the San Diego Department of Environmental Health ( SDDEH).              The HMD is
responsible for regulating hazardous materials business plans and chemical inventory, hazardous waste and
tiered permitting, underground storage tanks, and risk management plans; and maintains a current listing of
permitted hazardous materials users within the City.          The NFPA further promulgates standards and
recommended practices for handling, storage, and transport of hazardous materials and wastes, including a
placard system known as the NFPA 704 System. The Vista Fire Department also provides hazardous
materials mitigation services.
Household hazardous wastes are materials commonly used in and around residential households that
contain toxic substances, such as cleaning products, automotive products, pool supplies, painting products,
hobby supplies, and garden products. In Vista, household hazardous wastes are received at the Household
Hazardous Waste Collection Facility, currently located at 3.3.45 East Taylor Street.
In addition to uses within the City that are associated with hazardous materials and wastes, Vista is subject
to potential accidental releases of hazardous materials and wastes into the environment from an accident of
a tanker truck on SR -78 or City streets carrying such materials, an accident of a Burlington Northern Santa Fe
 December 2011                                                                                           Page 7 -21
                                                                                                               ER A t
                                                                                                          C7ti
                                                                                                                      p( L
                                                                                                           XISTok
   Public Safety, Facilities, and Services Element                                                             2034
 BNSF) railway freight train on the NCTD railway carrying such materials, or a natural gas or petroleum
pipeline break.
Airport -Related Hazards
The San Diego County Regional Airport Authority, which functions as the Airport Land Use Commission for
San Diego County, is responsible for preparing an Airport Land Use Compatibility Plan ( ALUCP) for each of
the 3.6 public use and military airports within the County. The purpose of an ALUCP is to protect the general
welfare of people and property within the vicinity of airports, as well as the public in general, by providing
information regarding airport operations and guidance on appropriate land uses surrounding airports.
An ALUCP addresses a defined area around an airport, called an Airport Influence Area ( AIA).          Each AIA is
determined by the airport' s size, current and future airport operations, and compatibility criteria, including
noise, safety, airspace protection, and overflight, that may affect land uses and /or necessitate restrictions on
those uses. An AIA is divided into two review areas: Review Area i, which identifies locations that may be
subject to limitations on certain types of land use actions due to safety and /or noise concerns; and Review
Area 2, which includes locations that are outside Review Area i but within airspace protection and /or
notification  overflight areas.   Portions of Vista are within Review Area z of the AIA of two airports: the
McClellan -Palomar Airport, approximately one mile southwest of the southwestern corner of Vista, and the
Oceanside Municipal Airport, approximately 6. 5 miles west of Vista.
Local agencies such as Vista that have jurisdiction over land uses within the AIA of an ALUCP are required to
use the compatibility criteria identified in the ALUCP when preparing or amending their general plans or
other land use plans. The intent is for the general plan to be consistent with the ALUCP by eliminating direct
conflicts with compatibility criteria and establishing procedures that implement and ensure compliance with
the compatibility criteria policies. Although portions of the City fall within the AIAs of both airports, no
portions of Vista fall within the safety zones of either airport. Safety zones are established for the purpose
of evaluating the safety compatibility of land use actions and are shown on the Safety Compatibility Policy
Map within ALUCPs. Therefore, the majority of discussion regarding consistency with the ALUCPs for the
McClellan -Palomar and Oceanside Municipal Airports is located with the Land Use and Community Identity
Element. The City will continue to review and comment on updates to the ALUCPs of both airports to
ensure that proposed airport operations do not negatively affect the safety of people or property within
Vista. If the safety zones for either airport are extended into Vista as a result of increased airport operations,
the City will determine what appropriate actions should be taken to protect the community' s safety.
 December 2011                                                                                            Page 7 -22
                                                                                                            E1k A t
                                                                                                       C7ti
                                                                                                                    p( L
                                                                                                        XISTok
    Public Safety, Facilities, and Services Element                                                         2034
PUBLIC FACILITIES AND SERVICES
Sanitary Sewer System
The City operates and maintains both the City of Vista Sanitation District, which serves approximately
3.6, 000 parcels within the City, and the Buena Sanitation District, a former County sanitation district that
serves over 5, 300 parcels within the City and portions of the unincorporated county to the southeast.
Although each sewer collection district is its own entity, all sewage goes to the Encina Wastewater Authority
 EWA), a public agency that provides wastewater treatment service to residents in northwestern San Diego
County. Six public agencies own EWA through a Joint Powers Agreement ( JPA).           Under the agreement the
six agencies share in the cost and management of the facility, an arrangement that is more economical and
provides access to better technology.         The six owners are the cities of Vista, Carlsbad, and Encinitas,
Vallecitos Water District, Buena Sanitation District ( BSD), and the Leucadia Wastewater District.       Vista' s
sanitation engineering division staff manages interagency agreements with the EWA, the Vallecitos Water
District, and the cities of Oceanside, Carlsbad, and San Marcos.         These agreements serve as a means for
agencies to utilize their collective infrastructure in the most efficient manner possible.
In January 2oo8, the City prepared and approved a Sewer Master Plan update, which includes an updated
inventory, a condition and capacity deficiency report, and recommended improvements.
Drainage Facilities
The City owns and maintains approximately 66 miles of storm drains and channels ( both open and closed),
which collect rainwater and divert it to creeks, lagoons, and the ocean to reduce flooding of roads and
property. Adequate drainage facilities are a critical factor in protecting persons and property from flooding.
Since water that is channeled through storm drains is untreated, it is important to reduce urban runoff —
related pollution. The goals, policies, and methods the City will use to protect and conserve these resources
are addressed in the Resource Conservation and Air Quality Element.
Water Supply and Distribution
The City' s water is supplied by the Vista Irrigation District ( VID), an independent entity governed by an
independent five -member Board of Directors.             VID also  provides water to  portions of San  Marcos,
Escondido, Oceanside, and some unincorporated areas.              VID receives a variety of water to supply its
customers, including imported water from the San Diego County Water Authority ( CWA) and local water
from its Lake Henshaw facilities.       Most of CWA' s water supply is from the Metropolitan Water District
 MWD), although CWA is pursuing projects to diversify its supplies.
 December 2011                                                                                        Page 7 -23

                                                                                                           E1k A t
                                                                                                      C7ti
                                                                                                                   p( L
                                                                                                        XISTOk
    Public Safety, Facilities, and Services Element                                                        2034
The VID' s Urban Water Management Plan, updated in December zoio, describes and evaluates estimated
water needs of its service area, use of recycled water, and conservation activities. The California Water Code
requires all urban water suppliers to prepare urban water management plans and to update them every five
years. The City will coordinate with VID to update its Urban Water Management Plan in zoio by providing
future land uses from the updated General Plan so the District can update forecast demand factors and
other information.
Fire and Emergency Response Protection
Services provided by the Vista Fire Department ( VFD)
include fire fighting, rescue ( swift water, high angle,
and   confined    space),  hazardous    materials incident
responses,      emergency       medical   services,    and
emergency transport. Additional services include fire
personnel      training     and    community      disaster
preparedness. The VFD provides services to the City
and contracts with the Vista Fire Protection District
 VFPD) to provide services to the SOL        Vista has six
fire stations, including two that were completed in                         Vista Fire Station # 5
2009 ( see Figure PSFS -7).     The VFD is one of seven
participants in the North County Dispatch Joint Powers Authority ( NCDJPA). The NCDJPA agencies jointly
exercise their powers to provide dispatching and emergency communication services for fire protection,
security, and emergency medical service. A communication center and headquarters for the NCDJPA are
located at the Rancho Santa Fe Fire Department Station i in Rancho Santa Fe.
In September zoos, a Standards of Response Cover Deployment Analysis was prepared for the VFD and
VFPD. The report concluded that although the VFD is well trained and has adequate equipment, they had
response challenges, experienced a high level of simultaneous calls for service, had station spacing issues,
and experienced resource /budget constraints. According to the findings of the analysis, inadequate station
distribution hampered VFD' s abilityto provide the lowest response times, as well as backup response, during
simultaneous call    situations.  In response to the findings and recommendations of the analysis, two fire
stations were constructed ( as noted above), and the VFD undertook a strategic planning process to address
key issues, including: revenue, apparatus, training, responses, communications, and emergency medical
services.   In January zoio, an updated Standards of Response Coverage Report was adopted reflecting
implementation of the two new fire stations and the resulting improved coverage. The Strategic Plan will be
reviewed and updated periodicallyto provide guidance for the department.
 December 2011                                                                                        Page 7 -24
N
O
NF
axE
 0
    I
              PSFS -7
      Fire Protection
This page left intentionally blank
                                                                                                            VR A L P(,
                                                                                                                       q' Y
    Public Safety, Facilities, and Services Element                                                       2034
Law Enforcement
Police protection for Vista and the SOI is provided by the              A&
San Diego County Sherriff' s Department ( SDCSD),      which
maintains a station and three substations ( two are open to
the public) within the City.      Services provided in Vista
include general patrol, investigations, narcotics and gang
investigations,   crime  prevention,   juvenile intervention,
community policing, and administrative services.       Patrol
deputies are assigned to a geographical " beat" area, which
enables them to become familiarwith the residents of their
beat and the problems in the area. The beat system is a
cornerstone of the Community Oriented Policing concept
                                                                   San Diego County Government Center - Vista
requiring the interaction of neighborhood residents with
law enforcement.
Specialized services that are available to the City include homicide investigations, helicopter patrols, swat
teams, bomb and arson investigations, fraud and forgery investigations, and licensing investigation.          In
addition, the SDCSD draws upon the experience of Vista' s seniors through its Senior Volunteer Patrol
program.
The Sheriff's Department responds to calls based on four levels of priority.       These levels are based on
guidelines and are not inclusive of all possible situations.    Presently, the San Diego County Sherriff's
Department does not have standard response time guidelines specific to the City (Brown 2007).     Rather, the
Sheriff' s Department monitors response times but does not have a stated goal across Law Enforcement
Services areas, nor are there specific response time goals or performance measures in the City patrol
services contracts.
The present staffing level of police protection provided by SDCSD in Vista is approximately o. 8 officers per
1, 000 residents.   The build -out of the General Plan could result in the addition of approximately 14, 775
residents by 2030. This increase in population is expected to result in an increased demand for police
protection resources, including personnel, equipment, and facilities, in order for SDCSD to meet the new
demand and maintain current service levels ( Gore 2010).      The City will continue to work with SDCSD to
maintain an adequate level of police protection as the community grows.
The Vista is also home to the North County Regional Center, which is a full service branch court shared by
the Superior Court, Sheriff, Probation, District Attorney, Revenue and Recovery, and the Board of
Supervisors. This branch court has a venue encompassing most of Northern San Diego County. San Diego
County also owns and operates the Vista Detention Facility, which serves as the primary point of intake for
 December 2011                                                                                        Page 7 -25
                                                                                                             ER A t
                                                                                                        C7ti
                                                                                                                    p( L
                                                                                                         XISTok
   Public Safety, Facilities, and Services Element                                                           2034
male and female prisoners in North County. ( See Figure PSFS -8 for locations of the San Diego County
Sheriff and courthouse facilities within Vista.)
Circulation System
Vista relies on a diverse circulation system to move people and goods locally and regionally, including local
roadways, SR -78, rail service, transit service, bicycle facilities, and pedestrian facilities.  The Circulation
Element identifies the City' s existing and future transportation needs based on the Land Use Plan, including
future    improvements    to  the   circulation  system;  transportation    goals, policies,  and  actions;   and
implementation programs to safely and efficiently accommodate future growth.
Parks, Recreation, and Cultural /Arts Facilities
The City owns and maintains over 497 acres of parks and recreational facilities. The Recreation and
Community Services Department offers diverse recreational programs at each City -owned park depending
upon the size of the park and the type of facilities. The City' s Parks and Recreation Commission advises City
representatives and the Director of Parks and Community Services on decisions pertaining to parks,
recreation, and open space issues; and helps coordinate public agencies and civic organizations in regards to
parks and recreation planning and programming. The Recreation and Community Services Department also
operates a cultural arts program, Moonlight Stage Productions, which offers programming in two City -owned
venues: the Moonlight Amphitheater, located in Brengle Terrance Park, and AVO Playhouse, located in Vista
Village. The Resource Conservation and Sustainability Element discusses parks, recreation, and cultural /arts
facilities and associated goals and policies.
Other Public Facilities
In addition to the public facilities and infrastructure already described, the efficient provision of public
services is dependent upon support facilities, including the City' s Civic Center and maintenance and
warehousing facilities. Although not considered " essential" public facilities, amenities such as entry signs,
community identifiers, public art, and street furniture serve an important public function by promoting
community identity and pride, and market Vista as a good place to live, work, and invest.
Coordinated Planning and Funding for Public Facilities and Services
The City will use the General Plan and various public facility and service studies and plans to determine what
projects are needed to ensure the health, safety, and welfare of the community; support existing and
planned land uses; correct existing deficiencies; and comply with federal, state, and regional regulations and
 December 2011                                                                                          Page 7 -26
        PSFS -8
Police Facilities
This page left intentionally blank
                                                                                                            E1k A t
                                                                                                       C7ti
                                                                                                                    p( L
                                                                                                        XISTok
    Public Safety, Facilities, and Services Element                                                         2034
mandates.    In addition, Section 65403. of the California Government Code requires proposed public works
projects be reviewed annually for conformity with the general plan. Once the needs are identified, the City
must prioritize, fund, and implement them in a timely, cost -effective, and responsible manner. This is
accomplished through the City' s annual budgeting and Capital Improvement Program process, which
provides opportunity for citizen input and guides decision -makers while helping them set priorities.
Due to the size and complexity of most capital projects, the City' s financial resources are inadequate to fund
all needs at any given time. Therefore, the City uses a variety of funding mechanisms to finance the projects
and to ensure an equitable sharing of the cost burden. In certain cases projects may be prioritized based
upon availability of resources; this can result in important projects being deferred until funds become
available.  The community places such a high priority on providing adequate public facilities and services
that Vista voters approved Proposition L, a half -cent sales tax increase in November 20o6.
 December 2011                                                                                         Page 7 -27
                                                                           ER A t
                                                                      C7ti
                                                                                  p( L
                                                                       XISTOk
 Public Safety, Facilities, and Services Element                           2034
                                  This page intentionally left blank.
December 2011                                                         Page 7 -28
        Chapter 4
Resource Conservation and
  Sustainability Element
This page left intentionally blank
                                                                                                                         aE?,AL PL l+
                                                                                                                          2030
                                                                 RESOURCE CONSERVATION AND SUSTAI NAB ILITYGOALS
                                                                 AIR QUALITY
                                                                 RCS Goal is Improve air quality and protect persons and the
Chapter 4: Resource                                              environment from the effects of air pollution.
                                                                 CLIMATE CHANGE
                                                                 RCS Goal z: Reduce GHG emissions from community activities and
Conservation and                                                 municipal facilities and operations within the City boundaries to
                                                                 support the state' s efforts under Assembly Bill 32, Senate Bill 375, and
                                                                 other state and federal mandates, and to mitigate the community' s
                                                                 contributions to global climate change.
Sustainability                                                   WATER RESOURCES
                                                                 RCS Goal 3: Reduce the projected demand for water service in the City
                                                                 through conservation and increased use of recycled water.
 Element                                                         RCS Goal 4: Preserve, protect, and enhance water quality in
                                                                 watersheds to which the City contributes stormwater and urban
                                                                 runoff.
                                                                 BIOLOGICAL RESOURCES
 INTRODUCTION                                                    RCS Goal 5: Preserve and protect, to the extent practicable, the range
                                                                 of natural biological communities and species native to the City and
                                                                 region; and conserve viable populations of endangered, threatened,
Conservation is defined in this General Plan as the
                                                                 and key sensitive species and their habitats.
careful     preservation,      protection,      or    planned    RCS Goal 6: Implement the provisions of the regional Multiple Habitat
                                                                 Conservation Plan ( MHCP).
management       of a   natural   resource to      prevent   its
                                                                 OPEN SPACE
exploitation,    destruction,   or    neglect.     The   terms
                                                                 RCS Goal 7:   Conserve, enhance, and restore, to the extent practicable,
sustainable and green have become common parlance                open space areas for the protection of wildlife habitats and plant and
                                                                 animal species.
when referring to principles, practices, and application
                                                                 RCS Goal 8: Provide and preserve open space areas for the protection
of techniques that conserve energy, water, and other             of public health and safety.
natural resources,- manage the use of renewable and              PARKS AND RECREATION
non -renewable       resources     in   an     efficient   and   RCS Goal g: Continue to provide parkland to effectively serve the
                                                                 recreational needs ofthe community.
responsible     manner;     preserve    and     improve     the
                                                                 RCS Goal lo: Continue to provide and maintain recreational facilities and
environment, from the local to the global level,- reduce         programs that serve the needs and enjoyment of residents.
                                                                 CULTURAL, HISTORICAL, AND PALEONTOLOGICAL RESOURCES
pollution,-  improve human health and safety,- and
                                                                 RCS Goal tt:  Continue to preserve and protect places, buildings, and
strengthen the economy.                                          objects that embody the City' s social, commercial, architectural, and
                                                                 agricultural history.
Vista is fortunate to possess many resources that                RCS Goal iz: Acknowledge, preserve, and protect the City' s Native
contribute    to   its  unique   character,      beauty,   and   American heritage.
desirability as a place to live, work, and recreate. Key         RCS Goal t3: Recognize the potential for paleontological resources
                                                                 and provide for mitigation programs to ensure collection and salvage
to maintaining this healthy and vibrant community is             of fossil materials.
the conservation and sustainable stewardship of our              ENERGY
natural resources —such as air quality, water, and open          RCS Goal 14: Promote efficient and sustainable use of energy resources
                                                                 through conservation, demand -reduction activities, and alternative
space —for the protection of plant and wildlife habitats
                                                                 energy sources.
and public health and safety.            Vista' s   parks  and   WASTE MANAGEMENT
recreational facilities are also important resources, as         RCS Goal 15: Reduce the amount of solid waste generated and diverted
                                                                 to landfills.
 December 2011                                                                                                           Page 4 -1

                                                                                                           VISTA
   Resource Conservation and Sustainability Element                                                         2030
                                       I
they provide opportunities for physical activities that are essential to the community health, social
interaction, and neighborhood identity. Of equal importance, cultural resources provide a link to the City' s
past, help shape its present -day character, celebrate its unique identity, and offer a source of pride and
community connection for its residents. A trails system will link all of Vista' s natural and physical resources,
strengthening community connections, promoting physical activity, and providing alternatives to the use of
personal automobiles, which reduces air pollution and greenhouse gas ( GHG) emissions. Conserving energy,
promoting clean energy generation, and reducing the amount of community -generated waste will help
preserve non -renewable resources and reduce GHG emissions.
Vista Vision 203o emphasizes the value the community places on these resources and our desire to conserve
and protect them. The Resource Conservation and Sustainability Element reflects the City' s commitment to
conserve, preserve, and enhance its valuable resources, and its recognition of the importance of taking an
overall sustainable and green approach to decision -making. It also acknowledges the interrelationship of all
the other General Plan elements in carrying out the City' s goal of promoting sustainability and conserving its
resources.
PURPOSE
The purpose of the Resource Conservation and Sustainability Element is to:
     i.
         Identify Vista' s important resources, and those that are consumed ( such as water and energy) or
         affected by the decisions and actions of everyone who lives, works, and recreates in the City.
     2.  Protect the quality of life for Vista' s community members by maintaining the area' s natural
         biodiversity, parks and recreational opportunities, and scenic beauty.
     3.  Develop policies and implementation programs to protect, preserve, or enhance these resources
         and manage their production (such as water and energy) and utilization in a sustainable manner.
The topics addressed in the Resource Conservation and Sustainability Element include:
         Air Quality
         Climate Change
         Water Resources
         Biological Resources
         Open Space
         Parks, Recreational Facilities, and Trails
         Cultural, Historical, and Paleontological Resources
         Energy
         Waste Management
 December 2011                                                                                            Page 4 -2
                                                                                                               E1k A t p,
                                                                                                        C7ti
                                                                                                         01  .
    Resource Conservation and Sustainability Element
The Resource Conservation and Sustainability Element fulfills the requirements of the State- mandated
Open Space and Conservation Elements as defined in Sections 65302( e) and 65302( d) of the Government
Code. According to these requirements, the General Plan must contain policies concerned with managing
all open space areas, including open space that is left undeveloped for the preservation and managed
production of natural resources, protection of public health and safety, and land for parks and recreation. It
also must provide direction regarding the conservation, development, and utilization of natural resources,
including rivers and water, forests, and wildlife. The preservation and /or sustainable management of other
resources, such as air quality and energy, and reduction of GHG emissions pursuant to recent legislation,
also may be included.
This element also addresses recreational resources and needs beyond the level mandated by State law. The
City has determined that adequate parks and recreational facilities are necessary to maintain a high -quality
living environment and has elected to include recreational goals and policies in the General Plan.         These
goals and policies support the State' s Quimby Act and Mitigation Fee Act, which allow cities to collect
exactions, such as dedication of land or imposition of impact fees in lieu of dedication, to provide or enhance
parks or recreational facilities to serve the identified needs of the community.
GOALS AND POLICIES
AIR QUALITY
RCS Goal 1:      Improve air quality and protect persons and the environment from the effects
of air pollution.
         RCS Policy i.i: Monitor changes in State regulations related to air quality and develop policies and
         programs and update local regulations as appropriate.
         RCS Policy 1. 2: Discourage the location of new, or the expansion of existing, sensitive receptor land
         uses ( including residences, long -term health care facilities, rehabilitation centers, convalescent
         centers, retirement homes, schools, playgrounds, child care centers, and athletic facilities) within
         500 feet of State Route ( SR) -78.
         RCS Policy 3.. 3: Develop and implement plans to minimize dust from areas within the City that are
         prone to soil erosion from wind.
         RCS Policy 1. 4: Amend the Grading Ordinance as needed to reduce fugitive dust generated as a
         result of construction projects.    Require implementation of best management practices ( BMPs) to
         stabilize disturbed land, including but not limited to short -term methods during construction ( e. g.,
 December 2011                                                                                           Page 4 -3
                                                                                                           E1k A t p,
                                                                                                    C7ti
                                                                                                     01  .
  Resource Conservation and Sustainability Element                                                       2030
       watering active construction areas, covering open stockpiles, and applying non -toxic soil stabilizers
       on unpaved access roads and temporary parking areas) and permanent methods post- construction
        e. g., vegetation or revegetation, installation of hardscape, etc.).
       RCS Policy 1. 5:   Facilitate compliance by local employers and businesses with regional air quality
       regulation through education, outreach, involvement, and policies that assist them in meeting
       regulations, while cultivating and supporting a positive business climate.
CLIMATE CHANGE/ GLOBAL WARMING
RCS Goal z:     Reduce GHG emissions from community activities and municipal facilities and
operations within the City boundaries to support the State' s efforts under Assembly Bill
32,  Senate Bill 375,        and    other   state    and   federal    mandates,      and  to  mitigate     the
community' s contributions to global climate change.
       RCS Policy 2. 1: Prepare and implement a Climate Action Plan ( CAP) within 24 months of adoption
       of the General     Plan that, through    its full implementation, will     reduce GHG emissions from
       community activities and municipal operations by at least 3. 5 percent by 2020 compared to the 2005
       baseline community emissions inventory ( including any reductions required by the CARB under AB
       32).
       RCS Policy 2. 2:   Update the City' s Greenhouse Gas Emissions Inventory periodically to incorporate
       improved methods, better data, and /or more accurate tools and methods, and to assess progress.
       RCS Policy 2. 3:     Participate in inter -agency and /or inter -jurisdictional meetings and planning
       activities to share best practices and adaptation strategies to reduce GHG emissions, increase
       community sustainability, and educate the public about climate change.
       RCS Policy 2. 4: Develop a public outreach program to increase public awareness of climate change
       and climate protection challenges; publicize the importance of reducing GHG emissions; and
       provide information on actions community members and businesses can take to reduce their
       individual impacts.
       RCS Policy 2. 5:    Adopt City purchasing practices and standards to support reductions in GHG
       emissions, including preferences for energy- efficient equipment and the use of recycled materials
       and manufacturers that have implemented green management practices; encourage other public
       agencies and private businesses within Vista to do the same, when feasible.
 December 2011                                                                                       Page 4- 4
                                                                                                              E1k A t p,
                                                                                                       C7ti
                                                                                                        01  .
   Resource Conservation and Sustainability Element                                                         2030
  IV
       RCS Policy 2. 6:     Establish City bidding standards and contracting practices that encourage GHG
       emissions reductions, including preferences or points for the use of low or zero emission vehicles
       and equipment, recycled materials, and provider implementation of other green management
       practices; encourage other public agencies and private businesses within Vista to do the same, when
       feasible.
       RCS Policy 2. 7:    Through California Environmental Quality Act ( CEQA) documents, evaluate and
       disclose the contribution new projects could         have on climate change and       require mitigation
       measures as appropriate.
       RCS Policy 2. 8: Implement new or enhance existing measures to reduce employee vehicle trips and
       mitigate emissions impacts from business -related travel to reduce GHG emissions.
WATER RESOURCES
RCS Goal 3:      Reduce the projected demand for water service in the City through water
conservation and increased use of recycled water.
       RCS Policy 3. 3.: Work with the Vista Irrigation District (VID) to reduce per capita water consumption,
       increase the use of recycled water, and implement, enhance, or promote programs to educate the
       community about the importance of water conservation and methods to reduce water use.
       RCS Policy 3. 2:     Continue to evaluate and periodically update the City' s existing Water Efficient
       Landscaping Ordinance to ensure that it remains at least as effective as the State' s Model Efficient
       Landscape Ordinance pursuant to AB 3.883. and /or any subsequent legislation, and encourage
       existing development to upgrade to water -efficient landscaping and irrigation, including:
            a.   planting drought -tolerant and native species;
            b.   covering exposed dirtwith moisture -retaining mulch;
            c.   installing water -efficient irrigation systems and devices, including advanced technology
                 such as moisture -sensing irrigation controls;
            d.   using gray and /or recycled waterfor irrigation; and
            e.   installing edible landscapes that provide local food.
       RCS Policy 3. 3: Manage the City' s stock of vegetation on public property (e. g., street trees, planted
       medians, lawns at public facilities and parks, etc.) to reduce water consumption.
 December 2011                                                                                          Page 4- 5
                                                                                                                VISTA
  Resource Conservation and Sustainability Element                                                              2030
 IV
       RCS Policy 3. 4: Work with Caltrans to expand the use of reclaimed water on the SR -78 right -of -way
       and install water -efficient landscaping and irrigation.
RCS Goal 4: Preserve, protect, and enhance water quality in watersheds to which the City
contributes stormwater and urban runoff.
       RCS Policy 4. 3.: Preserve, protect and enhance water quality within the San Luis Rey and Carlsbad
       Hydrologic Units, of which the City is a part, through pollution prevention, encouraging preservation
       of natural   drainage courses,     prevention      of wildfires, and    prevention   of other anthropogenic
       detrimental effects to the watersheds.
       RCS Policy 4. 2:   Continue to improve water quality in the San Luis Rey, Loma Alta, Buena Vista,
       Agua Hedionda, and San Marcos watersheds, through the implementation of water quality
       improvement programs with the goal of achieving sustainable resource management by balancing,
       social, economic, and environmental needs.
       RCS Policy 4. 3:   Implement the Agua Hedionda Watershed Management Plan and develop and
       implement a similar watershed management plan for Buena Vista Creek and its major tributaries,
       dependent upon available funding.
       RCS Policy 4. 4:   Promote practices and programs that integrate the various disciplines of water
       resources   management,       recognizing and fostering the interconnectedness of water quality
        including surface,     stormwater,    and   waste    water    management),      water   supply,   and  natural
       resources.
       RCS Policy 4. 5:     Protect and    restore appropriate       beneficial uses for prioritized water bodies
       impacted by stormwater and urban runoff.
       RCS Policy 4. 6:     Require the    incorporation     of Low     Impact Development ( LID)       techniques  in
       accordance with current stormwater regulations to manage stormwater and urban runoff, reduce
       runoff and pollution, and assist in maintaining or restoring the natural hydrology of the site.
       Examples of LID techniques include, but are not limited to the following:
            a.  Use permeable paving or pavers for sidewalks and parking areas instead of impervious
                material, such as concrete and asphalt.
            b.  Incorporate     bioretention     facilities,  such    as  cells (  small -scale  shallow    vegetated
                depressions),    bioswales, (  linear bioretention features that may mimic natural stream
                channels),   tree box filters ( stand -alone or connected         mini -bioretention areas that are
                installed beneath trees), and other bioretention features in site design for development
                projects and subdivisions.
December 2011                                                                                                 Page 4 -6
                                                                                                         VR A L P(,
                                                                                                                    q'[ r
                                                                                                       VISTA
 Resource Conservation and Sustainability Element                                                       2030
           c.    Utilize rain barrels and cisterns to manage rooftop runoff and /or utilize rooftop runoff to
                 provide water for irrigating lawns and gardens.
           d.    Install street trees in stand -alone or connected tree box filters.
      RCS Policy 4. 7:      Encourage the use of LID techniques through public outreach and education by
      installing demonstration projects at City facilities and by incorporating LID and other green
      technologies into public infrastructure projects.
      RCS Policy 4. 8: Continue to require native and non -invasive vegetative buffers along the margins of
      water bodies to provide water cleansing for runoff entering the water bodies. Buffers from the edge
      of the existing natural tree canopy should be established based on scientific analysis of the existing
      site conditions and any development proposal by a qualified biologist. New buildings or parking
      areas should not be permitted within any buffer area.
       RCS Policy 4. 9:      Continue to maintain, repair, and replace current drainage infrastructure where
      necessary to maximize public safety and water quality benefits.
      RCS Policy 4. 3.o: Require that any property to be annexed into the City be required to hook up to the
      City' s sewer system and bear
      the cost of improvements to
      the sewer system if needed to
      serve such areas.                              IF
      RCS Policy 4. 3.3.:    Restrict the
      installation    of new concrete
      lining       or     channelization
                                                                                               1
                                                            4
      projects     within   open    creeks
      and    waterways      and    restore
      the creek system to its natural
      state    where     feasible    in  an
      effort      to    balance       flood
      protection,       water
                                   quality
      benefits,         and        habitat
      preservation. The daylighting                               Natural creek bed with trail.
      and     restoration    of   covered
      creek channels is encouraged.
December 2011                                                                                         Page 4 -7
                                                                                                           ER A t p,
                                                                                                      C7ti
                                                                                                          VISTA
  Resource Conservation and Sustainability Element                                                         2030
 IV
      RCS Policy 4. 3. 2:  Allow alteration, rechannelization, and /or modifications to existing channelized
      streams only if such modifications preserve or restore natural habitat values to the greatest extent
      feasible and necessary permits are obtained.
BIOLOGICAL RESOURCES
RCS Goal 5: Preserve and protect, to the extent practicable, the range of natural biological
communities and species native to the City and region; and conserve viable populations of
endangered, threatened, and key sensitive species and their habitats.
      RCS Policy 5. 3.: Continue to require development that is proposed in areas identified or expected to
      contain sensitive vegetation and wildlife communities to consult with wildlife agencies ( i. e., United
      States Fish and Wildlife Service [ USFWS] and the California Department of Fish and Game [ CDFG])
      early in the development review process regarding special status plant and wildlife species; conduct
      biological assessments, as appropriate; and develop and implement project- specific mitigation
      measures to mitigate impacts on threatened and endangered species.
      RCS Policy 5. 2:    In areas that are adjacent to sensitive vegetation and /or wildlife communities,
      continue to require development, uses, and activities to be designed and managed to ensure
      minimal impacts to those resources. Examples include, but are not limited to the following:
           a.   Provide buffers or barriers between the development and the biological resources. Buffers
                from the edge of the existing natural tree canopy should be established based on scientific
                analysis of the existing site conditions and the development proposal by a qualified
                biologist. New buildings or parking areas should not be permitted within any buffer area.
           b.   Prohibit parking lots and other developed areas from draining into sensitive resources.
           c.
                Require land uses that use chemicals or fertilizers or generate by- products that are
                potentially toxic or harmful to wildlife, sensitive species, and habitats to incorporate
                measures to mitigate those impacts.
           d.   Require development to incorporate measures that avoid degradation of habitats from
                erosion and sedimentation.
           e.   Ensure that sensitive species are protected from night lighting from nearby development.
           f.   Mitigate noise impacts from development, uses, or activities on nearby sensitive species
                through noise reduction measures and /or restriction of hours during the breeding season of
                sensitive species.
           g.   Require development that is adjacent to sensitive resources to landscape their sites with
                native, non -invasive vegetation that is similar to or compatible with the adjacent resources;
December 2011                                                                                          Page 4 -8
                                                                                                           VR A L P(,
                                                                                                                      q'[ r
                                                                                                          VISTA
  Resource Conservation and Sustainability Element                                                        2030
               and prohibit horticultural regimes ( irrigation, fertilization, pest control, and pruning) that
               could alter site conditions in natural areas.
           h.  Enforce fire and brush management plans so that both biological and safety goals are met.
      RCS Policy 5. 3: Preserve the integrity of riparian habitat areas, creek corridors, and other drainages
      that support biological resources and contribute to the overall health of the watershed areas
      through the preservation and restoration of native plants and the removal of invasive, exotic, and
      nonnative species.
      RCS Policy 5. 4: Preserve, protect, and enhance the City' s urban forest ( on both public and private
      property).
      RCS Policy 5. 5: Consider adoption of a tree preservation ordinance to address tree preservation on
      private property.
      RCS Policy 5. 6: Continue to require the use of native, naturalized, and non -invasive plants and turf
      to avoid or minimize use of irrigation, fertilizers, and pesticides, and to provide increased wildlife
      habitats for native species.
      RCS Policy 5. 7: To the extent practicable, and as determined by the City, avoid sensitive habitats
      and species during the planning, design, and construction of new public infrastructure ( such as
      sewers, storm drain and flood control facilities, utilities, and roads), unless alternative locations are
      not practical.
      RCS Policy 5. 8:    Maintain and regularly update a database of biological resource information
      relevant to    natural  resources  in  Vista, including regional data sets and more focused field
      investigations within the City.
RCS Goal 6:   Implement the provisions of the regional Multiple Habitat Conservation Plan
 MHCP)
      RCS Policy 6. 3.: Establish and maintain a Biological Preserve Overlay ( BPO) reflecting the Focused
      Planning Area in the MHCP to the maximum extent practicable. The BPO shall define lands worthy
      of protection based on the presence of sensitive vegetation and wildlife communities, orthose lands
      that support viable wildlife corridors.
      RCS Policy 6. 2: Limit land uses within the BPO to only those necessary for the protection of public
      health and safety, or recreational uses that are consistent with the conservation standards in the
      MHCP. Biological conservation shall be the primary objective within the BPO whenever potential
      conflicts with recreational uses arise.
December 2011                                                                                           Page 4- 9
                                                                                                                 E1k A t
                                                                                                            C7ti
                                                                                                                         p( L
                                                                                                             XISTok
  Resource Conservation and Sustainability Element                                                               2034
        RCS Policy 6. 3:        Establish maintenance and      management standards for the BPO to ensure
        permanent conservation. The City' s standards shall be based on the applicable standards in Section
        6. o of the Final MHCP ( i. e., Fire Management; Habitat Restoration; Erosion Control; Landscaping
        Restrictions; Recreation and Public Access; Fencing, Signs and Lighting; Predator and Exotic
        Species    Control;    Hydrology and Flood Control; and Species Reintroduction),            subject  to   the
        availability of permanent funding.
        RCS Policy 6. 4: Adopt a Habitat Conservation Plan ( a Subarea Plan) covering, at minimum, the BPO
        and enter into an Implementing Agreement with the Wildlife Agencies, subject to the availability of
        permanent funding.
        RCS Policy 6. 5: Use the mitigation ratios established in the MHCP for impacts to sensitive biological
        habitats.
        RCS Policy 6. 6: Integrate the City' s conservation planning efforts with watershed planning, GHG
        reductions, and other regional planning efforts involving natural resources when possible in order to
        maximize opportunities for grant funding for conservation purposes.
OPEN SPACE
RCS Goal 7:      Conserve, enhance, and restore, to the extent practicable, open space areas
for the protection of wildlife habitats and plant and animal species.
        RCS Policy 7. 3.: Acquire or otherwise protect, where possible, open space and other properties that
        contain   or protect significant sensitive   resources, such as special- status plant and wildlife species
        know to occur in or near the City, natural habitats, and habitat linkages. Primary consideration shall
        be given to those properties within the City' s Biological Preserve Overlay. Actions may include, but
        are not limited to:
             a.   Acquire private land with significant natural habitat or sensitive resources, assuming the
                  seller is willing and that funding is available.
             b.   Encourage the county, state, and federal government, or other conservation agency
                  dedicated to Vista' s conservation goals, to acquire private land with significant natural
                  habitat or sensitive resources, assuming the seller is willing.
             c.   Enforce     state   and  federal  conservation   and   avoidance     regulations,   through     the
                  development review process, for all new development projects on private property that
                  may potentially impact affect natural vegetation communities or biological resources
                  within Vista.
 December 2011                                                                                             Page 4 -10
                                                                                                            ER A t
                                                                                                       C7ti
                                                                                                                   p,
  Resource Conservation and Sustainability Element                                                          2030
             d.  Acquire   easement    rights or establish  agreements    with  public utilities to ensure   the
                 protection of natural habitats or sensitive resources within existing or planned utility
                 easements.
             e.  Require privately owned open space designed as an integral part of a new development to
                 be designated Open Space ( OS) on the Land Use Map.
        RCS Policy 7. 2: Cooperate with other municipalities and San Diego County to strive to acquire or
        otherwise protect open space areas that provide key habitat linkages and wildlife movement
        corridors on a regional level.
RCS Goal 8:     Provide and preserve open space areas for the protection of public health and
safety.
        RCS Policy 8. 3.: Through the development review process, ensure that new development located in
        or near areas that may pose public health and safety hazards ( such as flood plains, areas of known or
        suspected geologic hazard, and /or fire hazard zones) is designed to minimize potential impacts on
        people and property. Actions may include, but are not limited to the following:
             a.  Promote the protection of open space on private property for the protection of health and
                 safety through continued application of the Open Space Residential ( OSR) and Rural
                 Residential ( RR) land use designations and specific plans as appropriate.
             b.  Encourage new commercial and industrial development to employ site plan design that
                 avoids areas that may pose public health and safety hazards.
             c.  Encourage new residential subdivisions to employ alternative subdivision design, such as
                 clustering, to avoid areas that may pose public health and safety hazards.
             d.  Require privately owned open space designed as an integral part of a new development to
                 be designated Open Space on the Land Use Map.
        RCS Policy 8. 2:   Retain existing publicly owned open space and pursue acquisition by the City of
        private land in areas that may pose public health and safety hazards, assuming the seller is willing
        and that funding is available, especially when such property can provide recreational and /or
        resource protection opportunities or serve other public health, safety, and welfare purposes.
        RCS Policy 8. 3:   Preserve sensitive lands, including permanent bodies of water, floodways, and
        slopes over 35 percent, as open space for resource conservation and public safety purposes.
        RCS Policy 8. 4: Preserve and increase the amount of open space /forest land within the City to help
        mitigate GHG emissions.
December 2011                                                                                          Page 4 -11
                                                                                                            ER A t p,
                                                                                                       C7ti
                                                                                                           VISTA
  Resource Conservation and Sustainability Element                                                          2030
 IV
      RCS Policy 8. 5:     Preserve and maintain natural areas in urban neighborhoods, such as canyons and
      creeks, and provide access for the enjoyment of the surrounding community.
PARKS AND RECREATION
RCS Goal 9: Continue to provide parkland to effectively serve the recreational needs of the
community.
      RCS Policy 9. 3.:        Continue   to  work     with  the  Parks  and Recreation   Commission,  citizens,
      organizations, volunteer groups, and community partners to identify and provide needed park,
      recreation, trail, and open space amenities that address changes in the City' s population and
      demographics, based on the Park, Recreation, Open Space, and Greenway Guidelines ( Guidelines)
      that were developed by the National Recreation and Park Association ( NRPA), and pursuant to the
      Qu i m by Act.
      RCS Policy 9. 2:        Provide three acres of community parks per i,000 residents; two acres of
      neighborhood      parks   per i,000  residents, and    an  overall
      average park standard of 4. 49 acres per i,000 residents.
      RCS      Policy  9. 3:     Provide   parks     and   recreational
      opportunities in proximity to neighborhoods to promote
      physical activity and increase access to facilities.
      RCS Policy 9. 4:        Maintain   a program for acquisition
      and /or development of identified parkland property and
      facilities that includes a variety of funding or acquisition
      methods,      such   as  grants, development        impact fees,
      easements,         leaseholds,     joint -use,     transfer    of
      development rights, land donations, and gift annuities, if
      feasible.
      RCS Policy 9. 5: Give priority to acquiring and developing
      parks and recreational facilities in areas with the greatest
      need, as identified in the process described in RCS Policy
      8. i.
                                                                                     Vista Sports Park
      RCS Policy 9. 6: Continue the school /parkjoint -use concept
      for increased recreational resources and year -round use of these facilities.
December 2011                                                                                          Page 4 -12
                                                                                                             ER A t p,
                                                                                                        C7ti
  Resource Conservation and Sustainability Element                                                           2030
       RCS Policy 9. 7:     Collaborate with San Diego County to manage the portion of Guajome Regional
       Park within Vista' s boundaries, including the Antique Gas and Steam Engine Museum, and ensure
       the preservation and support of this valuable resource.
       RCS Policy 9. 8:      Encourage and, where appropriate, require the inclusion of recreation facilities,
       permanently dedicated open space, and /or trails within new residential subdivisions, and multi-
       family, commercial, and industrial developments, and within the Opportunity Areas identified in the
       Land Use and Community Identity Element.
       RCS      Policy 9. 9:    Build  and   maintain   parks, recreation,  and community facilities in an
       environmentally sustainable manner. Examples include, but are not limited to:
             a.   harvesting rain water with cisterns to reduce use of potable water;
             b.   designing and implementing efficient irrigation systems;
             c.   using drought tolerant and native plant species;
             d.   using lawn substitutes to reduce mowing, water use, and green waste;
             e.   reducing impervious surfaces by using porous concrete and /or asphalt and permeable
                  pavers;
            f.    detaining stormwater on site and reducing water pollution through the use of bioswales,
                  stormwater planter, rain gardens, and other similar features;
             g.   providing recycling bins for park users;
             h.   providing onsite composting;
             i.   using recycled and recyclable materials and Forest Stewardship Council ( FSC)—certified
                  wood; and
            j.    retrofitting existing, and constructing new, buildings and facilities in parks pursuant to
                  green policies elsewhere in the General Plan.
       RCS Policy 9. 3.o:     Consider the use of publicly owned land such as flood control projects, excess
       right -of -way, and other public lands for the development of new public parks and recreational
       facilities
RCS Goal so:       Continue to provide and maintain recreational facilities and programs that
serve the needs and enjoyment of residents.
       RCS Policy io. i: Provide a range of high quality recreational facilities programming to serve the
       needs of all Vista' s residents, including children, teens, adults, senior adults, families, and persons
       with disabilities.
 December 2011                                                                                         Page 4 -13

                                                                                                                       E1k A t p,
                                                                                                                 C7ti
 Resource Conservation and Sustainability Element                                                                     2034
      RCS Policy 3.0. 2: Maintain the diversity of recreational programs serving the community subject to
      the availability of adequate funding. Pursue funding opportunities to support program diversity
      when available.
      RCS Policy 3.o. 3: Consider the NRPA Guidelines when evaluating and planning for specific activities
      and facilities, such as sports fields, courts, and rinl<s,- tracl<s,- trails,- pools,- and golf driving ranges and
      courses.
      RCS     Policy 3-0. 4:    Continue     to   encourage
                                                                                                                  r
      privately owned recreation facilities that create
      minimal      neighborhood      disruption,      provide
      ample     parking,   and   have   adequate     support
                                                                                                                      9
      facilities.
      RCS Policy 3-0. 5:   Continue to seek grant funds
      for facility programming.
      RCS Policy 3.o. 6: Operate the McClellan Senior
      Center      and    expand     current     services    to
      accommodate         any   increase    in   the   senior
                                                                                   McClellan Senior Center
      population.
      RCS Policy 3-0. 7: Support and continue to make necessary investments in cultural arts facilities, such
      as   the    Moonlight    Amphitheater       and   AVO    Theater,     and    expand      programming,     including
      performances, concerts, and special annual events, if funding is available.
      RCS Policy 3.o. 8: Operate the Wave Waterpark and support programming and facility rental and
      partnerwith local schools for sports activities.
      RCS Policy io. g:     Operate and maintain community and recreation centers, such as the Townsite
      and Thibodo Community Centers and Brengle Terrace Recreation Center, and expand offerings to
      provide high quality programs and activities, dependent on the availability of funding.
      RCS Policy io. io:      Support the Alta Vista Botanical Gardens as a valuable passive recreational
      amenity.
      RCS Policy io.ii: Identify an appropriate location and provide funding for construction and
      operation of a new skate park.
December 2011                                                                                                    Page 4 -14
                                                                                                           E1k A t p,
                                                                                                      C7ti
                                                                                                          VISTA
   Resource Conservation and Sustainability Element                                                        2030
  IV
       accommodate any increase in the senior population.
       RCS Policy 3.0. 7: Support and continue to make necessary investments in cultural arts facilities, such
       as   the  Moonlight     Amphitheater   and    AVO    Theater,  and   expand   programming,    including
       performances, concerts, and special annual events, if funding is available.
       RCS Policy 3.o. 8: Operate the Wave Waterpark and support programming and facility rental and
       partner with local schools for sports activities.
       RCS Policy io. g:     Operate and maintain community and recreation centers, such as the Townsite
       and Thibodo Community Centers and Brengle Terrace Recreation Center, and expand offerings to
       provide high quality programs and activities, dependent on the availability of funding.
       RCS Policy io.io:      Support the Alta Vista Botanical Gardens as a valuable passive recreational
       amenity.
       RCS Policy io.ii: Identify an appropriate location and consider development and operation of a
       new skate park, subject to the availability of adequate funding.
       RCS Policy 3.0. 3. 2:  Develop and implement a master plan for Buena Vista Creek that includes
       creation of a linear park along the creek from Brengle Terrance Park to Downtown Vista and
       enhancement of pedestrian and bicycle access.
CULTURAL, HISTORICAL, AND PALEONTOLOGICAL RESOURCES
RCS Goal 11:    Continue to preserve and protect places, buildings, and objects that embody
the City' s social, cultural, commercial, architectural, and agricultural history.
       RCS Policy ii.i: Continue to utilize historical resources, such as the Rancho Buena Vista Adobe, for
       school programs, community education, and events; and coordinate programming with other
       historic sites.
       RCS Policy 11. 2:      Continue to preserve Vista' s historic adobes and nationally registered and
       significant historic buildings, such as the Rancho Guajome Adobe and the Braun House.          Consider
       national and local historic designations for eligible City -owned properties.
       RCS Policy 3.1. 3: Support preservation of historical resources, including providing for adaptive reuse
       and tax incentives where appropriate.
 December 2011                                                                                        Page 4 -15
                                                                                                               E1k A t p,
                                                                                                          C7ti
   Resource Conservation and Sustainability Element                                                            2030
  IV
       RCS Policy 3. 2. 2: In collaboration with NAHC and the San Luis Rey Band of Mission Indians, adopt
       procedures for protecting significant archeological features, and apply to projects requiring
       discretionary City approval.
       RCS Policy 3. 2. 3:  Ensure that the San Luis Rey Band of Mission Indians is notified of any proposed
       discretionary planning or grading applications affecting lands with potential archaeological
       resources.
       RCS Policy 3.2. 4: If significant Native American artifacts are discovered during pre- construction or
       construction phases of a discretionary project or during the implementation a grading permit, the
       first priority shall be a) to avoid any further disturbance of those areas by re- designing the proposed
       development or project, and b) to have those areas placed into protected open space via an open
       space easement or similar protective measure.         If avoidance is not feasible based on consultation
       with the Most Likely Descendant of such artifacts, appropriate mitigation shall be required. Any
       discovered Native American artifacts shall be returned to their Most Likely Descendant and
       repatriated at the earliest opportunity.
       RCS Policy 3. 2. 5: If Native American human remains and /or associated grave goods are found during
       any of the activities identified in RCS Policy 3. 2. 4, the first priority shall be a) to avoid any further
       disturbance ( i. e., grading, development) of those areas in which they are found, and b) to have the
       remains and /or associated grave goods preserved in place via an open space easement or similar
       protective land use measure. The second priority shall be that the Most Likely Descendant of the
       remains and /or associated grave goods, as determined by NAHC, must also have the opportunity to
       recommend other culturally appropriate treatment.
RCS Goal 13:         Recognize the potential for paleontological resources and provide for
mitigation programs to ensure collection and salvage of fossil materials.
       RCS Policy 3.3. 3.: Adopt procedures to provide pre- construction mitigation.
       RCS Policy 3.3. 2:    Adopt procedures to mitigate impacts during construction, including requiring
       monitoring of excavation operations and salvage programs.
ENERGY
RCS Goal 14:          Promote efficient and sustainable use of energy resources through
conservation, demand -reduction activities, and alternative energy sources.
 December 2011                                                                                           Page 4 -16
                                                                                                              ER A t p,
                                                                                                      C7ti
                                                                                                        00, ,
  Resource Conservation and Sustainability Element                                                         2030
 IV
      RCS Policy 3.4. 3.: Consider the goals and policies in SANDAG' s Regional Energy Strategy in drafting
      new legislation, policies, or procedures.
      RCS Policy 3.4. 2: Collaborate with San Diego Gas and Electric ( SDG & E) and any other local energy
      suppliers and distributors to promote energy conservation programs, Energy Star® appliance
      change -out programs, rebates, vouchers, and other incentives to install energy- efficient technology
      and products.
      RCS Policy 3.4. 3: Partner with energy providers and community services agencies to offer grants to
      low- income homeowners to encourage energy retrofits for existing residential development,
      including heating, ventilation, air conditioning, lighting, water heating equipment, insulation, and
      weatherization energy efficiency projects.
      RCS Policy 3.4. 4:     Continue to target local funds, including redevelopment and Community
      Development Block Grant resources, to assist affordable housing developers in incorporating
      energy efficient designs and features.
      RCS Policy 3.4. 5: Promote voluntary energy retrofits for existing commercial and industrial /business
      park uses, and require major renovations that exceed a certain dollar amount ( such as the amount
      considered an unreasonable hardship for disabled access) to meet a prescriptive list of energy
      efficiency requirements.
      RCS Policy 3.4. 6: Prepare and implement a comprehensive plan to improve the energy efficiency of
      municipal facilities and conserve electricity and natural gas, including the following:
           a.  conducting energy audits for all municipal facilities and equipment;
           b.  retrofitting facilities for energy efficiency where feasible and when remodeling or replacing
               components, including increasing insulation, and installing green or reflective roofs and
               low- emissive window glass;
           c.  implementing an energy tracking and management system;
           d.  installing energy- efficient exit signs, street signs, and traffic lighting;
           e.  installing energy- efficient lighting retrofits and occupancy sensors, and instituting a " lights
               out at night" policy;
           f.  retrofitting heating and cooling systems to optimize efficiency ( e. g.,       replace  chillers,
               boilers, fans, pumps, belts, etc.);
           g.  installing Energy Star appliances and energy- efficient vending machines;
December 2011                                                                                         Page 4 -17

                                                                                                            ER A t
                                                                                                       C7ti
                                                                                                                   p,
 Resource Conservation and Sustainability Element                                                           2030
           h. improving efficiency of water pumping and use at municipal facilities, including a schedule
              to replace or retrofit system components with high- efficiency units ( i. e., ultra -low -flow
              toilets, fixtures, etc.);
           i. providing chilled, filtered water at water fountains and taps in lieu of bottled water;
          j.  installing a central irrigation control system and timing its operation for offpeal< use; and
           k. adopting an accelerated replacement schedule for energy inefficient systems and
              components.
      RCS Policy 3.4. 7: Encourage any newly constructed, purchased, or leased municipal space to meet
      minimum standards as appropriate, such as the following:
           a. requiring new commercial buildings to meet Leadership in Energy and Environmental
              Design ( LEED) criteria established by the U. S. Green Building Council;
           b. incorporating passive solar design features in new buildings, including daylighting and
              passive solar heating;
           c. retrofitting existing buildings to meet standards under Title 24 of the California Building
              Energy Code, or to achieve a higher performance standard as established by the
              City /County; and
           d. retrofitting existing buildings to decrease heat gain from non -roof impervious surfaces with
              cool paving, landscaping, and other techniques.
      RCS Policy 3.4. 8: Create a Capital Reinvestment Fund to provide capital for future energy efficiency
      improvements from ongoing energy efficiency savings.
      RCS Policy 3.4. 9: Implement a training program for City staff to support the City' s goal of reducing
      GHG emissions from municipal facilities and operations, including energy efficiency training to
      engineering, building operations, and facility maintenance staff; and energy conservation for all City
      employees.
      RCS Policy 3.4. 3.o: Encourage adherence to the California Green Building Code.
      RCS Policy 3.4. 3.3.: Promote alternative energy development by preparing an Alternative Energy
      Promotion Study, which will include the following:
           a. Identify possible sites for the production of energy using local renewable sources, such as
              solar, wind, and biofuel.
           b. Consider the potential for exemption of alternative energy facilities from other General
              Plan policies concerning visual and biological resources.
December 2011                                                                                         Page 4 -18
                                                                                                             E1k A t
                                                                                                      C7ti
                                                                                                                     p,
                                                                                                       01  .
  Resource Conservation and Sustainability Element
           C.  Evaluate potential land use, environmental, economic, and other constraints affecting
               renewable energy development.
           d.  Develop a ministerial process for approval of small -scale wind and solar energy systems for
               onsite residential, commercial, industrial, and agricultural uses.
           e.  Expedite permits for projects that incorporate alternative energy sources.
      RCS Policy 3.4. 3.2: Provide, where possible, incentives for renewable energy projects ( e. g., reduced
      fees and expedited permit processing), creative financing ( e. g., subsidized or other low- interest
      loans and /or the option to pay for system installation through long -term assessments on individual
      property tax bills), as well as other support for community members or developers seeking funding
      for such projects.
      RCS Policy 3.4. 3-3:   Support SDG & E in the location of new or expanded service facilities where
      appropriate, and support maintenance and operational activities through coordinated efforts with
      SDG & E staff and contractors.
WASTE MANAGEMENT
RCS GOAL 15: Reduce the amount of solid waste generated and diverted to landfills.
      RCS Policy 3. 5. 3.: Comply with the Integrated Waste Management Act by maintaining an up -to -date
      Source Reduction and Recycling Element and Non -Disposal Facility Element.
      RCS Policy 3.5. 2:    Continue the City' s green waste collection and recycling program for all single -
      family residences.
      RCS Policy 3.5. 3: Create a mandatory green waste collection and recycling program for multi -family
      residences and commercial, retail, and industrial operations.
      RCS Policy 3. 5. 4: Maintain the Construction and Demolition Debris Recycling Ordinance, requiring
      building projects to recycle or reuse a minimum percentage of non -hazardous construction and
      demolition debris and unused or leftover building materials.
      RCS Policy 3.5. 5:     Promote organic waste reuse to produce compost and /or biofuel from the
      maximum amount of organic waste generated within the City as possible.
      RCS Policy 3. 5. 6: Increase asphalt recycling and the use of recycled asphalt and cement in the new
      development, rehabilitation, or reconstruction of public facilities.
December 2011                                                                                         Page 4 -19
                                                                                                               ER A t p,
                                                                                                          C7ti
                                                                                                              VISTA
   Resource Conservation and Sustainability Element                                                            2030
  IV
          RCS Policy 3.5. 7:   Encourage the community to produce less waste by reducing, reusing, and
          recycling, including encouraging individual onsite composting through the use of public education
          programs and City demonstration projects.
THE RESOURCE CONSERVATION AND
SUSTAI NABI LITY PLAN
As Vista is nearly built out, the majority of new development proposed will involve infill and redevelopment
of existing sites. Although this is a more sustainable pattern of growth that will have less of an impact on
natural resources, air quality, or the supply of water and energy than greenfield development, the City
recognizes that an expected increase in population will result in a corresponding increased demand for or
impact on valuable resources. The Resource Conservation and Sustainability Plan ( Plan) reflects the City' s
commitment to promote sustainable and efficient use and management of natural resources to reduce the
use of non -renewable resources, reduce GHG emissions, conserve water, and improve the overall quality of
the environment. The City is also committed to preserving and protecting the other valuable resources that
make it special and unique, including biological, open space, parks and recreation, and cultural resources.
The City recognizes that local decisions alone cannot solve regional, state, national, or even worldwide
issues, such as air pollution, drought conditions, or global climate change.              Therefore, the Plan also
demonstrates Vista' s intent to work cooperatively with other agencies and community partners in their
goals and responsibilities to manage resources responsibly, efficiently, and in a sustainable manner.
The Plan provides a brief overview of information and key issues related to the topics addressed in the Goals
and Policies section of this element.      In addition, the Plan includes figures that augment the policies and
guide City actions and decision -making. The Plan has been organized to follow the structure of the Goals
and Policies section. Additional information regarding the topics addressed in this element can be found in
the Background Report.
AIR QUALITY
Air quality is characterized by the degree to which undesirable amounts of particulate or gaseous substances
exist in the air and the impact they have on the health and welfare of the public. Vista is within the San
Diego Air Basin ( Basin), a single air pollution control district that consists of San Diego County. The SDAPCD
and SANDAG are responsible for developing and implementing the clean air plan for attainment and
maintenance of ambient air quality standards in the Basin. The San Diego County Regional Air Quality
Strategy (RAQS) was initially adopted in 3. 993. and is updated every three years, most recently in 2009. The
RAQS outlines those SDAPCD plans and control measures that are designed to attain the air quality
standards for nonattainment criteria pollutants. The Basin is currently designated as nonattainment for the
 December 2011                                                                                            Page 4 -20
                                                                                                               ER A t p,
                                                                                                          C7ti
   Resource Conservation and Sustainability Element                                                            2030
                                       I
one -hour California Ambient Air Quality Standards ( CAAQS) for ozone ( 03);            the eight -hour National
Ambient Air Quality Standards ( NAAQS) and CAAQS for 03; and the CAAQS for both PM1,, and PM,.,
 particulate matter of varying size; SDAPCD z0o8).
The climate in the Basin is controlled largely by the strength and position of the subtropical high -pressure
cell over the Pacific Ocean.     Areas within 3.5 miles of the coast, which include Vista, experience generally
moderate temperatures and comfortable humidity, with a few storms during the winter months.                     The
atmospheric conditions of the Basin create subsidence inversions during the summer months and radiation
inversions during the winter months, which contribute to the region' s air quality problems. Air pollution
levels in the Basin are exacerbated when polluted air from the South Coast Air Basin, particularly Los
Angeles, travels southwest over the ocean at night and is brought onshore into the Basin by the sea breeze
during the day. Smog transported from Los Angeles is a key factor on more than 50 percent of the days San
Diego exceeds clean air standards.
Although local air quality conditions are affected by atmospheric conditions and sources outside the
immediate area, local sources contribute to the quality of air in the City. Recent air pollution studies indicate
that residents living close to freeways and areas of high traffic counts (over 3.00, 00o vehicles per day in urban
areas) and the associated traffic emissions, such as carbon monoxide ( CO), ultra -fine particulates, and black
carbon ( soot), may be subject to adverse health effects beyond those associated with regional air pollution
in urban areas ( CARB 2000, 2005, Wilhelm et al. 2oo3; Kim et al. 2004; Zhu et al. 2002).       Exhaust and road
dust from traffic on SR -78, which generates an average daily traffic volume of 3.44, 000 vehicles ( Caltrans
2007) is the largest source of air pollution in Vista. Stationary sources of pollution generated by those living
and working within the City include fugitive dust from construction activity, grading, and erosion from
unvegetated and unpaved areas; and chemicals from local businesses, such as automobile repair businesses,
dry cleaners, and others that use chemicals such as combustion emissions from other motor vehicles,
manufacturing, power plants, and other large emitters.
Some people are particularly sensitive to certain pollutants, including those with respiratory illnesses or
impaired lung function because of other illnesses, the elderly, and children. Facilities and structures where
these people live or spend considerable amounts of time are known as sensitive receptors. Chapter 4 of the
SCAQMD Air Quality Analysis Guidance Handbook ( South Coast Air Quality Management District 3.993)
defines land uses considered to be sensitive receptors as long -term health care facilities, rehabilitation
centers, convalescent centers, retirement homes, residences, schools, playgrounds, child care centers, and
athletic facilities.
The goals and policies listed above recognize and consider the key relationships between air quality, land
use, transportation, and other policies in Vista' s planning efforts, and identify ways in which the City can
reduce its emissions of air pollutants through various programs to reduce health risks to the community.
They are also intended to assist the City and region to meet ambient air quality standards set by the U. S.
Environmental Protection Agency ( EPA) and the CARB.
 December 2011                                                                                            Page 4 -21
                                                                                                                ER A t p,
                                                                                                         C7ti
                                                                                                          01  .
   Resource Conservation and Sustainability Element                                                           2030
Vehicles are the largest source of air pollution and GHG emissions in the City and State.          Development
patterns have an impact on the degree to which people must use passenger vehicles to carry out the
activities in their daily lives, such as shopping, running other errands, going to entertainment venues, and
getting to and from work. Policies and programs that foster sustainable, compact, multi -modal oriented
development can reduce the need for vehicles, which in turn can improve air quality and reduce GHG
emissions.     Although Vista is nearly built out, the City will encourage new development to incorporate
sustainable     development     principles when   properties   are  recycled and  when   infill development        is
constructed.
As a city within the Basin, Vista will coordinate and cooperate with other local, regional, and state agencies
to improve air quality at the local and regional level to reduce the associated health and environmental risks
to Vista and other Basin residents, including those sensitive to air pollution.      These efforts will include
monitoring and implementing legislation and regulations regarding air quality, developing and
implementing effective mitigation measures to improve air qualitythat do not unduly impact businesses and
employers, and monitoring air quality impacts of the local freeways on sensitive receptors. The City also will
undertake communication, outreach, and education programs to increase the public' s awareness of air
quality issues and how their actions can affect air quality. The air quality goals and policies also support the
goal of reducing GHG emissions pursuant to recent State legislation ( discussed in more detail below).
CLIMATE CHANGE/ GLOBAL WARMING
The temperature on Earth is regulated by a system commonly known as the greenhouse effect, which is
responsible for providing temperature and climate that support life. " Global warming," simply defined, is
the increase in the average surface temperature of the earth. Global warming is thought to be the result of
an enhanced greenhouse effect, which is an increase in the concentration of GHGs in the atmosphere that
results in an increase in the amount of heat -reflecting potential of the atmosphere, leading to an increase in
the   planet' s average temperature and a change in climate.           GHGs are both naturally occurring and
anthropogenic ( human- made).       Human -produced GHGs are considered by many scientists to be responsible
for artificially increasing the greenhouse effect and contributing to changes in local and global climate
patterns.    These GHGs include carbon dioxide ( CO2), methane ( CH0.7, near -surface ozone ( 03),        nitrous
oxide ( N20), and chlorofluorocarbons ( CFCs).     Common sources of human -produced GHGs include burning
fossil fuels ( especially coal and petroleum) for transportation, electricity, heating, and deforestation. In
California, the transportation sector is the largest contributor to GHG emissions ( 38 percent), followed by
production of electricity ( 23 percent), industry ( 20 percent), and commercial and residential uses ( g percent)
 CARIB Greenhouse Gas Inventory zoog).
The State of California considers GHG emissions and the impacts of global warming to be serious threats to
the public health, environment, economic well- being, and natural resources of California, and has taken an
 December 2011                                                                                           Page 4- 22
                                                                                                             ER A t p,
                                                                                                        C7ti
   Resource Conservation and Sustainability Element                                                          2030
aggressive stance to address climate change through the adoption of legislation and policies, the most
relevant of which are summarized below.
          Executive Order 5 -3 -05, signed by the Governor in zoos, establishes statewide GHG emission
          reduction targets as follows: by 2o3.o, reduce GHG emissions to 2000 levels; by 202o, reduce GHG
          emissions to iggo levels; and by 205o, reduce GHG emissions to 8o percent below iggo levels.
          AB 32, known as the Global Warming Solutions Act of 2oo6, requires that the State' s GHG
          emissions be reduced to iggo levels by the year zozo. This is roughly equivalent to the reduction in
          emissions to a level 3.5 percent below current levels.
          5B 97 ( 2007) requires the Office of Planning and Research ( OPR) to prepare guidelines to submit to
          the California Resources Agency regarding feasible mitigation of GHGs or the effects of GHG
          emissions as required by CEQA.
          5B 375 ( 2oo8) calls for coordinated land use and transportation planning as a means to address
          climate change by adding consideration of GHG emissions and linking regional transportation plans
            RTPs) to infill development and housing.
There are many plans, regulations, rules, and other actions that have been or are in the process of being
developed at the State and regional levels to implement California' s global warming /climate change
legislation.    While the largest potential GHG emissions reductions are dependent on State actions, local
governments also will play a role in GHG reduction strategies and will be required to take actions to meet the
mandatory reduction goals.         The Climate Change Scoping Plan ( December 20o8), prepared by CARB
pursuant to AB 32, notes that in some cases, local governments have exclusive authority over emission
sources through their processes, policies, and ordinances.
The City will support and implement policies, plans, programs, activities, and regulations to reduce GHG
emissions to iggo levels, pursuant to AB 32, and will encourage local employers and businesses to do the
same.    In addition to the goals and policies described in the air quality section above, these efforts include
preparing and implementing a Climate Action Plan for both community activities and municipal operations,
updating the Greenhouse Gas Inventory, minimizing fugitive dust, promoting energy conservation and
increased energy efficiency, promoting waste reduction and recycling, and using renewable resources.
                                                                                                              r—
WATER RESOURCES
Vista is located within two hydrologic units –   the San Luis Rey
and Carlsbad Hydrologic Units ( HUs) –     each of which contains
creeks,    rivers, and    other water   bodies.   These  HUs    are
subdivided into hydrologic areas ( HAs).     The San Luis Rey HU
 9o3) is one true watershed draining to the Pacific Ocean,
while the Carlsbad HU ( 904) is comprised of six hydrologic
 December 2011                                                                                          Page 4 -23

                                                                                                                VR A L P(,
                                                                                                                           q'[ r
                                                                                                               VISTA
   Resource Conservation and Sustainability Element                                                            2030
areas or separate watersheds. The City is comprised of basins that drain to the San Luis Rey HU and to four
of the HAs in the Carlsbad HU including:        Loma Alta, Buena Vista, Agua Hedionda, and San Marcos. (         see
Figure RCS -3.)   Several streams traverse Vista, including Loma Alta Creek, Buena Vista Creek, Buena Creek,
and Agua Hedionda Creek. These Creeks drain to coastal estuaries including Loma Alta Slough, Buena Vista
Lagoon, Agua Hedionda Lagoon, and Batiquitos Lagoon, all ultimately discharging to the Pacific Ocean.
Beneficial uses are defined as the uses of water necessary for the survival or well being of man, plants, and
wildlife.   These    uses of water serve     to  promote    the tangible  and   intangible  economic,   social, and
environmental goals of mankind. ( Water Quality Control Plan forthe San Diego Basin, 3.994).
Beneficial uses of the inland surface waters in the City' s watersheds include: municipal and domestic supply
 MUN),    agricultural supply ( AGR), industrial service supply ( IND),  hydropower generation ( POW) ( San Luis
Rey only), contact water recreation ( REC -3.),  non -contact water recreation ( REC -2), preservation of biological
habitats of special significance ( BIOL), warm freshwater habitat ( WARM), cold freshwater habitat ( COLD)
 San Luis Rey only), wildlife habitat (WILD), and rare, threatened, or endangered species (RARE).
Beneficial uses of the coastal waters in the City' s watersheds include: contact water recreation ( REC -3.), non -
contact water recreation ( REC -2),    commercial and sport fishing ( COMM) ( Agua Hedionda Lagoon only),
preservation of biological habitats of special significance ( BIOL), estuarine habitat ( EST), wildlife habitat
 WILD), rare, threatened, or endangered species ( RARE), marine habitat ( MAR), aquaculture ( AQUA) ( Agua
Hedionda Lagoon only),        migration  of aquatic organisms ( MIGR), spawning,        reproduction, and /or early
development ( SPWN),       shellfish harvesting ( SHELL) ( Agua Hedionda Lagoon only), and warm freshwater
habitat ( WARM) ( Buena Vista Lagoon only. Definitions of these beneficial uses and details regarding their
application to Vista' s watersheds are located in the most recent version of the Water Quality Control Plan for
the San Diego Basin.
Every few years, the State Water Resources Control Board ( SWRCB) updates its list of impaired water
bodies, those that are not meeting the designated beneficial uses. These are designated as 3o3( d) listed
waters under the Clean Water Act. Local 3o3( d) listed impairments were approved most recently by EPA and
the SWRCB in 203.0. These impairments are listed by watershed below:
          San Luis Rey Hydrologic Unit (903): chloride, total dissolved solids, total nitrogen, phosphorus, total
          coliform, fecal coliform, enterococcus, toxicity, eutrophication
          Loma Alta Hydrologic Area ( 904. 3.):  selenium, toxicity, indicator bacteria, eutrophication
          Buena Vista Hydrologic Area ( 904. 2):      selenium, sediment toxicity, indicator bacteria, nutrients,
          sedimentation /siltation
          Agua Hedionda Hydrologic Area ( 904. 3):       fecal coliform, enterococcus, manganese, phosphorus,
          selenium, total dissolved solids, total nitrogen, toxicity
          San Marcos Hydrologic Area ( 904. 5): DDE, phosphorus, sediment toxicity, selenium
 December 2011                                                                                             Page 4- 24
      Figure RCS -1
Regional Hydrology
This page left intentionally blank
                                                                                                          ER A t
                                                                                                     C7ti
                                                                                                                 p( L
                                                                                                      XISTok
   Resource Conservation and Sustainability Element                                                       2034
More details regarding the 3o3( d) listings can be found on the State Water Resources Control Board Website
at www. swrcb. gov.
The City recognizes the interconnectedness of water quality including surface, storm, and wastewater
management; water supply; and natural resources. Understanding the relationships between these various
water resources allows the City to operate efficiently and effectively when managing these resources,
leveraging programs and efforts where possible and solving problems with a holistic approach. Because of
this recognition, the water programs within the organization work closely together to achieve better
management of these resources. Concurrently, the programs also work closely with other resource related
organizations within the watersheds.
The City continues efforts to improve the water quality of the watersheds of which it is a part. Urban runoff
and stormwater have been shown to contribute to the degradation of surface water quality in our
watersheds. This degradation has led to many of the beneficial uses within the watersheds not being fully
attained.     In examining the beneficial uses and the impairments in the waterbodies within Vista' s
watersheds, the City has prioritized its pollution concerns within each hydrologic area. In general, the
priority pollutants in the City are bacteria, sediment, and nutrients.
Urban runoff may be generated from many sources during dry weather including over -irrigation, washing
surfaces, sanitary sewer overflows, illegal dumping, etc. Stormwater runoff, during rain events, becomes
polluted when it picks up contaminants from a variety of sources such as: motor oil, gasoline, and heavy
metals from streets, trash, and fertilizers and pesticides from lawns, parks, and golf courses, sediment from
unprotected lands, and pet waste.
Many simple and cost -effective techniques can be applied to various sites and land uses to reduce urban
runoff   and   manage    stormwater.      One stormwater management strategy is known as Low Impact
Development ( LID).      LID works by mimicking a site' s natural hydrology by capturing runoff, reducing its
volume and velocity of flow, and directing it to vegetated areas or areas with soils that promote infiltration
and naturally filter pollutants from the water. By maintaining or restoring the natural hydrology of a site,
LID can protect surface and groundwater quality, minimize flooding, and reduce habitat degradation.
Depending on the LID techniques chosen, sites can reduce the impacts of bacteria, sediment, and nutrients
on downstream receiving waters. Examples of LID techniques include, but are not limited to:
          Using bioretention areas and bioswales in landscaped areas;
          Decreasing impervious surface and installing permeable paving material;
          Using rain barrels, cisterns, and other rain collection systems;
          Planting street trees and connecting them with vegetated filter strips; and
          Installing vegetative roof systems.
 December 2011                                                                                       Page 4- 25
                                                                                                        VISTA
   Resource Conservation and Sustainability Element                                                     2030
                                      I
The versatility of LID techniques makes them appropriate for single -family, multi -family, commercial, and
industrial development, and they can be applied in new development or remodels and redevelopment. The
City will encourage the use of LID techniques through public outreach and education, and will add design
guidelines and /or development standards to encourage or require the use of LID techniques in new or
redeveloped projects in accordance with regional standards. The City also will apply LID techniques in its
own public projects, such as medians, trails, parkways, street improvements, landscaping, and parl<s; and
will    publicize   and     promote     them    as    demonstration       projects   for    the  community.
An example that illustrates the City' s strategy in managing its water resources is the development and
implementation of the Agua Hedionda Watershed Management Plan.              With signs of degradation evident
throughout the Agua Hedionda Hydrologic Area ( 904. 3),       the local stakeholders have prepared the Agua
Hedionda Watershed Management Plan ( WMP) to " Preserve, restore and enhance the watershed' s natural
functions and features."    Development of the plan was a stakeholder driven, collaborative process which
included support from the cities, non -governmental organizations, and regulatory agencies within the
watershed. The WMP was completed in 20o8 and adopted by the City of Vista in the spring of 2009.
The Agua Hedionda WMP provides a comprehensive, scientifically -based plan for preserving, restoring, and
enhancing watershed functions and minimizing future degradation. The WMP recommends management
actions to address priority issues, build upon current efforts, and resolve existing management gaps.
Recommended management actions include: New Development and Redevelopment Site Management,
Preservation    and  Restoration  Measures,  Stormwater     Best  Management     Practice ( BMP) Retrofitting,
Monitoring, and Outreach.
By addressing the goals and objectives of the plan, stakeholders will work toward preserving, restoring, and
enhancing the Agua Hedionda Watershed' s natural functions and features. Each of these actions will further
efforts towards a healthy watershed that provides habitat, water cleansing, and aesthetic benefits that can
be managed to promote quality local communities.
According to the California Department of Water Resources, the City is not located within a groundwater
basin; however, the San Marcos Area basin and San Luis Rey basin are located southeast and northeast of
Vista, respectively, and the quality of surface water that flows through Vista may have an impact upon
groundwater in the nearby basins.
Drinking water within Vista is provided by the Vista Irrigation District ( VID). VID receives water from a
variety of sources to supply its customers, including imported water from the San Diego County Water
Authority (CWA) and local water from its Lake Henshaw facilities. Although most of CWA' s water supply is
from the Metropolitan Water District (MWD), CWA is pursuing projects to diversify its supplies. VID' s Urban
Water Management Plan, updated in December 201o, describes and evaluates estimated water needs of its
service area, use of recycled water, and conservation activities.
 December 2011                                                                                       Page 4 -26
                                                                                                         VISTA
    Resource Conservation and Sustainability Element                                                     2030
The State is experiencing a multi -year drought, and the Colorado River Basin, which is an important source
of water for California, is experiencing nearly a decade of drought conditions. Due to this situation, on June
4, 2oo8, the Governor issued Executive Order S - o6 -o8 proclaiming that California is in a condition of
statewide drought.    He issued orders for the Department of Water Resources to take immediate action to
address the drought conditions and water limitations that currently exist in California, and called upon local
water agencies and districts to implement measures to conserve water.
The City will undertake efforts to protect and enhance water resources through water conservation and
water quality improvement efforts. The California Water Code requires all urban water suppliers to prepare
urban water management plans and to update them every five years. The City coordinated with VID to
update its Urban Water Management Plan in 2010, and will work with VID in their efforts to respond to
Executive Order S - o6 -o8 by encouraging residents and other water consumers to increase their water
conservation efforts, and by revising the City' s landscape ordinance to implement new water conservation
standards. In addition, new development and rehabilitation projects will be required to make maximum use
of water conservation techniques.
BIOLOGICAL RESOURCES
Vista is primarily a built -out community, and only a few areas of natural habitat remain within the City.
Figure RCS -2 shows the distribution of the 17 vegetation /habitat types that occur within Vista. Of the 17
vegetation /habitat types, 12 are considered natural and naturalized, and comprise the focal vegetation
communities to be conserved within the City.
The most extensive natural vegetation communities in the City are the riparian habitats and other wetlands,
which are concentrated along major waterways and natural drainages, such as Buena Vista, Agua Hedionda,
and Buena Creeks. Diegan Coastal Sage Scrub, which comprises the second -most abundant habitat in Vista,
is found mostly in the southern portion of the City, including areas in and around Dawson Los Monos Canyon
Reserve, La Mirada Canyon, and Green Oal< Ranch.         Diegan Coastal Sage Scrub is considered a sensitive
habitat and is given the highest inventory priority by the California Natural Diversity Database ( CNDDB).
The CNDDB is a program that inventories the status and locations of rare plants and animals in California. A
CNDDB list of special- status plant and wildlife species was reviewed for the General Plan Update and
revealed that many species are known to occur or have a reasonable probability of occurring in or near Vista.
Another substantial open space area with plant communities and habitat occurs in Guajome Regional Park
at the northwest corner of Vista; other smaller areas of natural habitat are scattered throughout the City.
Many of the larger natural habitat areas make up part of a regional core area, habitat linkages, and /or
wildlife movement corridors that extend beyond the City limits into neighboring jurisdictions, including
Carlsbad and San Marcos, and support significant natural habitats and sensitive species within the region.
 December 2011                                                                                        Page 4 -27
                                                                                                          VISTA
   Resource Conservation and Sustainability Element                                                       2030
The City is part of the North County MHCP, which was
adopted by the SANDAG Board of Directors in 2003.            The
MHCP is a comprehensive conservation planning process
developed to identify and protect critical habitats for a wide
range   of   plant and  animal   species within  a  20, 000 -acre
preserve system in North San Diego County.           The North
County MHCP, which encompasses the cities of Vista,
Carlsbad, Encinitas, Escondido, Oceanside, San Marcos, and
Solana Beach, is coordinated through SANDAG and is one of
the four subregional habitat conservation planning programs
in the region.     This program will, in conjunction with the
                                                                                 La Mirada Canyon
others, contribute to a coordinated preserve system for the
San Diego region and Southern California. The preservation areas also will serve as a key component of the
region' s smart growth efforts by directing forecasted growth into appropriate areas for development. The
intent is to assemble a regional habitat preservation system that will be created through conservation of
lands already in public ownership, contributions from private development through development
regulations and mitigation of impacts, and acquisition of private lands from willing sellers by public entities.
Once the preserve is assembled, restoration and ongoing management and monitoring will be required to
ensure the land is conserved in perpetuity. To support the overall ecosystem preserve of the MHCP, each
city is responsible for developing a subarea plan that identifies the sensitive habitat areas within its
boundaries and includes policies for their conservation and ongoing management. The City is preparing its
draft Subarea Plan and will work toward its adoption.
A key to protecting biological resources is to preserve the open spaces in which they exist. To implement
the MHCP within the City of Vista, a Biological Preserve Overlay ( BPO) has been created and identified as
the City' s regional habitat preservation system. Biological conservation is the primary function of the 296. 2 -
acre BPO, and it will be implemented by a zoning overlay adopted concurrently with the General Plan.
Figures RSC -2 and RSC -3 show the outline of the areas included in Vista' s BPO.
The goals and policies above describe the measures the City will take to preserve and enhance these
important and sensitive biological resources, including the BPO. They provide for continued efforts to limit
land use and recreational use incompatibilities, and establish long -term maintenance and management
standards. The goals and policies also support both the North County MHCP and the City' s responsibilities
to conserve natural biotic communities and sensitive plant and animal species pursuant to various state and
federal laws and policies relevant to biological resources.
 December 2011                                                                                         Page 4 -28
WN
       Luis
 San
                                                                                 J _- - - - - -         Bonsall
                                                                                     r.
                                                                   BPO _
                                       Oceanside                                   Mm
                                                                                                               North
                                                                                                            County
                                                                                                              Metro
                                                                                                           lanning
                                                                                                                 Area
                                         BPO
                                                                                                                 I
                                                                               I
                                                                                                                    I
                                                                                                                   J
         Carlsbad
                                                                     BPO
   Q Vista City Boundary                            Extensive Agriculture
         Vista Sphere of Influence                  Field / Pasture ( ruderal)
         Sprinter                                   Mule Fat Scrub
                                                    Non -Native Grassland
         Waterways
                                                    Non -Native Vegetation
   Vegetation Communities
         Baccharis Scrub                            Open Freshwater
         Coast Live Oak Woodland                    Orchards / Vineyards
         Coastal Sage - Chaparral                   Southern Coast Live
                                                    Oak Riparian Forest
         Coastal and Valley Freshwater
         Marsh /Emergent Wetland                    Southern Cottonwood -
                                                                                                            N
                                                    Willow Riparian Forest
         Developed
         Diegan Coastal Sage Scrub
         Exotic Riparian Woodland
                                                    Southern Mixed Chaparral
                                                    Southern Willow Scrub
                                                                                                            A         1
                                                                                                           T
                                                                                                           Miles
   Source: Vegetation - Merkel, 2007: Waterways - SanGIS, 2004.
                                                                                                        Figure RCS -2
                                                                                                Biological Resources
This page left intentionally blank
                                                                                                               ER A t p,
                                                                                                        C7ti
                                                                                                         01  .
   Resource Conservation and Sustainability Element
OPEN SPACE
Approximately 63.6 acres or 6 percent of the land area in Vista is designated Open Space ( OS) on the Land
Use Map. Open space is critical for the conservation and management of natural resources. Retaining open
space in its natural state provides many benefits to the community, such as:
         supporting endangered and special- status and other plant and wildlife species;
         providing habitat and refuge for wildlife in urban areas and linkages to regional habitats and wildlife
         corridors;
         providing passive recreational opportunities;
         enhancing water quality and groundwater recharge;
         providing natural systems that absorb and store CO, from the atmosphere to help mitigate GHG
         emissions;
         providing educational opportunities; and
         protecting scenic resources.
The management of open space is also crucial for promoting public health and safety by reducing flooding
and diverting development from areas of unstable soil and other geologic hazards; these issues are
addressed in greater detail in the Public Safety, Facilities, and Services Element. Open space also can
include agricultural land and land used for orchards and vineyard.       However, in developed cities such as
Vista, where agricultural enterprises are small -scale, scattered, and surrounded by other land uses, it is
appropriate to promote the retention of agricultural uses through land use designations that allow these
uses, rather than designating the land as open space.
Open space areas in Vista are primarily found along
creek   corridors    and   between    planned    residential
developments as buffers.      Major areas of open space
include Dawson Los Monos Canyon Reserve, which is
owned by the Regents of the University of California; La
Mirada Canyon, which is an open space amenity that
also serves as a utility easement within the Vista
Business Park and is largely owned by the City of Vista;
and a portion of the Vista Parks Park that will remain
undeveloped due to the presence of wetlands.           The
locations of land designated OS on the Land Use Map
are shown on Figure RCS -3.      Table RCS -3. describes the
                                                                        Dawson Los Monos Canyon Reserve
two largest areas, Dawson Los Monos Canyon Reserve
 December 2011                                                                                          Page 4 -29
                                                                                                             ER A t
                                                                                                        C7ti
                                                                                                                    p( L
                                                                                                         XISTok
    Resource Conservation and Sustainability Element                                                         2034
and La Mirada Canyon, both of which are publically owned, and summarizes many smaller open space areas
that are located throughout the community. The smaller open spaces may be either publicly or privately
owned, and fall into two general categories: riparian habitats that are found along creeks, drainages, and
other bodies of water, such as Agua Hedionda Creek, Buena Creek, and the unchannelized portion of Buena
Vista Creek; and deed -restricted open spaces that have been set aside as part of a development proposal to
provide buffers for resource conservation and /or open space for health and safety purposes. The open space
areas along Buena Vista Creek will be protected and enhanced through development and implementation of
a master plan for Buena Vista Creek, which has been identified as an Opportunity Area in the Land Use and
Community Identity Element. Figure RCS -3 also shows the location of the proposed master plan for Buena
Vista Creek.
It is important to note that several parks within the City also provide open space that contributes to resource
conservation, such as Guajome Park, which includes riparian areas, a spring -fed lake, a marsh, and chaparral
in drier areas, and Buena Vista Park. Although these parks may contribute to resource conservation, they
are designated Parks and Recreation ( PR) on the Land Use Map because recreation is their primary use.
Conversely, many areas that are designated OS may allow limited passive recreational uses, and hiking and
bicycling trails.
The Biological Preserve Overlay ( BPO) designates lands the City of Vista has dedicated to the permanent
conservation of biological resources. Refer to the discussion found in the Biological Resources section of this
element for a detailed discussion of the BPO and see Figures RCS- 2 and RCS -3 for a map of the areas
included in the BPO.
In addition to    land designated OS and      PR, several   residential   land use designations encourage the
preservation of open space and resource conservation and promote the protection of safety -related open
space on private property. The intent of the Open Space Residential ( OSR) designation is to preserve and
maintain the integrity of the hillside topography of Vista, preserve the rural character of the area, and allow
animal husbandry and other agricultural uses under the guidance of conditions established in the zoning
ordinance.    The Rural Residential ( RR) land use category is intended to enhance and preserve the rural
atmosphere in certain areas of Vista by lessening negative impacts on environmental, geologic, and
hydrologic land features, and protecting the integrity of Vista' s hillside areas with a minimum disturbance of
the property' s natural topography and native landscape features.
 December 2011                                                                                         Page 4 -30
             Sa'a
                        Oceanside
                                            fCyee?
                                 BPO_
                      Carlsbad
      I3 Vista City Boundary
      j —1 Vista Sphere of Influence
v
            Sprinter
i                                                  nos                 Trail will be
            Waterways                                                   unpaved
                                                    n
                                                                 J
      p     Proposed Buena Vista Creek             Ve
n           Master Plan
                                                                   BPO
5®          Biological Preserve Overlay ( BPO)         La Mirada
                                                   BPO                                           Marcos
            Open Space
                                                        Canyon
n
                                                                                       San    N
            Existing Trail
            Proposed Bike /Pedestrian Trail
i                                                                                      0                1
v ...
i
            Proposed Hiking Trail
      Source: Waterways - SanGIS, 2004.                                                      Miles
2 j
                                                                                         Figure RCS -3
                                                                                     Open Space Plan

This page left intentionally blank
                                                                                                              VISTA
    Resource Conservation and Sustainability Element                                                          2030
TABLE RCS -1.   OPEN SPACE CONSERVATION AREAS
Open Space
                                                     Description
      Area                                                                                               Vista
                 The Dawson Los Monos Canyon Reserve is a 234 -acre habitat area within the cities
                 of Vista and Carlsbad, which is owned by the Regents of the University of California
                 and administered by UCSD. The 163 -acre portion of the Reserve that is located in
   Dawson Los    Vista is adjacent to Agua Hedionda Creek and contains habitats such as southern
 Monos Canyon    riparian woodland, coast live oak woodland, inland sage scrub, mixed and chamise        163. 0
     Reserve     chaparral, and mixed grassland of native bunchgrasses and introduced annuals.
                 One of the primary functions of the reserve is to protect one of Southern California' s
                 only perennial streams, the Agua Hedionda Creek, in addition to the native upland
                 and riparian habitats that occur along the southwestern portion of the City.
                 This property is located in the South Vista Business Park area. The majority is
    La Mirada    owned and managed by the City. La Mirada Canyon serves as a southern tributary
                                                                                                         113' 0
     Canyon      to the Agua Hedionda Creek Watershed and contains a substantial amount of open
                 space and natural habitat.
                 Buena Vista Park is a unique community park in Vista as it contains both areas for
   Buena Vista   active use and areas intended for the permanent conservation of natural resources.
                                                                                                         119. 4
       Park      Of the 15o acres, approximately 30. 6 acres are dedicated to active use, and the
                 remaining 119. 4 is dedicated to open space and trails.
                 The primary purpose of the BPO is the conservation of biological resources. The
                 BPO has been identified in order to limit land uses to only limited passive
    Biological
                 recreational uses where protection of those resources is ensured, or those uses are
     Preserve
                 required to protect the public health and safety. The BPO applies to a total of 296. 2
 Overlay (BPO)   acres, and includes portions of Buena Vista Park, La Mirada Canyon, and Dawson
                 Los Monos Canyon Reserve.
                 Other properties that are designated as open space include City -owned or deed -
   Other open    restricted areas and /or buffers located along waterways and other sensitive habitat
                                                                                                         220. 7
      spaces     areas within developed spaces to restrict future development, such as 10. 5 acres of
                 wetlands in Vista Sports Park.
                                                                                               TOTAL     61.6. 1.
Much of the land that is designated OS, PR, OSR, and RR also corresponds to property that is located in the
fire hazard severity zones in the City (see Figure PSFS -6 and discussion in the Public Safety, Facilities, and
Services Element for more information). These designations serve to minimize risk to persons from wildfires
by limiting the exposed population and the intensity of high -value property.
The City is committed to continue to preserve its existing open space and increase it as practicable.             The
goals and policies above describe the measures the City will take to acquire, preserve, or otherwise protect
significant open spaces. A variety of methods will be used to accomplish this, including the development
 December 2011                                                                                            Page 4 -31
                                                                                                             VR A L P(,
                                                                                                                        q'[ r
                                                                                                           VISTA
    Resource Conservation and Sustainability Element                                                        2030
review process, collaboration with other agencies and environmental groups, and acquisition of open space
if funding is available and the seller is willing.
PARKS AND RECREATION
Vista' s parks and recreational assets are highly valued by its residents as important contributors to the
community' s quality of life. These assets promote physical and emotional health, individual character
development, social relationships, economic value, skills and widening interests, community connections
and stability, and community character. This section provides an overview of Vista' s existing parkland and
recreational facilities, discusses existing and future needs, and highlights key goals and policies to achieve
the community' s vision regarding these significant resources.
Existing Parks and Recreational Facilities
Table RCS -2 describes the City- and County- owned parks
in Vista as of 2o3.o, and summarizes each park' s amenities
and acreage. The parks are organized by type: regional,
community,      neighborhood,    and     special   recreational/
resource   area. ( The classification system and standards
for each type of park are described in the following
section.)     The   Recreation   and    Community      Services
Department offers diverse recreational programs at each
City -owned park depending upon the size of the park and
the type of facilities.    The City' s Parks and Recreation
Commission advises the City Council and the Director of
                                                                           Active and Passive Recreation
Parks and Community Services on decisions pertaining to
parks, recreation, and open space issues.       The Commission also aids in the coordination of public agencies
and civic organizations as it relates to parks and recreation planning and programming.
 December 2011                                                                                           Page 4- 32
                                                                                                                 VR A L P(,
                                                                                                                            q'[ r
                                                                                                              VISTA
   Resource Conservation and Sustainability Element                                                            2030
TABLE RCS- 2. PUBLICLY OWNED PARKS AND RECREATIONAL FACILITIES
       Parks and • •
                                                                   Amenities
       Recreation
Regional Parks
                        Part of a 557 -acre regional park that provides preserved open space, active
Guajome City Park       trails, campsites, and regional historic significance; the Rancho Guajome              140. 0
                        Adobe Ranch House and the Antique Gas and Steam Engine Museum.
Community Parks
                        Group picnic areas, play apparatus, the Moonlight Amphitheatre, community
                        recreation center including gymnasium, two lighted softball fields, lighted
Brengle Terrace Park    tennis courts, two lighted outdoor basketball courts, large passive areas and          82. 4
                        park maintenance facility, four bocce ball courts, a sand volleyball court, and a
                        senior citizen center.
                        One lighted baseball field, two lighted softball fields, a recreation building that
                        contains restrooms, a concession stand and a meeting room, a two -acre lake,
Buena Vista Park        picnic facilities, open space, and trails.       Approximately 30. 6 acres are         30. 6
                        developed. The majority of the undeveloped portion of Buena Vista Park lies
                        within the BPO, designated as Open Space ( 119. 4 acres).
                        Two lighted synthetic turf soccer /football fields, two multi -purpose ball fields,
                        one pony /colt field, a concession stand, a future recreation center and
                        gymnasium, play apparatus, a group picnic area, trail, and maintenance area.
Vista Sports Park                                                                                               24. 3
                        The Sports Park is developed on 24. 3 acres of the 34. 8 -acre site. (          The
                        remainder, which is mostly wetlands, will be left as undeveloped and is
                        designated Open Space. This area is within the BPO.)
Total:                                                                                                         137. 3
Neighborhood Parks
Breeze Hill Park        Two lighted softball fields, play apparatus, restrooms, and a concession stand.          4. 5
                        Two youth ball fields, restrooms, concession stand, and an open passive area
Bub Williamson Park                                                                                             9. 0
                        along creek.
Civic Center Park
                        Passive park with walking trails that connect the library, civic center, and
                                                                                                                 4. 1
                        Rancho Buena Vista Adobe.
Luz Duran Park          Soccerfields, picnictables, tot lot, and restrooms.                                     4. 4
                        Two youth playgrounds, picnic shelter, restrooms, a half -court basketball
Shadowridge Park                                                                                                 7. 3
                        court, and an open play field.
 December 2011                                                                                              Page 4 -33

                                                                                                                    VR A L P(,
                                                                                                                               q'[ r
                                                                                                                   VISTA
   Resource Conservation and Sustainability Element                                                                2030
  IV
         Parks and
                                                        Description
        Recreation                                                                                               in Vista
Raintree Park                 Synthetic turf soccer area, handball courts, tot lot, and restrooms.                   1. 0
South Buena Vista Park
                              Play apparatus, picnic areas, and a half -court basketball court. Also an off-
                                                                                                                    14. 2
                              leash dog park. The park serves as a trail head for Buena Vista Park.
                              Two lighted tennis courts, one lighted basketball court, play apparatus, picnic
Thibodo Park                  area, restrooms, hiking trail, and Thibodo Community Center. Approximately             8. 7
                              six acres are developed.
Wildwood Park
                              Picnic areas, play apparatus, and restrooms. Provides parking and access point         1. 8
                              for Rancho Buena Vista Adobe.
Total:                                                                                                              55. 0
Special Recreational /Resource Areas (City- Owned)
Creek Walk Park               Naturalized creek, walkways, and an outdoor amphitheatre.                              2. 9
                              Family waterpark that includes the " Flow Rider" body board attraction, four
Wave Waterpark                water slides, a crazy river, swimming pool, children' s water playground, island      4. 8
                              bandstand, locker rooms, and concessions.
Total:                                                                                                               7. 7
                             orTotal City -Owned Property Designated                    Parks and Recreation:      340. 0
In addition to 34o acres of publicly owned parks and facilities, there are 3.57.-1 acres of other property and
facilities not owned or maintained by the City but that provide recreational opportunities for the
community, for a total of 497.1 acres of public and private parkland and recreational resources. The City has
entered into a joint -use agreement with various schools, allowing public access to more than 1o8 acres of
school recreational facilities, play fields, hard court areas, and other recreational amenities during non -
school hours. Other privately owned recreational resources include the Optimist Fields and Buena Vista Ball
Fields, which provide lighted ball fields and other recreational and open space amenities, and the
Shadowridge Golf Course. While this acreage does not contribute to the City' s overall parkland acreage, it
benefits the community by expanding the variety and location of playgrounds, ball fields, and other
recreational amenities that are available to Vista' s residents.         Buena Vista Park differs from Vista' s other
Community Parks. A portion of Buena Vista Park is dedicated to active uses, and a much larger portion is
designated as Open Space and covered by the Biological Preserve Overlay ( BPO).                This area is dedicated to
the permanent conservation of biological resources.            Figure RCS -4 depicts the location of the parks and
recreational facilities in Vista, including all of the City- and County -owned parks, and other privately owned
properties that are designated PR on the Land Use Map and serve a recreational purpose.
 December 2011                                                                                                 Page 4- 34
QVista City Boundary                      Waterway
   Proposed Buena Vista Creek Park,
   Recreation, and Open Space             Public School
   Master Plan
                                          Proposed Pedestrian Bridge
   Parks and Recreation
                                          Existing Trail                                                           1
   Sprinter Station
                                          Proposed Bike /Pedestrian Trail
                                                                                                             CIVIC
   Sprinter
                                          Proposed Hiking Trail                                             Center -
                                                                                                              Park
                                                                                                                 n
                     Ell
                               Gua' ome !                                          I
                                                                                     y
                              County Park` -!
                     Vista Sports Park
                                                                                                    North- C oun4
                                                                                                             -- r
                                                                                                        Metro
                               F '
                                                           Luz    Duran ?
                                                                                                      Planning
                                              p                 Park -                                   Area
                                            C                             Ra mtree       Bren g le
                                                                            Park !     Terrace Park
                                                                                                       Figure RCS -4
                                                                                          Parks and Recreation Plan
This page left intentionally blank
                                                                                                                 ER A t p,
                                                                                                          C7ti
                                                                                                           01  .
   Resource Conservation and Sustainability Element
Parks and Recreation Needs
In order to provide parks and recreational facilities to serve the citizens' needs and to effectively implement
the recreational goals and policies in this element, the City established a classification and standards system
that is based on the NRPA guidelines, but which has been tailored according to Vista' s needs and
developmental constraints. The City uses this system to describe parks according to the services they
provide, based on the present and projected needs of the population; evaluate parkland and recreational
facility needs; and guide the development, enhancement, and expansion of its parks and recreation
program, including decisions regarding property acquisition.
The City requires dedication of land and /or collects fees in lieu of parkland dedication for park or recreational
purposes as a condition of approval of residential subdivisions through the Quimby Act.             The City also
collects development impact fees under the Mitigation Act for maintenance of existing parks and facilities.
In 20o6, City voters passed Proposition L, the Vista Vital Public Services Restoration and Protection
Measure, which allows for a one -half cent sales tax increase; these funds may be used for new parks and
recreational facilities. The Quimby Act requires a city' s adopted General Plan to include policies and
standards for parks and recreation facilities to guide the calculation of the dedication and /or collection of
fees. The classification and standards system also provides the legal basis for collection and use of Quimby
Act and other funds.
The following classification and standards system is intended for guidance purposes; actual development
and /or acquisition decisions will depend on consideration of a variety of additional factors, such as access,
topography, surrounding uses, sensitive resources, identified need, and the potential to coordinate with
adjacent schools or other facilities to promotejoint usage and leverage resources.
         Neighborhood Park:        A neighborhood park serves mainly the children and families of a specific
         neighborhood.     If possible, it should be located adjacent to a school site and /or in the center of a
         populous area or neighborhood. A neighborhood park typically includes areas for active recreation,
         such as play apparatus, multipurpose courts, play fields, and specialized areas such as tennis,
         handball, and horseshoe courts.         It also includes shelters and areas for passive recreation and
         informal play, picnic facilities, rest rooms, and off -street parking. The park should be landscaped for
         the purposes of shade, beauty, and to provide a pleasant environment. A neighborhood park should
         have a service area of one -half to one mile and should be from five to 25 or more acres in area. It
         should be provided at a ratio of one to two acres per i,000 people.
         Community Park: A community park supplements the neighborhood park by providing a wider
         range of recreational facilities, accommodating larger groups of people, and serving a wider range
         of  interests.  It provides facilities for organized sports, large group picnicking, and passive
         recreation, and may include additional amenities, such as a community and /or senior center,
         gymnasium, multi -purpose courts, or a tennis complex. Specialized areas may include botanical
         gardens, an amphitheatre, or an equestrian center.           Community parks often have undeveloped
 December 2011                                                                                           Page 4- 35
                                                                                                                  ER A t
                                                                                                             C7ti
                                                                                                                         p( L
                                                                                                              XISTok
     Resource Conservation and Sustainability Element                                                             2034
          natural areas that may be served by trails. A community park should have a service area of one to
          two miles and should be 25 acres or more in area. It should be provided at a ratio of three acres per
          3., 000 people.
          Regional Park: A regional park provides, on a large scale, areas for active and passive recreation,
          picnic facilities, water features for boating and fishing, trails, and natural areas. It provides an
          opportunity to get away from noise and congestion of the built environment within a travel time of
          less than one hour. The responsibility of providing regional parks usually falls on the County. A
          regional park should be 25o acres or larger.
          Special Recreational /Resource Area:          A special recreational /resource area is an area that has
          potential regional significance, usually indicated by the uniqueness of the site and /or the type of
          facility or amenity provided. While special recreational /resource areas contribute to the City' s
          overall parkland acreage, they do not have specific service areas or standards.
The City is committed to providing an overall average of 4. 49 acres of publicly owned parkland for every
3., 000 residents. This includes the goal to provide three acres of community parks per 3., 000 residents and
two acres of neighborhood           parks per 3., 000 residents.  With a population of 97, 53.3 residents in 2010
  SANDAG 203.0), Vista currently exceeds the provision of its overall parkland goal by providing 4. 68 acres of
parkland per 3., 000 residents; however, it does not meet its goals for community or neighborhood parks.
According to the NRPA facility standards, the City meets or exceeds the standards for the provision of
recreational facilities ( refer to the Background Report for details).
To meet the parkland and recreational needs of the residents of Vista, consideration must be given to an
estimated increase of approximately 3.4, 775 residents by 203o, as well as expected changes in demographics.
For example, a substantial increase in the senior population is anticipated as the baby boomer generation
ages. Proactive planning for the expansion of services, facilities, and programming for seniors will benefit
the City as it prepares for this demographic shift. In addition, the expected increase in population will put
demands on existing parks and recreational facilities. The Land Use Plan focuses on redevelopment of
commercial       corridors  and   the   concept   of smart  growth   to include   a mix  of  uses,  transit -oriented
development, and infill.       This type of development will result in population growth and an increase in
densities in certain locations, called Opportunity Areas ( OA), described in the Land Use and Community
Identity Element. OA -3., the Buena Vista Creek Opportunity Area, is the only OA that does not propose
increased development; instead, it calls for creation of a master plan that will connect parks, neighborhoods,
and commercial areas through a system of trails and walkways, create a linear park along Buena Vista Creek
from Brengle Terrance Park to Downtown Vista, and enhance the creek' s hydrology and natural habitats.
Figure RCS -4 depicts the location of the proposed Buena Vista Creek master plan.            Creative methods will
need to be employed to increase the amount of parks, recreational facilities, and green space while
accommodating anticipated infill and redevelopment. The addition of mini -parks, landscaped plazas, and
playgrounds will be encouraged in private development to serve the more urbanized development.
 December 2011                                                                                              Page 4 -36
                                                                                                              E1k A t p,
                                                                                                       C7ti
                                                                                                        01  .
   Resource Conservation and Sustainability Element                                                         2030
Trails
Providing additional hiking, biking, and pedestrian trails is also a high community priority. Vista' s climate
and topography provide an opportunity to create an integrated bicycling and pedestrian circulation network.
This trails network would promote physical exercise and recreation; provide connections between and
increased enjoyment of Vista' s parks and recreational facilities, natural open space areas, historic and
cultural sites, and waterways; and provide alternatives to the use of private vehicles. Key trails within the
City, as well as those that provide linkages to regional trails, were identified through a series of public
meetings conducted for the General Plan Update.              The trails network, which shows both existing and
proposed pedestrian and bicycle trails, is shown on Figure RSC -4.             Proposed improvements are also
addressed in the Circulation Element.
CULTURAL AND PERFORMING ARTS
Cultural and performing arts benefit and enrich the community by providing educational and cultural
opportunities and increased awareness and appreciation of theater and music. The City' s Recreation and
Community Services Department operates a cultural arts program, Moonlight Stage Productions, which is an
award -winning regional theater company that offers a diverse, professional line -up of dramas, musicals, and
comedies in two City -owned venues ( http: / moonlightstage.
                                                 /                  com /):
         Moonlight      Amphitheater,       located    in   Brengle
         Terrance Park, is an open air venue with a state -of-
         the -art stage house; it seats 899 and accommodates
         an additional 3.,200 in lawn seating.
         AVO      Playhouse,    located  in    a   renovated   3. 948
         neighborhood movie house in the Vista Village, is a
         fully equipped performance venue that seats 328.
Vista' s cultural arts program is supported by volunteers,
sponsors, and the Moonlight Cultural Foundation, a nonprofit
organization     that   directly   supports     Moonlight    Stage
                                                                                Moonlight Amphitheater
Productions.
The City will continue to work with citizens, City commissions, organizations, volunteer groups, and other
community partners to identify parks, recreation, and trail needs that accommodate a growing population
and address changes in Vista' s demographics. It will continue to utilize the NRPA guidelines when updating
the parkland and recreation needs assessment. As Vista is nearly built out, it will be important for the City to
take advantage of opportunities to acquire property or otherwise secure facilities for parks and /or
recreational purposes as they become available. The City will use the needs assessment to prioritize
development of parks and recreational facilities in areas with the greatest need.
 December 2011                                                                                         Page 4 -37
                                                                                                           VISTA
   Resource Conservation and Sustainability Element                                                        2030
CULTURAL, HISTORICAL, AND PALEONTOLOGICAL RESOURCES
Each city has its own unique history—the people, events, and forces that determine how it was settled in
recent times; its place in a historical context, which often shaped its recent history; and its prehistoric past,
which reveals itself through archaeological investigations. Together, these components of a city' s history
and origin contribute to its present -day uniqueness and community heritage. Cultural resources include
physical remains of past human activities: prehistoric and historical archaeological remains; historical
architectural remains, including buildings, structures, and other features of the built environment; and
places of importance to Native Americans.          All periods of
California    history are represented       by Vista' s cultural,
historical, and paleontological sites.
According     to    officially recorded   resources   and   other
databases that were researched forthe General Plan update,
85 buildings within the planning area of the City' s General
Plan are considered historically significant. These structures
include    historic   residential, commercial,    and   industrial
buildings built between the late 1800s and the 195os. There
are 7-) of the 85 historic structures located within the City                     Rancho Buena Vista
limits, while the remaining 13 are located within OA 9 ( see
Land Use and Community Identity Element), which is located within the City' s SOL
Vista is home to two cultural resources included on the National Register of Historic Places: the Charles A.
Braun House and the Guajome Ranch House. The Charles A. Braun House, built in 1929 and designed by
Edgar V. Ullrich, is an example of Mission /Spanish Revival.       Guajome Regional Park includes the original
Rancho Guajome, the Guajome Ranch House, and the Antique Gas and Steam Engine Museum.                        The
Guajome Ranch House was built around 1852 - 1853 and is considered an exemplary example of a Mexican
colonial -style ranch still standing in southern California. The Guajome Ranch House is a part of the original
Rancho Guajome, which is listed as a California State Historical Landmark. Rancho Buena Vista Adobe, built
in the second half of the nineteenth century, is one of the best preserved original land grant ranchos in San
Diego County and served as a central meeting place for other ranchos in the northern San Diego County
area. The City acquired the Rancho Buena Vista Adobe in 1989 to protect this important historic and cultural
resource and make it accessible for the community through tours and a variety of educational and youth -
related programs; it also serves as a unique venue for private parties and events.
Research conducted for the General Plan indicates that 112 prehistoric or historical archaeological sites have
been previously recorded in Vista, and four have been recorded within the City' s SOL The creeks and rivers
in and near Vista' s present location were of critical importance to each society local to the area throughout
prehistory and history. In addition, multiple historic trails border or pass through the City.
 December 2011                                                                                          Page 4- 38

                                                                                                             E1k A t p,
                                                                                                        C7ti
   Resource Conservation and Sustainability Element                                                          2030
                                       I
Paleontological resources are the remains and /or traces of remains of plant and animal life ( such as fossils)
that are more than io, 000 years old, the localities where they are collected, and the geologic formations
that contain the localities ( Demere 2007).   The paleontological resources technical report that was prepared
for the General Plan Update indicates that certain geologic formations in Vista are known to contain
paleontological localities with rare, well - preserved, fossil materials that offer important information about
the plant or animal and /or its evolutionary history. These important resources are most often destroyed as a
result of construction, such as excavation, trenching, and tunneling. Impacts can be mitigated through pre -
construction and construction mitigation programs.
The City will undertake policies and programs to encourage the preservation and protection of these
valuable resources through research, inventorying, education, adaptive reuse, incentives, and regulations as
required or appropriate. In addition, the goals and policies regarding conservation of open space, especially
along the creeks and water bodies, will assist in minimizing the disturbance of prehistoric and historical
resources commonly found there.
ENERGY
The sustainable use and management of energy is essential to address many significant energy -related
issues, including meeting the state' s and the country' s increasing energy demands; improving national
energy security; and reducing the impact that energy production has on human health, the environment,
and GHG emissions and climate change.
SDG & E, a regulated subsidiary of Sempra Energy Utility, provides both electricity and natural gas to Vista.
By zoio all California power companies are required to have 20 percent of their energy come from clean
resources, such as wind, solar, biomass, and geothermal.         SDG &E is working to acquire more renewable
energy for its customers, such as developing excess land the utility owns in Vista with a solar energy project.
SDG & E participates in the California Public Utilities Commission' s California Solar Initiate ( CSI),    which
provides incentives for solar installations on existing residential homes and existing and new commercial and
industrial development, and the New Solar Homes Partnership, which encourages the construction of new
energy efficient solar homes. SDG & E also is promoting clean energy generation technologies, including
photovoltaics, fuel cells, and wind power, through its Sustainable Communities Program.           The San Diego
Energy Resource Center, a program jointly provided by SDG & E and the California Center for Sustainable
Energy, is a valuable energy -related information source for the community.
Increasing the use of renewable and clean energy sources, improving efficiency requirements, and
conserving energy are methods individuals, private industry, and government at all levels can take to tackle
these challenges.    The City will encourage or require efficient and sustainable use of energy resources
through conservation, demand -reduction activities, and promotion of alternative and renewable energy
sources on the part of homeowners, the business community, and other energy consumers. The City also
 December 2011                                                                                          Page 4- 39
                                                                                                         ER A t
                                                                                                    C7ti
                                                                                                                p( L
                                                                                                     XISTok
   Resource Conservation and Sustainability Element                                                      2034
will serve as a model for incorporating green building techniques into building and site design of its new
facilities and for remodeled facilities, as implemented in the new Civic Center, which is LEED- certified.
Goals and policies to promote sustainable and green development patterns are also included in the Land Use
and Community Identity Element.
WASTE MANAGEMENT
Waste management is another important and effective way that the community can conserve natural
resources, energy, and disposal space and costs; recover resources from waste; and reduce pollution and
GHG emissions.     Waste management can be achieved by reducing the amount and toxicity of trash and
other waste that is discarded; reusing containers, products, and building materials; and recycling as many
materials as possible, including green waste through composting. In addition, buying products that are
made from recycled materials also has an impact on the waste stream and the environment by utilizing
materials that otherwise would have ended up in landfills and reducing the demand for raw materials.
The Escondido Disposal Corporation ( EDCO) currently provides all of Vista' s trash and curbside recycling
services.    EDCO is a privately owned and operated waste collection and recycling company that serves
residential   homes,   multi -family properties, commercial businesses,   multi- tenant buildings, industrial
centers, construction sites, and community events for Vista. Waste and recycling are collected on a weekly
basis, including green waste. The City has a requirement that 50 percent of all construction and demolition
debris is either reused or recycled. Compliance is enforced through the City' s Construction and Demolition
Debris Recycling Ordinance, which must identify and provide receipt of recycling activities prior to final
building approval.
The goals and policies above include promoting sustainable waste management by the community.             The
City will also undertake efforts to reduce municipal waste generation.
 December 2011                                                                                      Page 4 -40
       Chapter z
     Land Use and
Community Identity Element
This page left intentionally blank
                                                                                                                       ERp. l. p(,
                                                                                                                                   9' 1
                                                                                                                     2030
                                                               LAND USE AND COMMUNITY IDENTITY GOALS
                                                               COMMUNITY CHARACTER, IDENTITY, AND DESIGN QUALITY
                                                               LUCI Goal t: Increase the level of design quality and preserve and
Chapter Z:                      Land Use                       enhance Vista' s identity and image.
                                                               LUCI Goal z:   Preserve and enhance the characteristics and features
                                                               of neighborhoods that share common development patterns,
                                                               topography, major streets, and zoning patterns.
and Community                                                  LUCI Goal 3: Preserve and protect existing residential
                                                               neighborhoods from actions, activities, or land uses that may have an
                                                               adverse impact upon the enjoyment of the residential living
                                                               environment.
 Identity Element                                              SMART GROWTH AND SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT
                                                               LUCI Goal 4: Promote sustainable and smart growth land use
                                                               patterns and development regulations and guidelines.
 INTRODUCTION                                                  COMPLETE STREETS
                                                               LUCI Goal 5: Support Complete Street design and construction
                                                               projects that complement desired land uses, provide equitable
Vista is a well -established community that values its
                                                               transportation options for all residents, and ensure the safety and
strong sense of identity, diverse neighborhoods, semi -        convenience of all roadway users.
rural   character,  economic     vitality,  and cultural  and  REVITALIZATION, REDEVELOPMENT, AND ECONOMIC VITALITY
agricultural heritage.     Land    use   is one of the   most  LUCI Goal 6: Revitalize or redevelop aging or underutilized uses,
                                                               properties, districts, and corridors.
important factors affecting the future of Vista and the
                                                               LUCI Goal 7: Support the City' s economic development strategies by
achievement of Vision 2o3o.       Given the importance the
                                                               providing an appropriate mix of land uses and appealing urban
City places on preserving and enhancing Vista' s physical      setting to attract and retain quality businesses and institutions.
                                                               LUCI Goal 8: Promote a positive business climate through proactive
image and the characteristics that make it a special and
                                                               use of incentives to retain and expand the City' s economic base.
unique city, the State -required land use element has          HOUSING FOR VISTA' S DIVERSE NEEDS
been expanded to address community identity.                   LUCI Goal g: Promote a range of housing types and sizes for a variety
                                                               of incomes and ages.
Vista' s Land Use and Community Identity Element has           AIRPORT LAND USE COMPATIBILITY
the broadest scope of the General Plan elements, as it
                                                               LUCI Goal io: Reduce the exposure and risk to persons and property
plays a central role in correlating all land use issues into a from impacts of airport operations of nearby airports.
                                                               COMMUNITY INVOLVEMENTAND INTERAGENCY COOPERATION
set of coherent development policies that relate directly
                                                               LUCI Goal tt: Promote public interest and involvement in
to the other elements.      In practice, the Land Use and
                                                               development and implementation of the City' s land use planning
Community Identity Element is the most visible and             policies, plans, and programs.
usually the most referenced element in the General Plan.       LUCI Goal tz: Foster coordinated planning and cooperation with
                                                               SAN DAG and other local, county, regional, special purpose, state,
Although all elements carry equal weight, the Land Use         and federal agencies to maximize the effectiveness of interagency
and Community Identity Element is often perceived as           planning, policies, and funding opportunities.
                                                               ANNEXATIONS
being the most representative of the General Plan.
                                                               LUCI Goal 13: Ensure that annexation of property within Vista' s Sol
Other elements of the General Plan are coordinated with
                                                               occurs in a manner that permits the existing character of the areas to
the Land Use and Community Identity Element to                 remain when annexation occurs and is consistent with the planned
                                                               land uses for these areas.
provide    an   integrated,    internally    consistent,  and
                                                               IMPLEMENTATION
compatible statement of development policies for the
                                                               LUCI Goal 14: Update the City' s zoning code and other standards
City.                                                          and /or guidelines regulating land use to implement the goals and
                                                               policies of the Land Use and Community Identity Element.
 December 2011                                                                                                       Page 2- 1
                                                                                                               ERA1. p(,
                                                                                                                         9
   Land Use and Community Identity Element                                                                    2030
Vista has experienced considerable growth and change overt he past 20 years, including the addition of over
24, 000 new residents and construction of new industrial and commercial development, with a corresponding
increase in its employment base.      Although the City is approaching buildout, it is expected to add nearly
14, 775 residents by 2030. The majority of this anticipated growth will be accommodated by infill of vacant
sites and redevelopment of underutilized sites, especially in areas known as Opportunity Areas, which are
described later in this element. Because it largely built out, most land use changes are associated with
redevelopment efforts for portions of the City that are
not functioning to their fullest potential,       and /or  to
encourage properties to change to needed land uses,;
such as housing. .._ `                                                               A
The Land Use and Community Identity Element not only
identifies where this growth will occur, it also directs how
growth will occur by placing a priority on goals and .,                                              x,,, M
policies based on guiding principles that will foster a
                                                                                                                 w
vibrant, attractive, and economically viable community.
One     of  those    principles,  known    as  pfacemaking,
encourages the careful design of and attention to the
                                                                       The AVO Playhouse in Downtown Vista
components that make up the City' s physical form,
including neighborhoods, districts, activity centers and
gathering places, landmarks, corridors, and focal intersections. The Land Use and Community Identity
Element also encourages improvement to the City' s physical image and communicates its unique identity by
incorporating high quality architecture and design elements into private and public development to promote
a visually attractive, well planned, and safe environment. Another guiding principle of Vista' s General Plan is
to promote smart growth and sustainable development wherever possible.                 When supported by and
coordinated with smart growth and sustainability goals and policies of the other General Plan elements, the
Land Use and Community Identity Element will help Vista transition into a walkable and transit -friendly city
while conserving and protecting valuable resources and reducing greenhouse gas ( GHG) emissions.
PURPOSE
The primary purpose of the Land Use and Community Identity Element is to establish the policy foundation
that will direct future land use decision -making for Vista and its SOL It functions as a guide to policy makers,
decision makers, the general public, and planners in the City regarding the desired pattern of land use and
development through the 2030 planning period.
The Land Use and Community Identity Element fulfills the requirements of the State' s mandated land use
element, which identifies land uses that require future planning, including: housing, business, industry, open
 December 2011                                                                                              Page z -z
                                                                                                            vR A L P,
                                                                                                        0
                                                                                                                    G
                                                                                                           U----   TA,
  Land Use and Communityy dentity Element                                                                  2030
space, forest /timber, agriculture, natural resources, recreation, scenic beauty, education, public buildings
and land, solid and liquid waste disposal facilities, and other public and private uses of land.
GOALS AND POLICIES
The goals and policies of the Land Use and Community Identity Element support Vista Vision 203o, address
key issues and opportunities, and implement the guiding principles. The goals and policies are divided into
two sections: goals and policies that apply citywide ( see below), and those that also apply to Opportunity
Areas, which are located in the Opportunity Areas section of the Land Use Plan below.
COMMUNITY CHARACTERY IDENTITY AND DESIGN QUALITY
LUCI Goal 1: Increase the level of design quality and preserve and enhance Vista' s identity
and image.
         LUCI Policy i.i: Require the application of the City of Vista Design Guidelines, including site design,
         architecture,    lighting, and  signage,   when reviewing and approving new development and
         redevelopment.
         LUCI Policy 1. 2: Preserve the City' s numerous identifying and thematic features, or landmarks, such
         as historical, aesthetic, or unusual buildings, structures, landscaping, gathering spaces, public art,
         and other similar features that reflect and enhance Vista' s identity, history, and cultural diversity,
         and incorporate them into new public and private development and redevelopment.
         LUCI Policy 3.. 3: Ensure that public and private gathering places and activity centers are designed to
         provide a safe, comfortable environment for users, and incorporate features such as shade trees,
         benches, tables, adequate lighting, and visible links to public streets for enhanced security.
         LUCI Policy 1. 4: Prepare and implement a citywide streetscape program that reflects the identity
         and /or character of the City, neighborhoods, and /or districts.
         LUCI Policy 1. 5: Require public and /or private landscaping along all arterial roadways to: minimize
        the visual dominance of paved surfaces; create more appropriately defined and human -scaled public
         places; help distinguish spaces designated for pedestrian and non -motorized use from those
         designated for vehicular travel and parking; and provide environmental benefits, such as absorbing
         carbon dioxide, helping manage stormwater, and shading to reduce heat island effects. Preference
         shall be given to native or drought tolerant landscape species.
 December 2011                                                                                           Page 2- 3
                                                                                                                 @RAZ
  Land Use and Community Identity Element                                                                       2030
       LUCI Policy 3.. 6:      Encourage undergrounding of utilities, and discourage new electric and
       communications lines to be added to existing aboveground utility systems.
       LUCI Policy 1. 7:   Ensure that telecommunications facilities are designed to integrate into existing
       structures and /or landscapes with minimal visual intrusion.
       LUCI Policy 3.. 8:    Preserve Vista' s major creek corridors, such as Buena Vista Creek and Agua
       Hedionda Creek and their major tributaries, as defining elements in the character of the community
       and   pursue  opportunities to enhance     these waterways through           public   works  projects, private
       development, redevelopment, environmental mitigation, and other means.
       LUCI Policy i.g: Consider revising the fencing standards in the zoning ordinance to define the types
       of fencing permitted in residential, commercial, and industrial areas; identify design guidelines for
       fencing along public roadways; and minimize the establishment of large visual barriers created by
       solid fencing placed on top of retaining walls.
       LUCI Policy i.io: Design streets in a manner that is sensitive to the local context and recognizes
       that the needs vary in mixed -use, urban, suburban, and rural settings.
LUCI Goal z:     Preserve and enhance the characteristics and features of neighborhoods that
share common development patterns, topography, major streets, and zoning patterns.
       LUCI Policy z. i: Maintain the existing residential character of Vista, characterized by large -lot
       single -family residential development, by encouraging land uses and intensities of development
       that are consistent with this image.
       LUCI Policy 2. 2: Provide flexibility in
       development
       accommodate
       neighborhood
                             standards
                              and
                         variations
                                        enhance
                                     within
                                               to
                                             the
                                                                       t
                                                                                              it
                                                                                                 F\Kid
       City while ensuring that site and                                                   J
       building    design,   landscaping,   and
       other amenities reflect neighborhood
       characteristics.
       LUCI Policy 2. 3:    Specific plans shall
       not be used as a tool to modify or
       avoid    zoning   regulations   that  are
       consistent        with
                                                             f fr7fh'6
                                    surrounding              u    e- opM    T
                                                                              7
       development patterns, or standards               fn f     Miff    Ir
                                                                            Subdivision Design
 December 2011                                                                                                Page 2- 4
                                                                                                        vR A L P,
                                                                                                    0
                                                                                                               G
                                                                                                     ETA,
 Land Use and Communityy dentity Element                                                               2030
      that would otherwise apply.        Minimum acreage for a new Specific Plan should be zo acres or
      greater.
      LUCI Policy 2. 4:    Discourage subdivision design that disrupts the existing development pattern
      within established neighborhoods (see illustration to the right).
      LUCI Policy 2. 5:    Ensure that multiple -family residential development is sited and designed to
      enhance the residential character of Vista; includes amenities such as open space, landscaping, and
      architectural  design   that contributes to     this  character; and  minimizes  impacts on  adjacent
      residential development that is of a lower density.
      LUCI Policy 2. 6:     Continue    to  implement     the Planned   Residential Development   Ordinance
       Development Code Chapter 3.8. 24) to encourage " clustering" to retain valuable natural resources.
      LUCI Policy 2. 7: Provide flexible public improvement standards in certain neighborhoods to retain
      their semi -rural character, if public safety is not compromised, such as keeping street lighting to a
      minimum, allowing trails or paths rather than concrete sidewalks, maintaining creek channels in
      their natural state, and preserving mature trees and landscaping whenever possible.
      LUCI Policy 2. 8: Consider adoption of a slope protection ordinance as an amendment to the zoning
      ordinance to better define grading standards for hillside development and ensure the protection of
      natural landforms in the review of new development.
      LUCI Policy 2. 9: Prohibit mass grading to protect the visual continuity of the hillsides.
      LUCI Policy z. io:    Discourage development on skyline ridges visible from scenic roadways and
      gateway corridors. Skyline ridges are those which define the horizon.
      LUCI Policy z. ii: Preserve immediate ridges and hilltops in a natural state to the maximum extent
      possible. Intermediate ridges are those with visible land behind them that creates a backdrop to the
      ridge as viewed from the valley floor. Development should be sited such that buildings do not
      project above the natural landform. Development applications shall be designed so that site plans
      concentrate development in the subordinate or hidden locations, and grading plans minimize
      disruption of the natural landform and vegetation.
      LUCI Policy 2. 12: Restrict development of hillsides so that the natural appearance and landform of
      the site is preserved.   Development projects on terrain with a slope greater than 3. 5 percent shall
      conform with the following standards: development shall be designed to minimize grading
      requirements by conforming to the natural contours of the site; the site shall be landscaped with
      existing trees and natural vegetation, as much as possible, to stabilize slopes, reduce erosion, and
December 2011                                                                                        Page 2- 5
                                                                                                                  0,AZ
  Land Use and Community Identity Element                                                                        2030
        enhance the visual appearance of the development; and grading, terracing, padding, and cut -and-
        fill shall be minimized to protect the visual continuity of the hillsides.
         LUCI Policy 2. 13: Support and encourage the ability of Vistans to continue the tradition of small -
        scale horticulture and specialty crop enterprises.
LUCI Goal 3:          Preserve and protect existing residential neighborhoods from actions,
activities, or land uses that may have an adverse impact upon the enjoyment of the
residential living environment.
         LUCI Policy 3. 3.:      Require all new development to be designed to minimize impacts on adjoining
         residential neighborhoods.
         LUCI Policy 3. 2: Mitigate unacceptable levels of noise, odors, pollution, dust, light, and glare upon
         residential     areas      and    other   sensitive
         receptors, such as schools and day care
        centers.                                                                             t
         LUCI     Policy   3. 3:      Require   visual   and
        acoustic buffering between non -residential                        f
        and     residential       land   uses   and    other
        sensitive        receptors        by     employing
        techniques such as landscaping, setbacks,
                                                                 do
        soundwalls,        and       sensitive   siting   of                                     ri
         buildings (see illustration to the right).                   Buffering
         LUCI Policy 3. 4:          Require  adequate off
        street parking for all residential development.
SMART GROWTH AND SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT
LUCI Goal 4: Promote sustainable and smart growth land use patterns and development
regulations and guidelines.
         LUCI Policy 4. 3.:         Encourage    mixed -use  projects ( including residential /commercial /office and
         live /work developments) in designated areas, such as close to SPRINTER stations; along high
        frequency public transportation corridors; in the Downtown Specific Plan; in certain Opportunity
        Areas; and nearjobs, schools, parks, and recreational facilities.
 December 2011                                                                                                 Page 2- 6
                                                                                                           ERA1.
   Land Use and Community Identity Element                                                                 2030
        LUCI Policy 4. 2:   Ensure that the existing and future transportation system is interconnected with
        the smart growth land use patterns to serve multiple modes of travel, such as walking, biking,
        transit, and driving.
        LUCI Policy 4. 3: Ensure that new and redeveloped projects are designed to improve pedestrian and
        transit connections, and connections to trail and bicycle networks.
        LUCI Policy 4. 4: Encourage new and redeveloped projects to incorporate facilities that support
        bicycle use, such as bike racks, lockers, and /or showers, to the extent possible and appropriate.
        LUCI Policy 4. 5:    Designate areas for the development of mixed use projects where alternative
        modes of transportation, such as walking, biking, and transit, will be emphasized overvehicle use.
        LUCI Policy 4. 6:      Promote mixed -use development in targeted areas by developing zoning
        classifications, development standards, and design guidelines that are appropriate for the scale,
        intensity, and character desired forthe particular area.
        LUCI Policy 4. 7: Develop and offer incentives for mixed -use development, such as reduced parking
        requirements, expedited permit processing, and /or lot consolidation assistance.
        LUCI Policy 4. 8: Mixed use development projects shall be evaluated based on consistency with the
        City' s zoning regulations and adopted Design Guidelines, as well as SANDAG Smart Growth
        publications including: ( i) Designing for Smart Growth, Creating Great Places in the San Diego
        Region; ( 2) Planning and Designing for Pedestrians, Model Guidelines for the San Diego Region; ( 3)
        Trip Generation for Smart Growth; and (4) Parking Strategies for Smart Growth.
        LUCI Policy 4. 9:     Ensure that new development complies with the California Green Building
        Standards Code ( the CALGreen Code) to promote sustainable design and construction practices and
        positive environmental impacts in planning and design, energy efficiency, water efficiency and
        conservation, and material conservation and resource efficiency.
        LUCI Policy 4. 3.o:   Develop and provide incentives proportionate to the level of sustainability for
        projects that utilize sustainable and green building techniques /installations, such as reduction or
        waiver of fees, priority building permit processing, and /or density and /or intensity bonuses.
COMPLETE STREETS
LUCI Goal 5: Support Complete Street design and construction projects that complement desired
land uses, provide equitable transportation options for all residents, and ensure the safety and
convenience of all roadway users.
 December 2011                                                                                          Page 2- 7
                                                                                                           ERA1.
  Land Use and Community Identity Element                                                                 2030
       LUCI POIicy 5. 1: Provide a dense, interconnected network of local and collector streets that supports
       walking, bicycling and transit use, while avoiding excessive traffic in residential neighborhoods.
       LUCI Policy 5. 2:     Ensure that the entire right -of -way is designed to accommodate appropriate
       modes of transportation.
       LUCI Policy 5. 3: Study and remove barriers, where feasible, to allow people of all abilities to access
       the mobility infrastructure serving the community.
       LUCI Policy 5. 4:    Promote the provision of multi -modal access to activity centers such as public
       facilities, commercial centers and corridors, employment centers, transit stops, schools, parks,
       recreation areas, and tourist attractions.
       LUCI Policy 5. 5:     Monitor progress in implementing a multi -modal transportation network by
       establishing related performance measures.
       LUCI Policy 5. 6:    Develop policies and tools to improve Complete Streets practices. These could
       include     place -based    street    typologies,   a   Complete   Streets    checklist   for  all  new
       development /redevelopment projects, multi -modal analysis software, and revisions to the City' s
       street design guidelines to ensure the inclusion of infrastructure that benefits all roadway users.
REVITALIZATION              REDEVELOPMENTS AND ECONOMIC VITALITY
LUCI Goal 6:     Revitalize or redevelop aging or underutilized uses, properties, districts, and
corridors.
       LUCI Policy 6. 3.:  Facilitate revitalization or redevelopment of underutilized commercial properties,
       districts, and corridors through promotion of compact and sustainable development patterns that
       allow flexibility to meet local needs and respond to market demands.
       LUCI Policy 6. 2: Consider the creation of a central development zone to define the City' s core and
       supporting residential neighborhoods so that resources may be prioritized for these areas.
       LUCI Policy 6. 3:    Ensure implementation of focused revitalization and changes in areas known as
       Opportunity Areas.
       LUCI Policy 6. 4: Employ a proactive code compliance effort to improve the appearance and safety
       of non -complying or neglected properties.
       LUCI Policy 6. 5: Promote public and private anti -graffiti programs.
 December 2011                                                                                          Page 2- 8
                                                                                                                 ERA1.
  Land Use and Community Identity Element                                                                       2030
       LUCI Policy 6. 6:      Require   graffiti- resistant   materials   and construction    techniques,   including
       landscaping, on all perimeter walls for commercial,              industrial, institutional,   and recreational
       development and redevelopment.
       LUCI Policy 6. 7: Encourage and provide incentives for lot consolidation.
       LUCI Policy 6. 8: Revise the City' s Nonconforming Ordinance to promote bringing nonconforming
       uses and properties into compliance with current zoning regulations.
LUCI Goal 7:       Support the City' s economic development strategies by providing an
appropriate mix of land uses and appealing urban setting to attract and retain quality
businesses and institutions.
       LUCI Policy 7. 1: Maintain sufficient flexibility in the types
       of   uses   allowed    in    commercially      and    industrially
       designated areas to address changes in market conditions
       and to encourage competition, provided these uses are
       environmentally safe and will not have adverse impacts on
       surrounding properties, businesses, and the population.
       LUCI Policy 7. 2: Promote regionally oriented commercial
       development along the SR -78 corridor to serve the
       traveling public and provide freeway- oriented uses where
       direct access is available.
       LUCI Policy 7. 3:  Revise the Vista Business Park Specific
       Plan as necessary to respond to market forces and
       improve opportunities within the business park consistent
       with the   recommendations       of the Vista     Business   Park
       Base    Economic    and     Cluster  Analysis (    prepared    by                   Vista Village
       Economics Research Associates, January 2009).
       LUCI Policy 7. 4:  Promote Vista as a desirable place to do business by ensuring it has a positive
       image and identity, quality development, and attractive streetscapes and gateways.
       LUCI Policy 7. 5: Evaluate zoning standards and modify them, as appropriate, to remain responsive
       to changes in market conditions and employment trends.
       LUCI Policy 7. 6: Continue to support the arts and cultural resources ( public, private, and non -profit)
       to stimulate redevelopment and economic growth in the City.
December 2011                                                                                                 Page 2- 9
                                                                                                                t R A t. p(
                                                                                                             11
   Land Use and Community Identity Element
                                                                                                                2030
 REVITALIZATION, REDEVELOPMENT, AND ECONOMIC VITALITY
LUCI Goal 7:            Support the City's economic development strategies by providing an
appropriate        mix of land uses and an                appealing urban     setting    to   attract and retain
quality businesses and institutions, including developments, businesses and uses that are distinguished,
in comparison to others, by a capacity to provide the Citv with needed revenues throuah various means, includina
sales taxes, property taxes, or transient occupancy taxes.
          LUCI Policy 7.:    Maintain sufficient flexibility in the types
         of    uses   allowed     in    commercially      and    industrially
         designated areas to address changes in market conditions
         and to    encourage    competition, provided       these uses are
         environmentally safe and will not have adverse impacts on
         surrounding properties, businesses, and the population.
          LUCI Policy 7. 2:  Promote regionally oriented commercial
         development along         the    SR -78   corridor  to   serve  the
         traveling public and provide freeway -oriented uses where
         direct access is available.
          LUCI Policy 7. 3:   Revise the    Vista Business Park Specific
         Plan as necessary to          respond     to  market   forces and
         improve    opportunities within    the business park consistent
         with   the  recommendations        of   the  Vista  Business Park
         Base     Economic    and     Cluster    Analysis (  prepared    by
                                                                                          Vista Wage
          Economics Research Associates, January 2009).
          LUCI Policy 7. 4:  Promote Vista as a desirable place to do business by ensuring it has a positive
         image and identity, quality development, and attractive streetscapes and gateways.
          LUCI Policy 7. S: Evaluate zoning standards and modify them, as appropriate, to remain responsive
         to changes in market conditions and employment trends.
         LUCI Policy 7. 6: Continue to support the arts and cultural resources ( public, private, and non -profit)
         to stimulate redevelopment and economic growth in the City.
         LUCI Policv 7. 7:     Promote a range of uses that will offer residents and businesses a diverse
         range of retail and service options while avoiding an overrepresentation of a single business
         category unless that category provides special community benefits, such as promoting quality
         iobs, revitalizing neighborhoods, providina entertainment, providing dinina or other consumables.
         or providing other value to the community.
         LUCI Policy 7. 8: Promote developments, businesses, and uses that, on a comparative basis, provide the City
         with enhanced revenues in the form of taxes (including through " spin -off" effects), thereby enabling the City to
         provide the community, its residents, and its businesses with valued services.
                                                                                                           OLAL P,
  Land Use and Community Identity Element
                                                                                                        TAVI
                                                                                                          2030
LUCI Goal 8:      Promote a positive business climate through proactive use of incentives to
retain and expand the City's economic base.
        LUCI Policy 8. 1: Continue to use Redevelopment as a tool to revitalize underutilized properties and
       stimulate   reinvestment.
        LUCI Policy 8. 2:    Develop incentives to stimulate reinvestment     in areas that are not within a
        Redevelopment area.
        LUCI Policy 8. 3:   Retain and encourage local businesses, as well as those that reflect and serve the
       City' s diverse citizenry, through business assistance and retention programs, such as Vista CAREs,
       project fast tracking, Shop VISTA, fee deferral and /or elimination, and other economic stimulus
       programs.
       LUCI Policy 8. 4:     Continue to work with the Chamber of Commerce, the Vista Village Business
       Association, and other business support groups; to ensure that the business community' s concerns
       are addressed in the review of public and private projects.
       LUCI Policy 8 -5s: Participate in preparation of the region' s Sustainable Communities Strategy
         SCS) per Senate Bill ( SB) 375 to provide opportunities for " Transit Priority       Projects" in Vista
       that can benefit from California Environmental Quality Act ( CEOA) streamlining as a development
       incentive.
       LUCI Policy 8 -6:    Favor developments, businesses and uses which create a vibrant retail and business
       environment which will encourage increased property values and uses which, on a comparative basis.
       provide the City with superior revenues, while avoiding or limiting the presence of developments
       business and uses which will have the opposite effect.
 December 2011                                                                                         Page 2 -10
                                                                                                          0,A1.
  Land Use and Community Identity Element                                                               2030
LUCI Goal 8:       Promote a positive business climate through proactive use of incentives to
retain and expand the City' s economic base.
        LUCI Policy 8. 3.: Continue to use Redevelopment as a tool to revitalize underutilized properties and
        stimulate reinvestment.
        LUCI Policy 8. 2:     Develop incentives to stimulate reinvestment in areas that are not within a
        Redevelopment area.
        LUCI Policy 8. 3: Retain and encourage local businesses, as well as those that reflect and serve the
        City' s diverse citizenry, through business assistance and retention programs, such as Vista CARES,
        project fast tracking, ShopVISTA, fee deferral and /or elimination, and other economic stimulus
        programs.
        LUCI Policy 8. 4:    Continue to work with the Chamber of Commerce, the Vista Village Business
       Association, and other business support groups, to ensure that the business community' s concerns
        are addressed in the review of public and private projects.
        LUCI Policy 8. 5: Participate in preparation of the region' s Sustainable Communities Strategy ( SCS)
        per Senate Bill ( SB) 375 to provide opportunities for " Transit Priority Projects" in Vista that can
        benefit from California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) streamlining as a development incentive.
HOUSING FOR VISTA' S DIVERSE NEEDS
LUCI Goal g: Promote a range of housing types and sizes for a variety of incomes and ages.
        LUCI Policy 9. 3.:    Provide land use designations that support semi -rural, suburban, and urban
        housing options.
        LUCI Policy 9. 2: Provide adequate sites for affordable housing to support the policies and programs
        of the City' s Housing Element.
        LUCI Policy 9. 3: Develop zoning classifications for mixed -use development that incorporates higher
        density land uses along multi -modal corridors, and that is compatible with the existing community
        character.
        LUCI Policy 9. 4: Consider providing incentives for senior housing, mixed -use projects, and mixed -
        income development.
 December 2011                                                                                        Page 2- 10
                                                                                                           vR A L P,
                                                                                                        0
                                                                                                                    G
                                                                                                          U----    TA,
  Land Use and Communityy Identityy Element                                                               2030
AIRPORT LAND USE COMPATIBILITY
LUCI Goal so:        Reduce the exposure and risk to persons and property from impacts of
airport operations of nearby airports.
        LUCI Policy io. i: Evaluate and respond to any proposals involving changes to the activity of the
        McClellan -Palomar and Oceanside Municipal Airports that may affect the quality of life of Vista' s
        residents and /or development objectives, such as new or modified flight patterns, more intense
        operations over the City, or relocation or extension of runways that may create the potential for
        impacts on sensitive land uses within Vista.
        LUCI Policy 3.0. 2:  Evaluate new development in Vista that is within Part 77 Airspace Protection
       Areas ( shown in Exhibit III - 3 of the McClellan -Palomar Airport Land Use Compatibility Plan
         ALUCP]) for compatibility with the airspace protection compatibility policies in Section 3. 5 of the
        McClellan -Palomar ALUCP.
        LUCI Policy 3.o. 3:  Evaluate new residential development in Vista that is within the Overflight
        Notification Area ( shown in Exhibit 4 of the McClellan -Palomar ALUCP) for compatibility with
        overflight compatibility policies in Section 3. 6 of the McClellan -Palomar ALUCP.
        LUCI Policy 3.0. 4: Require the dedication of an avigation easement in accordance with Policy 2. 3-1. 5
        and /or the recording of an overflight notification document in accordance with Section 3. 6. 3( a) of
       the McClellan -Palomar ALUCP for City approval of selected projects within the avigation easement
        and overflight notification areas indicated on Exhibit III - 6 of the McClellan -Palomar ALUCP.
        LUCI Policy 3.0. 5:   Evaluate applications for development in Vista that are within Terminal
        Instrument Procedures (TERPS) Airspace Protection Areas ( shown in Exhibit III -4 of the Oceanside
        Municipal ALUCP) for compatibility with the airspace protection compatibility policies in Section
        3. 5 of the Oceanside Municipal ALUCP.
        LUCI Policy 3.o. 6: Refer any land use actions that require mandatory review, including the adoption,
        approval, or amendment of the City' s General Plan that affects lands within the airport influence
        area of the McClellan -Palomar Airport or Oceanside Municipal Airport, to the Airport Land Use
        Commission for San Diego County for determination of consistency with the adopted ALUCP( s).
COMMUNITY INVOLVEMENT AND INTER -AGENCY COOPERATION
LUCI   Goal      11:     Promote      public   interest       and    involvement       in   development    and
implementation of the City' s land use planning policies, plans, and programs.
 December 2011                                                                                          Page 2- 11
                                                                                                          vR A L P,
                                                                                                      0
                                                                                                                  G
                                                                                                         U----   TA,
  Land Use and Communityy dentity Element                                                                2030
        LUCI Policy ii.i: Encourage community participation in planning and development of land use
        policies, plans, and programs through outreach efforts, workshops, community meetings, public
        hearings, newsletters, and electronic media.
        LUCI    Policy 11. 2:    Foster coordinated    planning   and   cooperation   with non -governmental
        organizations, particularly those involved in resource protection, in implementation of the City' s
        land use planning policies.
        LUCI Policy 11. 3: Provide and support opportunities for diverse groups to participate in the planning
        process.
LUCI Goal sz:     Foster coordinated planning and cooperation with SANDAG and other local,
county,     regional,     special    purpose,    state,    and   federal    agencies    to  maximize      the
effectiveness of interagency planning, policies, and funding opportunities.
        LUCI Policy 12. 1:      Work     with SANDAG    to  achieve   regional  smart  growth  goals  through
        implementation of the Regional Comprehensive Plan and Smart Growth Concept Map, as identified
        in the Opportunity Areas and supporting goals and policies throughout the General Plan.
        LUCI Policy 12. 2:    Encourage SANDAG to update the Smart Growth Map to incorporate changes
        consistent with the Vista General Plan.
        LUCI Policy 12. 3: Participate in established networks of planning related organizations, such as the
        League of Cities, the Community Redevelopment Association, the American Planning Association,
        and others to continuously improve the City' s efficiency in providing for the public health, safety,
        and welfare of its residents.
        LUCI Policy 12. 4: Coordinate and cooperate with the Vista Unified School District regarding future
        plans for school district facilities.
ANNEXATIONS
LUCI Goal 13: Ensure that annexation of property within Vista' s SOI occurs in a manner
that permits the existing character of the areas to remain when annexation occurs and is
consistent with the planned land uses for these areas.
        LUCI Policy 13. 1:    Encourage annexations of islands or pockets of unincorporated land that are
        designated as low density, rural residential, open space, commercial, or industrial while ensuring
        that these potential annexation areas are fully accessible via City streets.
 December 2011                                                                                        Page 2 -12
                                                                                                           vR A L P,
                                                                                                        0
                                                                                                                   G
                                                                                                         ETA,
   Land Use and Communityy dentity Element                                                                2030
        LUCI Policy 3.3. 2: Discourage annexation of residential land with a high density designation unless
        consistent with the Land Use Map.
        LUCI Policy 3.3. 3:   Prezone property within the SOI to zones that are consistent with the City' s
        designated land uses.
        LUCI Policy 3.3. 4: Evaluate fiscal impacts of requests for annexations to ensure that they occur in a
        mannerthat allows Vista to provide services without reduction in existing service levels.
        LUCI Policy 3.3. 5: All infrastructure, including sewer mains, local and collector street improvements,
        and utility connections needed to serve development tied to an annexation shall be the
        responsibility of the applicant.      Improvements to offsite roads serving an annexation shall be
        required as necessary to meet City standards or provide the needed capacity for all travel modes to
        adequately serve the annexed area.
IMPLEMENTATION
LUCI Goal 14:        Update the City' s zoning code and other standards and /or guidelines
regulating land use to implement the goals and policies of the Land Use and Community
Identity Element.
        LUCI Policy 3.4. 3.: Revise zoning designations, development standards, and design guidelines to be
        consistent with the Land Use and Community Identity Element.
        LUCI Policy 3.4. 2: Revise the Zoning Code to create one or more zones to implement the Mixed Use
        land use designation, including development standards that provide incentives for mixed use, such
        as reduced parking requirements and minimum residential unit sizes.
        LUCI Policy 3.4. 3:  Evaluate the existing Specific Plans and determine which would be appropriate
        and beneficial to sunset.
        LUCI Policy 3.4. 4:     Continue to promote sustainable subdivision design, such as clustering to
        manage, preserve, and protect natural resources.
THE LAND USE AND COMMUNITY IDENTITY PLAN
A wide range of natural and human -made factors were considered in updating Vista' s Land Use and
Community Identity Plan. The community' s long -range vision, the guiding principles, Vista' s setting within
the larger region, areas of special environmental and /or topographic significance, potential safety issues,
 December 2011                                                                                          Page 2 -13
                                                                                                            vR A L P,
                                                                                                        0
                                                                                                                    G
                                                                                                           U----   TA,
   Land Use and Communityy Identityy Element                                                               2030
limitations of the circulation system and infrastructure, and the nature and character of existing
development all influenced land use policy. By identifying the general distribution location, and extent of all
uses of land, both private and public, the Land Use and Community Identity Element establishes clear and
logical patterns of land use as well as direction for future development. It refocuses development policies to
guide future development in a manner that will preserve and enhance Vista' s most distinguishing attributes
and valuable resources, and maintain and enhance its economic viability.
The Land Use and Community Identity Plan includes:
          The Land Use Map
          Land use designations
          The relationship between land use and zoning
          Population density and intensity
          Redevelopment
          Regional growth
          Housing
          Airport Land Use Compatibility
          Opportunity Areas
LAND USE MAP
The Land Use Map, as shown on Figure LUCI -1, will guide the development, maintenance, and improvement
of land and properties within the City and SOI until the horizon year 2030. In orderto accurately describe the
various neighborhoods, districts, and places within Vista and the SOI, each area is categorized by the
primary use( s) allowed by the City' s Land Use Plan.
The SOI, representing the possible future boundaries and service area of the City, comprises a land area of
approximately seven square miles of unincorporated area.         See Figure LUCI -1 for Vista' s SOI. Vista may
apply land use designations to property within its SOI as an indication of the City' s desired land uses should
it annex that property in the future; however, unless or until annexation occurs, responsibility for regulating
land use within the SOI belongs to the County of San Diego (County). Vista has designated the majority of
land in its SOI to Rural Residential with one -acre minimums, consistent with the County, to protect the rural
nature of the outlying areas. Higher density residential land uses, a mobile home park, and strip commercial
development, which occur in the SOI in the vicinity of South Santa Fe Avenue north of SR -78, have been
designated consistent with their existing uses and to support future development in proximity to the Buena
Creek SPRINTER station, also within the SOI. The City' s policy regarding annexations evaluates the fiscal
impacts of the annexation to assure that annexations occur in a manner that allows Vista to provide service
 December 2011                                                                                          Page 2 -14
                                                           C
                                                      3'
                                        BPO
                                                                                                      1..
                                              Melrose
                                               Station
           College
           Blvd                                                               X         Vale Ter?
           Statio,r
                                                                                                                  A•
        BPO
          c,+
 Legend
       Vista City Boundary
       Vista Sphere of Influence
ti.
     F Sprinter
                                                                                                                I
   El Sprinter Stations                      BPO
        Biological Preserve Overlay ( BPO)
                                                           Sh
Land Use Categories                                          daOw r
        Open Space Residential ( OSR) - 0. 4 du /ac `
        Rural Residential ( RR) - 1 du /ac                                   La Mirada Dr
        Low Density Residential ( LD) - 2 du /ac
        Medium Low Density Residential ( M LID) - 5 du /ac
        Medium Density Residential ( MD) - 10 du /ac                T     o`
                                                                        o
        Medium High Density Residential ( MHD) - 15 du /ac
                                                                     t`
                                                                      o
        High Density Residential ( HD) - 21 du /ac
        Mixed Use ( MU) - 40 du /ac
                                                                                                  BPO
        Commercial Office ( CO)
        Neighborhood Commerical ( CN)                         BPO
        General Commercial ( GC)
        Commercial Service ( CS)
        Industrial General ( IG)                                                                             N
                                                                                                            A
        Research Light Industrial ( RLI)
        Civic Activity ( CA)
                                                                                                          0            1
        Parks and Recreation ( PR)
        Open Space ( OS)                                                                                    Miles
                                                                                                            Figure LUCI -1
                                                                                                            Land Use Map

This page left intentionally blank
                                                                                                                                 vR A L P,
                                                                                                                         0
                                                                                                                                        G
                                                                                                                             U----    TA,
    Land Use and Communityy dentity Element                                                                                  2030
without reduction in existing service levels ( City of Vista 2010). Although San Diego County retains land use
jurisdiction over the property within Vista' s SOI, the City may prezone land within its SOI that it expects to
 annex in the future, as long as the prezoning is consistent with a city' s general plan. Benefits of prezoning
 include having zoning in effect immediately upon annexation of the property, providing notice to residents
 of the subject property of the land use regulations that would affect them should annexation occur, and
 indicating to LAFCO a city' s intentions regarding property.
 LAND USE DESIGNATIONS
The land use designations depicted on the Land Use Map identify the type and nature of development
 allowed for a particular location. The land use designations, which are described in greater detail below, use
 urban planning terminology to define the extent to which the land use types can be developed; they are
 described by the terms density and intensity.
 Density is used for residential uses and refers
to the development capacity of residential
 land; it is described in terms of dwelling units
 per acre of land ( du /ac).     For example,   50                                       Lot Area
                                                                                           100'
                                                                                         X100,
 dwelling units occupying 10 acres of land is 5                                           10, 000 sq. fl.
 du /ac. The density standard that is applied to                        elegy. ,       P Gross Building Area
                                                                                           50'
the various land use designations controls the                                           X50,
                                                                                         2500 sq. f[.
 maximum number of dwelling units that can                H loo Ice                        2500
                                                                                                      0- 25 Floor Area Ratio { FAR
 be constructed on a parcel.                                                             10,000 —
                                                                                         Lot Area
 Intensity refers to the extent of development                                             100'
                                                                                         x100'
 on a lot, and is often expressed as floor area                                           10. 000 sq. ft.
 ratio ( FAR). FAR is determined by dividing the              i
                                                                A-
                                                                                     Z
                                                                                   Io°
                                                                                         Gross Building Area
                                                                                           5o'
                                                                                         x50'
 gross floor area of all buildings on a lot by the              Ir  few          0
                                                                                         2500 sq. ft. x Z Stories = 5000 sq. ft.
 area    of the   lot.  While density standard                                                        0. 5 Floor Area Ratio ( FAR)
                                                                                           0 pp0 —
 controls the maximum        number of allowable
 dwelling units on a lot, FAR controls the                             Illustration of Floor Area Ratios
 maximum       allowable    intensity, or   square
footage, on a lot. For example, on a 1o, 000 square foot lot, a FAR of 0. 25: 1 will allow 2, 500 square feet of
 building floor area. On the same lot, a FAR of 0. 5: 1 will allow up to 5, 000 square feet of floor area. The FAR
 standard controls the maximum floor area allowed, regardless of the number of stories in the building. For
 example, with a FAR standard of 0. 5: 1, the building could be 5, 000 on one floor, 2, 500 square feet per floor
 on two floors, or 1, 250 square feet per floor on four floors. Other development standards in the zoning code,
 such as maximum lot coverage, minimum setbacks, and maximum building height, will dictate how the
 allowable FAR is translated into the building' s form.
  December 2011                                                                                                          Page 2 -15

                                                                                                               vR A L P,
                                                                                                           0
                                                                                                                       G
                                                                                                              U----   TA,
   Land Use and Communityy dentity Element                                                                    2030
The major categories of land use types in Vista include residential; commercial; mixed use; industrial; and
civic activity, open space, and parks and recreation.       Within each of these categories are specific land use
designations, which are described below.
Residential
     Rural Residential ( RR).    The Rural Residential land use category includes extremely low density, large -
     lot, single -family residential uses and non -habitable accessory structures for agricultural and limited
     animal husbandry land uses. It encourages the continuance of agricultural and agri- business land uses
     within the community that are compatible with and secondary to the permitted residential use( s).         This
     is also important to promote a healthy community by allowing and encouraging urban agriculture for
     local food    production.    The   RR designation is also    intended to enhance and      preserve the    rural
     atmosphere in certain areas of Vista by lessening negative impacts on environmental, geologic, and
     hydrologic land features, and by protecting the integrity of Vista' s hillside areas with a minimum
     disturbance of the property' s natural topography and native landscape features.
     Dwelling unit ( du) density in the RR designation is based upon the average topographical slope
     expressed in percentage. A slope analysis must be prepared for each development prior to the submittal
     of development plans.       The maximum density will be determined by computing the number of lots
     allowed in each slope category based on the following criteria:
          a.   Land area having a slope of up to 3.5 percent shall be based upon a maximum density of one
               dwelling unit for each i.o gross acre.
          b.   Land area having a slope of 3.6 percent up to 25 percent shall be based upon a maximum density
               of one dwelling unit for each 1. 5 gross acres.
          c.   Land area having a slope of 26 percent up to 50 percent shall be based upon a maximum density
               of one dwelling unit for each 2. 0 gross acres.
          d.   Land area having a slope in excess of 50 percent shall be based upon a maximum density of one
               dwelling unit for each 4. 0 gross acres.
          e.   The maximum dwelling unit density permitted on a single development site shall be computed
               by summing ( adding) the maximum number of dwelling units permitted in each slope
               classification on a project site. Where a fractional number of dwelling units is the result of any
               calculation, the number shall be rounded down to the nearest whole number.
     The zoning districts that are considered consistent with the RR designation are:                Specific  Plan
     Implementation (      SPI),  Open    Space (  0),  Open   Space   Residential ( OSR),  Planned    Residential
     Development ( PRD), and Agricultural ( A -i). The     maximum density cannot exceed that specified in the
     criteria described above.
 December 2011                                                                                             Page 2- 16
                                                                                                               @RAZ
 Land Use and Community Identity Element                                                                      2030
   Open Space Residential ( OSR).         The Open Space Residential land use designation applies primarily to
   the eastern portions of the community where significant slopes occur.                The  intent of the     OSR
   designation is to preserve and maintain the integrity of the hillside topography of Vista, preserve the
   rural character of the area, and allow animal husbandry and other agricultural uses under the guidance
   of conditions established in the zoning ordinance. Urban agriculture is important to promote a healthy
   community by allowing and encouraging local food production.
   Dwelling unit density in the OSR designation is based upon the average topographical slope expressed
   in percentage.      A slope analysis must be prepared for each development prior to the submittal of
   development plans. The maximum density will be determined by computing the number of lots allowed
   in each slope category based on the following criteria:
        a.   Land areas with average slopes of up to 25 percent shall be based upon a maximum density of
             one dwelling unit for each 2. 5 acres.
        b.   Land areas with average slopes in excess of 25 percent and greater shall be based upon a
             maximum density of one dwelling unit for each 5 gross acres.
   The zoning districts that are considered consistent with the OSR designation are: Specific Plan
   Implementation ( SPI),      Open    Space ( 0), Open    Space   Residential ( OSR), and  Planned   Residential
   Development ( PRD).      The maximum density cannot exceed that which is described above.
   Low Density ( LD). Low Density residential is the largest residential land use designation, and includes
   low- density, large -lot, single -family residential development to enhance the semi -rural residential
   character of the community.         Urban agricultural uses are allowed to promote local food production,
   subject to conditions in the zoning code.             Non -habitable structures ancillary to the support of
   agricultural or animal husbandry uses are allowed where permitted under zoning regulations subject to
   minimum acreage limitations.
   The zoning districts that are considered consistent with the LID designation are: Specific Plan
   Implementation ( SPI),      Open Space ( 0), Planned Residential Development ( PRD), Agricultural ( A -i),
   Estate ( E - i),and Mobile Home Park ( MHP). The mobile home park must have existed prior to 3. 980. The
   allowed density for the mobile home park is the density that existed in 3.980.             The LID residential
   designation permits densities up to z. o dwelling units per gross acre.
   Medium Low Density ( MILD).           The Medium Low Density residential land use designation includes
   medium —     low density, single -family residential development, and accounts for much of the older single -
   family development within the City.
   The zoning districts that are considered consistent with the MILD designation are: Specific Plan
   Implementation ( SPI),      Open Space ( 0), Planned      Residential Development ( PRD),    Estate ( E - i), R - i
   Residential, and Mobile Home Park ( MHP). The mobile home park must have existed prior to 3.980. The
December 2011                                                                                             Page 2- 17

                                                                                                            ERA1.
 Land Use and Community Identity Element                                                                  2030
                              Wooff—
   allowed density for the mobile home park is the density that existed in 3.980.          The MILD designation
   permits densities up to 5. o dwelling units per gross acre. The minimum lot size for new parcels is no less
   than io, 000 square feet.
   Medium Density ( MD). The Medium Density residential land use designation includes medium -density,
   single -family detached structures to provide for smaller lots closer to the urban core. Duplexes and
   townhomes are permitted in certain circumstances.             Multi- family residential development may be
   appropriate in certain locations, such as along transit corridors, and /or to protect natural topographic
   and environmental features. Multi- family residential development must be designed to be compatible
   with adjacent development, such as through clustering and providing large landscaped buffers between
   adjacent uses, and must provide sufficient open space to balance the developed areas of the site.
   The zoning districts that are considered consistent with the MD designation are: Specific Plan
   Implementation ( SPI), Open Space ( 0), Planned Residential Development ( PRD), R - i Residential, R - i -   B
   Residential, Multi- Residential ( R - M), and Mobile Home Park ( MHP). The mobile home park must have
   existed prior to 3.980. The allowed density for the mobile home park is the density that existed in 3.980.
   The MD designation permits densities up to io. o dwelling units per gross acre.
   Medium High Density ( MHD).            The Medium High Density residential land use designation allows
   medium —    high density, multi -family residential development, including duplexes, "         patio homes,"
   townhomes, and apartment -style development.           Multi-
   family residential development must be compatible with
   adjacent land uses and must be designed to be sensitive
   to surrounding neighborhoods by providing adequate                                                     SRI
   buffers and open space.
   The zoning districts that are considered consistent with
   the MHD designation are: Specific Plan Implementation _
    SPI),     Open     Space (   0),      Planned    Residential
   Development ( PRD), R -i -  B Residential, Multi- Residential
    R - M), and Mobile Home Park ( MHP). The mobile home
   park must have existed prior to 3.980. The allowed density for the mobile home park is the density that
   existed in 3. 980. The MHD designation permits densities between io. o and 3.5. o dwelling units per gross
   acre.
   High Density ( HD). The High Density residential land use designation allows high density, attached
   multi -family residential development in the form of patio homes, townhouses, and apartment -style
   development, to provide a range of housing types. Multi- family residential development must be
   compatible with adjacent land uses and must be designed to be sensitive to surrounding neighborhoods
   by providing adequate buffers and open space.
December 2011                                                                                           Page 2- 18

                                                                                                          ERA1.
 Land Use and Community Identity Element                                                                 2030
   The zoning districts that are considered consistent with the HD designation are: Specific Plan
   Implementation ( SPI), Open Space ( 0), Planned Residential Development ( PRD), Multi- Residential ( R-
   M), and Mobile Home Parl< (MHP). The mobile home park must have existed prior to 3. 980. The allowed
   density for the mobile home park is the density that existed in 3. 980.      The HD designation permits
   densities between 3.5 and zi dwelling units per gross acre.
Commercial
   Commercial Office ( CO).       The Commercial Office land use designation allows for single- and multi -
   tenant businesses and professional office services with limited ancillary uses to support such office uses.
   Uses allowed and encouraged in the CO designation include, but are not limited to, professional office
   uses for physicians, attorneys, financial services, consultants, and administrative and business services.
   Retail trade is limited to those ancillary uses that support the daytime activities of office uses, such as
   coffee shops, cafeterias, and delis; outlets for pickup and delivery of dry cleaning ( where service is
   performed off site); and daycare.
   The zoning districts that are considered consistent with the CO designation are: Specific Plan
   Implementation ( SPI), Open Space ( 0), and Office Professional ( OP).
   Commercial Neighborhood ( CN).          The Commercial
   Neighborhood land use promotes commercial uses on
   a more local scale, serving residents and businesses at
   the neighborhood level.      Allowable businesses in this
   designation       include       convenience     markets,
   neighborhood shopping centers, eating and drinking
   establishments,    specialty food stores, banks, gas
   stations, barber or beauty shops, pharmacies, self -
   service Laundromats, dry cleaning drop -off, and
   automotive    services   limited  to  minor  repairs and
   services typically found along major travel routes and
   at key intersections.
   The zoning districts that are considered consistent with the CN designation are: Specific Plan
   Implementation ( SPI), Open Space ( 0), Office Professional ( OP), C - i Commercial, and Mobile Home
   Park ( MHP). The mobile home park must have existed priorto 3.980. The allowed densityforthe mobile
   home park is the density that existed in 3.980.
   General Commercial ( GC).       The General Commercial land use designation provides for a broader range
   of retail sales and services than Commercial Neighborhood, including community shopping centers;
   department stores; restaurants; financial institutions; automotive services; and sales and repair of
December 2011                                                                                         Page 2- 19
                                                                                                            vR A L P,
                                                                                                        0
                                                                                                                   G
                                                                                                            U---- TA,
  Land Use and Communityy dentity Element                                                                   2030
    consumer goods such as home appliances, furniture, etc. Group assembly and hotels /motels intended
    for transient visitors only are encouraged in this category.
    The zoning districts that are considered consistent with the GC designation are: Specific Plan
    Implementation ( SPI), Open Space ( 0), Office Professional ( OP), C - i Commercial, and C - z Commercial.
    Commercial Services ( CS).       The Commercial Services land use includes higher intensity commercial
    uses   than  General    Commercial,   including commercial uses involving preparation and assembly,
    wholesale uses that are ancillary to industrial uses, and major repair of automobiles and heavy
    equipment. These uses are typically not compatible with the lower intensity retail found in the other
    categories.
    The zoning districts that are considered consistent with the CS designation are:               Specific Plan
    Implementation ( SPI), Open Space ( 0), Office Professional ( OP), C - z Commercial, and C - 3 Commercial.
Mixed -Use
    Mixed Use ( MU).      Mixed Use development means combining a variety of compatible land uses in a
    single development, and can be creatively used to create vibrant centers for living, working, and
    shopping. The primary purpose of the Mixed Use land use designation is to implement the principals of
    smart growth by applying the designation to certain areas along the City' s main transportation corridors
    that could successfully support a combination of uses ( multi -family residential, retail, and office uses)
    within a single development plan.        The Mixed Use land use designation is intended to facilitate
    redevelopment of underutilized commercial areas, such as Downtown Vista, North Santa Fe Avenue,
    and South Santa Fe Avenue, and other areas adjacent to public transportation facilities.         Within the
    Mixed Use designation, development can occur vertically (a combination of two or more individual uses
    within a single building) or horizontally ( a combination of two or more individual uses in detached
    buildings). The Mixed Use land use designation also allows for Live -Work uses, which allow residential
    and certain commercial uses within the same unit.
    The Mixed Use land use designation, which is intended to be flexible, allows residential densities up to
    40  units per gross acre.    The Downtown Vista Specific Plan implements the MU designation in the
    downtown area. In other areas of Vista, new zoning district(s) that will implement the MU designation
    will be adopted in conjunction with the General Plan.
Industrial
    Industrial   General ( IG).    The Industrial General land use allows for general manufacturing with
    moderate nuisance characteristics ( i. e.,  noise, smoke, dust, odor, or glare) and heavy manufacturing
    which may create greater nuisance characteristics.      The IG designation allows uses such as alcoholic
             AM.
 December 2011                                                                                         Page z -zo
                                                                                                             vR A L P,
                                                                                                       0
                                                                                                                    G
                                                                                                           U----  TA,
 Land Use and Communityy Identityy Element                                                                 2030
   beverage manufacturing and /or bottling, bakeries, chemical or glass manufacturing, manufacturing of
   large metal goods, and other similar goods which produce moderate to heavy nuisance characteristics.
   Development in land designated IG must be designed to ensure it is compatible with uses in surrounding
   areas, including adequate screening and other mitigation measures to reduce nuisances such as glare,
   noise, dust, and vibrations.
   The zoning districts that are considered consistent with the IG designation are:               Specific   Plan
   Implementation ( SPI), Open Space ( 0), Industrial Park ( IP), and Manufacturing ( M -1).
   Research Light Industrial ( RLI).   The Research Light Industrial land use was originally established in
   conjunction with the Vista Business Park Specific Plan ( Specific Plan No. 20), which addresses the
   development standards regarding height, use, architectural guidelines, signage, and other development
   requirements. Primary allowable uses include corporate offices, research, testing, developmental labs,
   and light industrial manufacturing, as well as printing and publishing industries and direct mail
   advertising services. In addition, uses that are ancillary and secondary to the primary uses are allowed
   for the convenience of Business Park employees.         Examples include coffee shops, cafeterias, delis,
   employment agencies, hotels and motels, banks, athletic facilities, and business services and offices.
   The zoning districts that are considered consistent with the RLI designation are: Specific Plan
   Implementation ( SPI) and Open Space ( 0).
Civic Activity, Open Space, and Parks and Recreation
   Civic Activity ( CA). The Civic Activity land use designation includes public and quasi -public uses that
   provide a necessary and /or desirable service to the community, including fire stations; court houses;
   government offices, facilities, and storage yards; libraries; public schools; museums; cultural facilities,
   community centers, and public utilities. Ancillary uses, such as community gardens, renewable energy
   projects, farmers' markets, and Low Impact Development ( LID) demonstration projects, would be
   allowed.   No private development potential is assigned to sites designated as Civic Activity.        Private
   development on a CA site requires a General Plan Amendment. The zoning districts that are considered
   consistent with the CA designation are Civic Activity (CA), Specific Plan Implementation ( SPI), and Open
   Space ( 0).
   Open Space ( OS).     The Open Space land use designation was established to preserve, in its natural
   state, land in the vicinity of Buena Vista Creek and Agua Hedionda Creek, other bodies of water,
   undeveloped flood plains, areas of biological significance, seismic activity, unstable soil, unique geologic
   formation, geologic hazard, and other areas of interest in order to protect the health, safety, and
   aesthetic sense of the public and to preserve these areas undisturbed for future generations.          It also
   includes deed -restricted open space in private development that is set aside for open space, habitat,
   and /or public safety purposes. The OS designation may allow ancillary uses, such as low- intensity public
December 2011                                                                                          Page 2- 21
                                                                                                           vR A L P,
                                                                                                       0
  Land Use and Community Identity Element
                                                                                                               STk
                                                                                                         2030
    recreation uses ( including pedestrian, biking, and       I'   I
    equestrian trails with associated staging and
    parking areas), community gardens, renewable
    energy     projects,  LID  demonstration     projects,
    etc.,   if they do not negatively impact the
    resources that are being preserved. The zoning
    districts that are considered consistent with the
    OS designation are Open Space ( 0) and Open
    Space Residential ( OSR).
    Parks     and  Recreation ( PR).    The    Parks and
                                                                         Alta Vista Botanical Gardens
    Recreation land use designation applies to public
    parks, and recreation areas and facilities ( such as City -owned and operated parks, Guajome Park, The
    Wave, etc.);   private recreation areas and facilities (such as Shadowridge Golf Course and Country Club);
    and deed -restricted property or facilities in private development that are set aside for recreational
    purposes. (     Note: Some parks may have civic activity uses —predominant use determines the LU
    designation.) Ancillary uses, such as community gardens, farmers' markets, renewable energy projects,
    LID demonstration projects, etc.,      are  allowed.    A new zoning district that will implement the PR
    designation will be adopted in conjunction with the General Plan.
    Biological Preserve Overlay ( BPO).        The primary purpose of the Biological Preserve Overlay is to
    designate areas in the City of Vista forthe long -term conservation of biological resources. Land uses in
    the BPO are restricted to only limited passive recreational uses where protection of the resources is
    ensured, or those uses required to protect the health and safety of Vista' s residents. The BPO works in
    tandem with the underlying zoning designations to protect biological resources within those areas. The
    BPO will be implemented through a zoning overlay that will be adopted in conjunction with the General
    Plan, and further policy guidance is found in the Resource Conservation and Sustainability Element. The
    areas covered by the BPO include portions of Buena Vista Park, Green Oak Ranch, La Mirada Canyon,
    Buena Vista, Agua Hedionda and Buena creeks, and a portion of the City' s Sports Park. The UCSD
    Dawson Los Monos Preserve is not included because the City does not have land use control over the
    property, but is considered to be managed for ecological values that contribute to the functioning of the
    City' s preserve system. The boundaries of the BPO are shown on Figure LUCI -1.
LAND USE PLAN AND ZONING RELATIONSHIP
The land use designations described above are implemented by Title 18, Zoning, of the City' s
Municipal /Development Code; their relationship is described above for each land use designation. State law
requires that a City' s zoning regulations must be consistent with the general plan land use designations. The
 December 2011                                                                                         Page 2 -22

                                                                                                           ERA1.
   Land Use and Community Identity Element                                                                2030
City will update Title 3.8 of the Municipal /Development Code as necessary to implement the goals and
policies of the Land Use and Community Identity Element.
Vista also employs specific plans to implement land use policy. A specific plan is a planning tool that defines
the types, intensities, and densities of allowable uses; identifies public and private infrastructure; provides
specific standards and design criteria by which development will proceed; and includes an implementation
and financing plan. Its contents are specified by Sections 6545o - 65457 of the California Government Code.
The City has 34 specific plans covering approximately 4, 669 acres or 45. 5 percent of the land within the City;
these specific plans are depicted on Figure LUCI -z. Considering that each Specific Plan can be developed
with unique land use designations and zoning categories, the large number of individual specific plans can be
onerous for City staff to manage. Each project coming forward that is within a specific plan requires staff to
refer to that plan' s unique development standards. Because most of the specific plan areas are built out, the
update of the General Plan provides the City with the opportunity to consider " sunsetting" some of the
specific plans and changing the land uses within those areas to match the General Plan land uses, thereby
eliminating the specific plan entirely.
POPULATION DENSITY AND INTENSITY
State law mandates that general plans include standards of population density and building intensity for all
of the territory covered by the Plan. Population density is described in the State General Plan Guidelines as
the relationship between the number of dwellings per acre ( density) and the number of residents per acre.
Table LUCI -i lists the land use designations shown on the Land Use Map and provides a corresponding
indication of maximum allowable density ( expressed as the number of dwelling units per acre) and
maximum allowable intensity ( expressed by floor area ratio [ FAR]).            It also includes the build -out
assumptions ( density and intensity) for each land use category that were used in preparation of the
Environmental Impact Report ( EIR) forthe General Plan.
The estimated 2030 population shown in Table LUCI -i assumes maximum development of all parcels of land
at the highest permitted densities /intensities at a projected average number of persons per household;
however, this estimate is considerably overstated. Total build -out at the maximum permitted density or
intensity for any given land use designation does not typically occur, as a variety of factors may restrict
actual development or redevelopment.        For example, existing land uses may not completely redevelop,
zoning standards could affect actual development, environmental constraints may exist, infrastructure
capacity could be insufficient, demand is likely to vary depending on land use, vacant land may not develop,
vacancy rates may vary, and public sentiment regarding proposed development may have an impact on
what is approved.       In addition, the actual number of persons per household occupying multi -family
residential and mixed use development is typically smaller than that for single -family residential land uses.
The estimated population calculated for the General Plan EIR is 3. 3. 2, 288, which is based on a more realistic
203o build -out assumption and therefore is a more reasonable population estimate.
 December 2011                                                                                         Page 2- 23
                                                                                                                                     vR A L P,
    Land Use and Community Identity Element
                                                                                                                                       STk
                                                                                                                                   2030
TABLE LUCH. DENSITY AND INTENSITY STANDARDS AND POPULATION PROJECTIONS                                     2030) PER THE LAND
USE MAP
                                                                   Build-Out
                                                 Maximum
 General Plan Land Use                                          Assumptions
 Designation
                                                  Density /                                            Designated        Population
                                                                    Density /              Land'
                                                  Intensity                                             Land Area
                                                              I    Intensity)
 Open Space Residential                           0. 4 du /ac       0. 3 du /ac             93. 0          0. 9%                121
 Rural Residential                                 1 du /i ac     o. 625 du /ac             258. 3          2. 5%               842
 Low Density Residential                            2 du /ac        1. 5 du /ac            1831. 3         18. o%             11, 940
 Medium Low Density Residential                     5 du /ac        3. 5 du /ac            2175. 8         21. 3%             35, 466
 Medium Density Residential                        10 du /ac         7 du /ac             1189. 5          11. 7%             38, 779
 Medium High Density Residential                   15 du /ac       12. 5 du /ac            438. 2           4. 3%             21, 428
 High Density Residential                          21 du /ac         18 du /ac              5o5. 8          5. 0%             34, 627
                                                                     31 du /ac
 Mixed Use                                         4o du /ac                               392. 0           3. 8%             51, 121
                                                                     0. 5 FAR
 Commercial Office                                 0. 75 FAR        0. 33 FAR                55. 9          0. 5%               n/ a
 Neighborhood Commercial                           0. 75 FAR        0. 33 FAR               179. 9          1. 8%               n/ a
 General Commercial                                0. 75 FAR        0. 33 FAR              466. 8          4. 6%                n/ a
 Commercial Service                                0. 75 FAR        0. 33 FAR                27. 9          0. 3%               n/ a
 Industrial General                                 0. 5 FAR        0. 33 FAR               224. 3          2. 2%               n/ a
 Research Light Industrial                          0. 5 FAR        0. 33 FAR               871. 4          8. 5%               n/ a
 Civic Activity                                                                             3742            3. 7%               n/ a
 Parks and Recreation                                                                       4971            4. 9%               n/ a
 Open Space                                                                                616. 1          6. o%                n/ a
                                                                          TOTAL         10, 197. 6        100. 0%          3. 94, 324'
  Total acreage shown in this table does not include roadway and railroad rights -of -way.
  Estimated persons per household ( 3. 26) is based on SANDAG' s 205o Regional Growth Projections (February 2010).
  This population estimate assumes total build -out at maximum density, which is not likely to occurfor reasons described earlier.
 OTHER KEY TOPICS ADDRESSED IN THE LAND USE PLAN
 This section provides discussion regarding topics and associated figures that augment the goals and policies
 and guide City actions and decision -making. These include redevelopment, regional growth, housing, and
 airport land use compatibility.
  December 2011                                                                                                                Page 2 -24
                                                                                                      iii/ -yr;!
                               Oceanside
                                                                                                       Specific
                                                                                                                                  Vineyards                                  County Metro
                                                                                                                                 Specific Plan
                                                                         ifi -
                                                                    Specifl    Specific I '.;..
                                                                                                        N
                                                                                                         Plan
                                                                                                           lan
                                                                                                                                                                            planning Area
                                                                 IP.Ia            Plan
                                                                      L     I    No. 16"
                                                       No. 25                                                                 Specific
                                                                                                Townsit                      Plan No. 7
                                    HiddenAk
                                                                                                Specific
                                       Specifi
                                                           Specific                               Plan         Specific
                                         Plan
                                                              Plan                                              Plan
                                                                                          I
                                                                                                  o
                                                            No. 32                                              No. 33
                                     specific
                                                                                         Downn town '..          1. ":•
                                        Plan
                                                                                          Specific
                                       No. 4
                        Specific
                                                                             j              Plan                                  C
                                                                  Specific
                       Plan No. 3
                                                                     Plan
     Vista Gateway
     Specific Plan
                                                                     No. 1                                       M, °   Sierra Verde                                        1
                                                                                                                        Specific Plan
                                                               Specific        Pheasant Hills                                             Specific Plan No. 5 '
                                                                 Plan           Specific Plan
                                                                 No.
                                                                                                                                                                          I
                                                                                                        Specific
                                                                                                         Plan No. 2
                                                                                                                                                                                       h _
                            1/             I                                                                                                                              I
                                  I   Haciend`               Specific
                                       Specific            Plan No. 31
n
                                         Plan   Specific    1 `
                                                  Plan
                                                 No. 29 `
                                                                                                                                 Nort,    ob t `                                          F
                                                                                                                                    Squarej
v                                                                                                                                Specific Plan
                                                                                                                               Specific .
                                                                                                    Shadowridge                an No.Yll.
                                                                                                    Specific Plan '
                                        1                                                                                                        Sycamore Estates
                                                                                                                                                                         J
                                                                                                                                                   Specific+Plan
a'
              Carlsbad
                                                                                Specific                                                          1
                                                                               Plan No. 24
ll
                                                                                                                                                   Specific Plan No. 14
                                                                                                                                                    San Marcos
            Vista City Boundary
            Vista Sphere of Influence
                                                                                                                                                                      0':                  1
5
            Sprinter
                                                                                                                                              j                             v
   SOURCE: City of Vista                                                                                                                                                       fVliles
                                                                                                                                                                           Figure LUCI -2
                                                                                                                                                                         Specific Plans

This page left intentionally blank
                                                                                                                       vR A L P,
                                                                                                                   0
                                                                                                                               G
                                                                                                                     U----    TA,
   Land Use and Communityy Identityy Element                                                                          2030
Redevelopment
The goals and policies of the Land Use and Community Identity Element are intended to promote a healthy
economy that fosters and attracts a diversified economic base, promote fiscal sustainability and stability,
and provide employment opportunities for the
City' s residents.   One of the key methods Vista
employs        to     promote          revitalization       is
redevelopment, which is legislation established
by the State that provides local governments
tools    to    revitalize      their    communities        by
eliminating blight from designated areas. These
tools allow the City' s Redevelopment Agency to
assemble      land     for     development,        use    tax
increment financing, invest in infrastructure, and
create affordable housing opportunities. The
City' s  existing    Redevelopment          Project Area                        New development in Vista Village
which     is  shown      on     Figure    LUCI -3,    includes
approximately 4, 005. 9 acres of land.            Vista has been successful in attracting large- scale, regional retail
companies      through     its   revitalization   efforts.     In addition,  the City' s support for cultural economic
development       has    played    a   role  in  redevelopment      and    revitalization of Vista.      Cultural economic
development promotes the arts and cultural resources to strengthen the economy and enhance Vista' s
quality of life. The success of Vista' s recent redevelopment efforts has enhanced the City' s image in the San
Diego region and positioned Vista to be a vital North San Diego County employment center. Existing areas
identified for re -use and redevelopment include commercial, industrial, office, residential, and institutional
land uses. Another method the City will use to encourage and facilitate revitalization includes the creation
of Opportunity Areas, which are described later in this chapter. In a region lacking developable land, Vista is
well positioned for continued redevelopment and revitalization of underutilized and underperforming areas
of the City.
 December 2011                                                                                                     Page 2 -25
                                                                                                               ERA1.
    Land Use and Community Identity Element                                                                   2030
Regional Growth
As an integral part the region, the City both influences
and is influenced by planning issues that extend beyond
its  jurisdiction,  such    as  transportation,  air quality,
housing,     and    natural    resource   preservation    and
management. As the designated Metropolitan Planning
Organization for the region, the San Diego Association of
Governments ( SANDAL) is responsible for planning for
growth within the region in a coordinated manner. One
of   the   tools   SANDAG      uses  to  accomplish   this  is
preparation of the Regional Comprehensive Plan ( RCP
                                                                    The SPRINTER provides an alternative to the
2004 and future updates), which is based upon the concept             automobile and supports smart growth
of smart growth.     To promote regional implementation of
the smart growth principles, SANDAG consulted with staff and elected officials of its member jurisdictions
to identify locations within the region that can support smart growth and transportation investments. These
locations are shown on the Smart Growth Concept Map ( Concept Map), and include existing /planned and
potential transit routes and stations and smart growth areas ( Figure LUCI -4). In addition, the City has added
a proposed Smart Growth Area around the Vista Village Transit Center and will work with SANDAG to add it
to the Concept Map.
Implementation of smart growth principles results in a development pattern and land use decisions that
promote sustainability, which increase the efficient and responsible use and management of renewable and
non -renewable resources, preserve and improve the environment, reduce pollution, improve human health
and safety, and preserve economic prosperity. The principles of smart growth and sustainable development
provide a cornerstone of the goals and policies of the Land Use and Community Identity Element.
Sphere of Influence
The City recognizes the semi -rural character of the outlying Sphere of Influence ( SOI) areas and, therefore,
has designated the majority of the SOI as Rural Residential ( RR) to preserve the large lot development
patterns present in the majority of these areas. Areas where the land use designations differ include the
South Santa Fe corridor and the areas surrounding the Buena Creek SPRINTER Station, where commercial
and higher density residential land use designations are generally consistent with the County' s General Plan
and SANDAG' s Smart Growth Concept Map. The Sunset Island areas east and west of Melrose Drive near
Sunset Drive were also reviewed to determine if the RR land use designations were appropriate for these
areas considering the surrounding land uses within Vista and Oceanside.       Based on the character of these
 December 2011                                                                                            Page 2- 26
                                                                                                                                                                                3onsall3onsall
                                                                                                                                                                     I
                                                                                                                                                                     I
                                                         N Santa P.
                                                                                                                                 4
                                                                        A                                                        5
                                                                                     Taylor St
                                                              I`                                                                      E-( ayllor St
                                                                                                                    Q                Arcadia Ave
                                                                                                                                     Palo:; Ppl            d
                                                            W Bobier Dr
                                                                                                                                  N
                                                                                                                                                             n
                                                                                                                                                              7
                                                                                                                                                                                          NorthNorth County County
                                                                                                                 F
                                                                                                                          U>                  M_onte Mar Rd   m                                    MetroMetro
                                                                                                                                  w
                                                                                                                         er Dr       Fee                        m
                                                 North Ave              East.
                                                                                                                                                                                              PlanningPlanning
                                                                                                                                                                                                    AreaArea
                                                                                                                        T °                                rty
                                                                                                                                                               O
                                                                                                       pr
                                                                                                                            mA
                                                                                            To
                                                   eland Dr                                                                                                                               II
                                                  2 —                                                      i
                                                                                                                         baI Terrace pr
                                                                                                                                                          Terrace Dr f
                                                                                                                          a therpr _                  ae
                                                  Oliv  Ave                                                              J'
                                                                                            Vr t yr                P `aG staD
                                               O
                                                                                                                                            N
                                     A                                                                       n     ¢                                   Dr
                                                         Z  ¢
                                                                                                              o                d                                                          11
                                                                                                                                L sta
                                                                                                                                    / Dr
                                                                                                                                                                                         II
                                                                 yy
                         G
                                                                                                                            s `            Q Mont_?jjtd Dr
                         nw                        2Py {
                               t`a`ie                                                                                                                                                 II
                                                 Melrose  I
                           J `                                                                                                                                                         II
                                                                    BrandingBranding
                                                                                                    MarMar
                                                                                                                                                                                       II
                                                         S
                                                                                                 11                                                                                             II
                                                                                                              S,S,
                                                                                                                    aldgealdge
                                                                                                                                                                                              ll
                                                                 11
                                                                                               y
                                       Carlsbad             11
           Vista City Boundary
                                                                                                                                                                                                   NN
n
ll
      2    Vista Sphere of Influence                                                                                                                              manman MarcosMarcos              nn
   rr-
           Sprinter
                                                                                                                                                                                oo                             1111
v Q
s
           Redevelopment Areas
   SOURCE: City of Vista                                                                                                                                                                       MilesMiles
                                                                                                                                                                                    FigureFigure LUCILUCI    - - 33
                                                                                                                                                                     Redevelopment Redevelopment AreasAreas

This page left intentionally blank
             College                                  I   eland Or
             Blvd '
                    r          i J                       Olive,Qy°e
                                                  o<
                                                    o                                                                                ta 0r ••
                                                                                                                                              Jr
                                 A
                               C7                                 Z
                    I                                                                                                                 b
                                                                                                                                                 1
                                          NaY
                                                                                                                                      Oi
            P.
      1      a
             u °                   Ot ?® . — _                                                                             S        a Mont¢ ista• Dr 1
                                                                                                                                    m
                vs-s
                                                  4u-.Melrose Way
                          1110 :
                                                                              Branding
            ti   •    °     .      •      •    `
                                                                        f' !                          Mar Vista Dr
                                                                                                                                    j
                                                                                   3
                                                                                                               pupine Hj'ispr?.6
                                                                                                                                 o Rd.
                                                                             i       Pn ,
                                                                                         oP                     Sn,adowridge Or
                                                                                           O
                                                                                 1
Legend "` `                                                                f—         I"' t                                 11
                                                                                                          La Mirada Dr        h      I1.i
                                                                                                   IN
 El Sprinter Stations
                                                                                         f
    FSprinter                                                                                        arrr  ' •
        SANDAG Smart Growth Areas
                                                                                                                 VON
        Proposed SANDAG Smart Growth Area
        Vista City Boundary
                                                                                                                Tiv-.
        Vista Sphere of Influence                                                            pspea
                                                                                                                NOR u
         VS ( Vista)
          OC ( Oceanside)
          CN ( County)~
Land Use Categories                                                                                                                   Industrial General ( IG)
                                                                               High Density Residential ( HD)
         Open Space Residential ( OSR)                                         Mixed Use ( MU)                                        Research Light Industrial ( RLI)
         Rural Residential ( RR)                                               Commercial Office ( CO)                                Civic Activity ( CA)
         Low Density Residential ( LD)                                         Neighborhood Commerical ( CN)                          Open Space ( OS)
         Medium Low Density Residential ( MLD)                                 General Commercial ( GC)                               Parks and Recreation ( PR) \
                                                                                                                                                                          V
         Medium Density Residential ( MD)                                      Commercial Service ( CS)                                                     0,                    1
         Medium High Density Residential ( MHD)
                                                                                                                                                                     Miles
SOURCE: SANDAG Smart Growth Concept Map, North County Subregion ( July 25, 2008)
                                                                                                                                                                       Figure LUCI -4
                                                                                                                                                   SANDAG Smart Growth Areas

This page left intentionally blank
                                                                                                             ERA1.
   Land Use and Community Identity Element                                                                  2030
areas and surrounding neighborhoods, the east Sunset Island area ( east of Melrose Drive) is designated RR
and the west Sunset Island area ( west of Melrose Drive) is designated Medium Low Density ( MILD).            The
Vista General Plan land use designations would be applied to these areas if proposed for annexation into the
City.
Housing
Residential land use is the most prominent land use type in the City. While the majority of residential land
use is single -family residential, Vista must plan for an estimated increase of approximately 3.4, 5oo residents
over the next 20 years.      As Vista is nearly built out, an important consideration for the City is how to
accommodate this increased population in a manner that protects existing neighborhoods and retains
Vista' s semi -rural character while meeting the diverse needs of its residents. One of those considerations is
to show that the City has planned to meet its existing and projected housing needs for all economic
segments of the community, including Vista' s share of the regional housing need, as required in the Housing
Element. While the Housing Element embodies policies for providing adequate housing and includes action
programs for that purpose, the Land Use and Community Identity Element identifies where and how those
housing needs will be accommodated.
Another consideration is to plan for the anticipated housing growth based on the principles of smart growth
and sustainability by directing it to areas of the City that are near local- serving commercial businesses,
transit routes, parklands, and trails, so that residents may walk or do not have to depend on their
automobiles for their daily needs. The Land Use Plan uses a combined approach to achieve these objectives
by designating properties to transit -supportive mixed use and higher density residential land uses in areas of
the City, called Opportunity Areas, which provide opportunities for walkability.
Airport Land Use Compatibility
The San Diego County Regional Airport Authority, which functions as the Airport Land Use Commission for
San Diego County, is responsible for preparing an ALUCP for each of the 3. 6 public use and military airports
within the County. The purpose of an ALUCP is to protect the general welfare of people and property within
the vicinity of airports, as well as the public in general, by providing information regarding airport operations
and guidance on appropriate land uses surrounding airports. An ALUCP addresses a defined area around an
airport, called an Airport Influence Area ( AIA). An AIA is determined by the airport' s size, current and future
airport operations, and compatibility criteria, including noise, safety, airspace protection, and overflight,
that may affect land uses and /or necessitate restrictions on those uses. The ALUCP includes an associated
Compatibility Policy Map and policies for each criterion. An AIA is divided into two review areas: Review
Area i, which identifies locations that may be subject to limitations on certain types of land use actions due
 December 2011                                                                                           Page 2- 27
                                                                                                            ERA1.
   Land Use and Community Identity Element                                                                 2030
to safety and /or noise concerns; and Review Area 2, which includes locations that are outside Review Area i
but within airspace protection and /or notification overflight areas.
Portions of Vista are within Review Area z of the AIA of two airports: the McClellan -Palomar Airport,
approximately one mile southwest of the southwestern corner of Vista, and the Oceanside Municipal
Airport, approximately four miles west of Vista. Figure LUCI -5 depicts the AIA of each airport in relation to
Vista. The compatibility criteria for each airport that apply in Vista are summarized below. ( Note: Each
ALUCP should be referenced for details regarding the individual Compatibility Policy Maps and additional
information.)
McClellan -Palomar Airport
The McClellan -Palomar ALUCP ( adopted on January 25, zoio, and amended on March 4, zoio) indicates
that portions of Vista are subject to the following compatibility criteria:
         Part 77 Airspace Protection. Exhibit III - 3 of the McClellan -Palomar ALUCP reflects the areas that
         should   be protected for the safe use of the airports' airspace.          The City will evaluate new
         development in Vista that is within Part 77 Airspace Protection for compatibility with the airspace
         protection compatibility policies in Section 3. 5 of the McClellan -Palomar ALUCP.
         Overflight Notification.    Exhibit III - 4 of the McClellan - Palomar ALUCP reflects the areas within
         which developers of new residential development projects will be required to record an overflight
         notification document as a condition of development approval.              The City will evaluate new
         residential development in Vista that is within the Overflight Notification Area for compatibility with
         overflight compatibility policies in Section 3. 6 of the McClellan -Palomar ALUCP.
         Avigation Easements.       Exhibit III - 6 of the McClellan -Palomar ALUCP depicts areas within which
         developers of certain projects will be required to dedicate avigation easements to the entity owning
         the airport. The City will evaluate new development in Vista that is within the Avigation Easement
         Area for compatibility with avigation easement policies in Section 2. 3.1. 5 of the McClellan -Palomar
         ALUCP.
Oceanside Municipal Airport
The Oceanside Municipal ALUCP ( adopted on January 25, zoio) indicates that portions of Vista are subject
to the following compatibility criteria:
         TERPS ( Terminal Instrument Procedures) Airspace Protection Compatibility. Exhibit III -4 of the
         Oceanside    Municipal  ALUCP     reflects the    areas  that are  within TERPS ( Terminal  Instrument
         Procedures) Airspace Protection areas, which should be protected for the safe use of the airports'
         airspace.   The City will evaluate applications for development in Vista that are within TERPS
 December 2011                                                                                          Page 2- 28
                                           fiJ -                          tyt{j}:m
                                                                         @MOT'/
                                                 L L41kZ1L
                                         e
0
NF
a x
  m
  U                                                                                yrVy
  m                                                        e
                                                              0
  o
a
  m
  m
U
a
  L
a6
   6
  N
rO
NNN
                                                                         N
     Airport Influence Area
NU           Review Areal -
             Review Area 2                                     0         2              4
 0
 a   Source: San Diego County Regional _
  m  Airport Authority, 2010                                          @Mil2S• .
 1Y
                                                                      Figure LUCI -5
                                                            Airport Influence Areas

This page left intentionally blank
                                                                                                           vR A L P,
                                                                                                        O
                                                                                                                   G
                                                                                                          U----   TA,
   Land Use and Communityy dentity Element                                                                2030
          Airspace Protection Areas for compatibility with the airspace protection compatibility policies in
          Section 3. 5 of the Oceanside Municipal ALUCP.
Local agencies such as Vista that have jurisdiction over land uses within the AIA of an ALUCP are required to
use the compatibility criteria identified in the ALUCP when preparing or amending their general plans or
other land use plans. The intent is for the general plan to be consistent with the ALUCP by eliminating direct
conflicts with compatibility criteria and establishing policies and procedures that implement and ensure
compliance with the applicable compatibility policies. The City has coordinated with the Airport Land Use
Commission staff in reviewing proposed general plan land uses along with the compatibility criteria. In
addition, Goal g and its associated policies will ensure ongoing coordination and compliance. The ALUCP
also discusses other land use actions that are subject to airport land use compatibility review by the airport
authority. However, Vista maintains land use authority through its General Plan, zoning ordinances, and
other local authority.
OPPORTUNITY AREAS
The Land Use and Community Identity Element does not propose significant changes to the overall
distribution of land uses, as Vista is nearly built out. However, the City expects and will encourage change to
occur in certain targeted areas, called Opportunity Areas ( OAs). Opportunity areas serve several purposes.
First, they identify the locations where the City wants land use changes to occur during the planning period.
Second, they are intended to promote redevelopment of or improvement to existing developed and natural
areas to encourage property revitalization and enhance community character. Finally, they are based on the
principles of smart growth, which encourages compact, walkable, mixed -use development located in
proximity to local services, employment, bicycle and walking trails, and public transit. All but one OA (OA -g,
which is in the SOI) is in a Redevelopment Area and therefore can benefit from the tools available to the
Redevelopment Agency to support revitalization.
The OAs are listed below and shown on Figure LUCI -6.
     OA -1:   Buena Vista Creek
     OA -2:   Downtown Vista
     OA -3:   North Santa Fe Avenue / West Bobier Drive
     OA -4:   Southern South Santa Fe Avenue
     OA -5:   West Vista Way
     OA -6:   East Vista Way
     OA -7:   Civic Center Drive " Link"
     OA -8:   East Vista Way / Foothill Drive
 December 2011                                                                                         Page 2 -29
                                                                                                          ERA1.
   Land Use and Community Identity Element                                                               2030
     OA -9:     Buena Creek Station
     OA -10: North County Regional Center / Breeze Hill Road
Many of the City' s OAs include SANDAG Smart Growth Areas as identified on SANDAG' s 2oo6 Concept
Map, as shown on Figure LUCI -4. There are seven existing or potential SANDAG Smart Growth Areas within
Vista' s city limits —one town center ( VS 3.), four community centers ( VS 2, VS 4, VS 6, and VS 7), and two
mixed -use transit corridors (VS 3 and VS 5). The Smart Growth Area that is designated CN 4 on the Concept
Map is within the County; however, because it is within Vista' s SOI and includes the Buena Creek SPRINTER
station, it is also considered an opportunity area for the purpose of the City' s General Plan. The Smart
Growth Area that is designated OC 7 on the Concept Map is within the city of Oceanside, just south of the
intersection of Bobier and Melrose Drives, and includes the Melrose SPRINTER station. Due to its proximity
to Vista, it has been included in OA -3.     Figure LUCI -4 also identifies a City -proposed Smart Growth Area
around the Vista Village Transit Center.       The City will work with SANDAG to incorporate this proposed
Smart Growth Area on SANDAG' s Concept Map.
The Smart Growth Areas are important to address in the OAs because they determine eligibility to
participate in the Smart Growth Incentive Program funded by TransNet, which is the voter -approved half -
cent sales tax for local transportation projects that is administered by SANDAL. Therefore, each of the ten
SANDAG Smart Growth Areas described above is referenced in the appropriate Vista opportunity area, both
graphically and in the text.
Implementation of the Opportunity Areas
Each OA includes the following:
          A vision that articulates the desired goal for the area
          A brief description of existing conditions
          A description of the proposed plan for the OA
          A map of the OA that shows, as appropriate:
                Land use designations ( note that these are the same as shown on Figure LUCI -3.)
                Existing and proposed Smart Growth Areas
                SPRINTER stations
               Transit stops and corridors
                Important pedestrian connections that should be enhanced to encourage walkability
                Existing and proposed bike /pedestrian and hiking trails
 December 2011                                                                                        Page 2- 30

   Figure LUCI -6
Opportunity Areas
This page left intentionally blank
                                                                                                           @RAZ
   Land Use and Community Identity Element                                                                2030
         o
             Existing public schools
         o   Proposed gateways
         Specific policies for each OA to achieve the vision
In addition, all OAs are subject to the following overall policies, which are intended to make it easier, more
comfortable, and safer for people to choose to walk and /or use transit. OAs are also subject to other goals
and policies in the Land Use and Community Identity Element the Downtown Vista Specific Plan ( DVSP),
and those of the remainder of the General Plan.
Overall Policies for the Opportunity Areas
         LUCI Policy OA -A:     Enhance and improve pedestrian connections to the adjacent neighborhoods
         through   installation   of sidewalks, trails,  distinctive paving, lighting,   signage,  and bikeway
         connections.
         LUCI Policy OA -B: Provide safe, attractive, and comfortable bus stops; encourage direct pedestrian
         connections from the bus stops into adjacent development.
         LUCI Policy OA -C: Evaluate whether there is a sufficient number of places for pedestrians to cross
         major road( s)   safely and conveniently.      Consider crossing enhancements, such as additional
         crosswalks, pedestrian refuge islands in the medians, curb extensions, and /ortextured paving.
The vision, proposed plan, and policies for the OAs emphasize the principles of smart growth, sustainability,
community identity, placemaking, and creating physical and social connections.         In addition, the OAs will
benefit from proposed improvements to the circulation infrastructure, including widening of roadways,
construction of sidewalks and trails, and installation of various classes of bikeways. Given the importance of
integrating these improvements and other mobility options with land use changes and development
policies, the key improvements are highlighted in the discussion of proposed plans for each OA; more
detailed information is found in the Circulation Element.
OA -1:    Buena Vista Creek
VISION: The vision for Buena Vista Creek (Figure LUCI -7) is to connect parks, neighborhoods, and commercial
areas through a system of trails and walkways that include enhancement of Buena Vista Creek.
DESCRIPTION:       Buena Vista Creek includes the creek channel and the adjacent natural tree canopy that
lines the creek corridor throughout the city. It traverses numerous land use designations, SANDAG Smart
Growth Areas, and other OAs. Although the headwaters of the creek originate in the hills east of the City,
the focus of OA -i is the portion extending from Brengle Terrace Park to the western City boundary. The
 December 2011                                                                                          Page 2- 31
                                                                                                            ERA1.
   Land Use and Community Identity Element                                                                 2030
creek currently flows through natural areas, underground pipes, box culverts, and human -made channels,
but has been largely ignored in the development of fronting properties. Recent improvements to the creek
corridor include a flood control detention basin adjacent to Brengle Terrace Park, Creekwalk Park in the
Vista Village shopping center, and trails that have been developed between Wildwood Park and Brengle
Terrace Park. As an annual flowing waterway running through the heart of the downtown area, it provides a
valuable asset as well as ample opportunities for enhancement.
PROPOSED PLAN: Buena Vista Creek is considered a major defining characteristic of the City and provides
opportunities for connections within the community coupled with enhancements to the creek' s hydrology
and natural habitats. OA- 3., in concert with improvements identified in the Circulation Element, provides an
opportunity to develop an integrated system of trails and walking paths along the creek corridor that
provide improved pedestrian access and take advantage of its natural setting. The creek corridor' s location
relative to the downtown area also allows for new connections through OA- 2 ( Downtown Vista) and OA- 3.o
 North County Regional Center /         Breeze Hill Road).  Enhancement of the creek corridor in these areas
includes the potential for removal or modification of concrete structures, bioengineering improvements,
water quality and flood control projects, and environmental mitigation opportunities. Trail and access
improvements, coupled with creek corridor enhancement projects, will capitalize on the natural beauty of
the creek corridor and create a unique resource for adjacent neighborhoods and the larger community.
OA -1 Policies
          LUCI Policy OA -i.i: Develop a master plan for Buena Vista Creek that defines opportunities for
          pedestrian access /trails, creek restoration and enhancement, and flood control.
          LUCI Policy OA-3.. 2:    Uncover the portions of Buena Vista Creek that are underground as new
         development or redevelopment opportunities arise, including the former Lincoln Middle School site.
          LUCI Policy OA -3.. 3: Modify the channelized portions of Buena Vista Creek to allow for pedestrian
         access, flood control, and environmental enhancements where feasible.            Consider removal     of
         channelized sections where feasible.
          LUCI Policy OA -3. 4 Orient new development or redevelopment projects toward the creek where
         feasible and address the creek as an integral part of development projects to capitalize on its
          resources.
          LUCI Policy OA -3.. 5:    Consider buffers along Buena Vista Creek in the approval of new or
          redevelopment projects fronting the creek corridor in order to protect its valuable natural resources.
          Buffers from the edge of the existing natural tree canopy should be established based on scientific
         analysis of the existing site conditions and the development proposal by a qualified biologist. New
          buildings or parking areas should not be permitted within any buffer area.
 December 2011                                                                                          Page 2- 32
                                                                                                                        11      YY
                                                                  1
                                                                                                                                 CDCD
                              AWN                                                                                                LL
                                                                                                               N
                                                                                                               o .__
                                                                                                                  o
                                                                                                                        JVJV
                                                                                                      w
                                                                                                                                 ICUICU
                     S                                                                    m d
  i   o                                                          ti
                                                                               10
                                                                                   m
                                                                                   0
                                                                                                        H w    1,          LL( ( nn
                   L                                                                      Cz m            a       CL
                                                                               7-- o      Q2         Y               v
                                                                                                               w
                                                                                                            B  o w`p             mm
                                                                                                      w w   ai                   CC
                                                                                   U cn   r U                        a°
                                                                                                                                 CDCD
                                                                                                          L C  d     U           mm
 w !
                                                                           Q       N N                2 2   4
                                                                           U) U)        o O>   w     a  a w U     w w           mm
     f.
      Fi                                                              ac                                       C,
         r                                                                                                           a
                                                                                                                                rr
                                                                                                                  U —
     icy                                                                                                                        QQ
                                                                                                                                OO
           c
                                                     r
                                       oil
                                       h     L
               Jim!
                                                                                                 limlim
                                                         rr
T
                                           l                            WW
                        Q                      II
             1
             L-=          7ff11
                 f
                       1
                                                  cc   tr:tr: rr    t
                                71 pxw

c
c
0
cv
c
v
vrn
 Q
s
H
                                                                                                        vRAL P,
                                                                                                    0
                                                                                                               G
                                                                                                      U----   TA,
 Land Use and Communityy dentity Element                                                              2030
      LUCI Policy OA -3.. 6:  Seek grants and other sources of funding, including the State Integrated
      Regional Water Management ( IRWM)          Grant Program and     mitigation opportunities to enhance
      Buena Vista Creek with flood control, access, water quality improvement, and habitat restoration
      projects.
      LUCI Policy OA -1. 7:  Create a linear park along Buena Vista Creek from Brengle Terrace Park to
      Downtown Vista.
      LUCI Policy OA -3.. 8: Facilitate flood control projects along Buena Vista Creek that provide for dual
      use as recreational facilities.
December 2011                                                                                      Page 2- 33
                                                                   vRAL P,
                                                               0
 Land Use and Community Identity Element                          2030
                           This page left intentionally blank.
December 2011                                                  Page 2- 34
                                                                                                             vRAL P,
                                                                                                         0
                                                                                                                     G
                                                                                                            U----   TA,
   Land Use and Communityy Identityy Element                                                                2030
OA -2:      Downtown Vista
VISION: The vision for Downtown Vista ( Figure LUCI -8) is to reestablish it as the community's center, where
residents and visitors will live, work, shop, and play in a lively, attractive mixed -use environment.
DESCRIPTION: The Downtown Vista OA (OA- 2) is implemented by the Downtown Vista Specific Plan. The
Downtown is a key area upon which Vista will continue to focus its revitalization efforts. Fostering physical
and social connections, strengthening community identity, promoting sustainability, and implementing
smart growth development concepts are all guiding principles of the Downtown Vista Specific Plan.
Downtown Vista also functions as the City' s key circulation connector, both within the City and to the
region, through its proximity to SR -78 and the location of two North County Transit District ( NCTD)
SPRINTER stations within its border, and as the place where many of the City' s major roadways, existing and
proposed trails and bikeways, and bus routes converge. This provides an enhanced opportunity to promote
better coordination between land use and mobility alternatives.
The goal of reinstating the Downtown as the commercial, social, and circulation hub of the City also
supports its role in serving as a catalyst for revitalization of several other opportunity areas, such as the
North Santa Fe Avenue Opportunity Area directly to the north, the Southern South Santa Fe Avenue
Opportunity Area directly to the south, and the Civic Center Drive " Link" Opportunity Area, which ties
portions of the Downtown Vista Specific Plan together on the east.
PROPOSED PLAN: OA- 2 ( shown on Figure LUCI -8) includes three SANDAG Smart Growth Areas, including
VS i (Vista Village, which is a potential Town Center), VS 3 ( South Santa Fe Avenue / Mercantile Transit
Corridor, which is an existing /planned Mixed Use Transit Corridor), and VS 7 ( Civic Center Drive SPRINTER
station, which is a potential Community Center).         OA- 2 also includes a proposed SANDAG Smart Growth
Area around the Vista Village Transit Center. These existing and proposed SANDAG designations, as well as
Vista' s commitment to implement the principles of smart growth, makes the Downtown a location of
regional    significance and    positions  it to pursue grants and        other funds to support pedestrian- and
transportation- related     infrastructure   improvements and planning activities that better coordinate
transportation and planning in the San Diego region.
OA -2 Policies
          LUCI Policy OA- 2. 3.: Implement the Downtown Vista Specific Plan.
          LUCI Policy OA- 2. 2:    Protect and enhance the character of the historic Downtown core area by
          limiting building heights, requiring pedestrian -friendly design, and limiting surface parking
          requirements for new or expanded land uses.
 December 2011                                                                                           Page 2- 35
                                                                   vR A L P,
                                                               0
 Land Use and Community Identity Element                          2030
                           This page left intentionally blank.
December 2011                                                  Page 2- 36
                                                                        sl      tip1' •
       MD
                                                                                        W          fir,
                                                                                                                   J
                                                                                                    till
                 HD
           MHD                                                                                                                   PR
                                                                    rte * ,
                                                                                                                            RBI
                                                                                                                                    rf
  EEO
                                            IN
                                                                            Mkj   all
                                                                                                           MM
                                               W Will 8.                                                       am
   H
        1110-
                                               f.,    ?
                                                            i          *                     r!•
                                                                                                                        titer
                              k? %'. ` +* +                                                                            111 !; !
                                                                   op
         A1,09l!
                          All,                                                                         l
                                                                                                         h       i
                                                                                                               Now
N
                                       r•• -              r'`    t
                                                                                          A        y. IR                        fl
                                                                  jA40       i                           Cin
                                             r                                             i     7 r *
    Legend
                                                                          J    Sri    .                                 111
                                                                                                                                    ri
                     Stations
           Opportunity Areas
           SANDAG Smart                                                                                             4k
           Growth Areas
           Proposed SANDAG
           Smart Growth Area
                                                                                                                                   IN
           Transit Stops
           Transit =
                   Corridor
           Gateways
                                               r *                                           I         ter `  ,
           School
           Opportunity Area ( Buena
           Vista Creek Master Plan)
                                                                                                                 A
           Existing Trail
           Proposed Bike/
           Pedestrian Trail           log
           Proposed                    Please
           Enhanced -
           Connection                                 categories.
                                                                                                                       Figure LUCI -8
                                                                                                            OA -2: Downtown Vista

This page left intentionally blank
                                                                                                           vR A L P,
                                                                                                       0
                                                                                                                   G
                                                                                                          U----   TA,
   Land Use and Communityy Identityy Element                                                              2030
OA -3:      North Santa Fe Avenue / West Bobier Drive
VISION:      The North Santa Fe Avenue /    West Bobier Drive OA ( Figure LOCI -g) is a mixed -use, community -
oriented area, which serves as a gateway from the west and a transit corridor that links the Melrose Drive
SPRINTER station and the Vista Transit Center station. It includes neighborhood-serving commercial, civic, and
service uses and a variety of housing types that are affordable to a range of residents.    The orientation and
intensity of development, the mix of uses, and the streetscape create an attractive, safe, pedestrian friendly
transit corridor. Connections to the adjacent neighborhoods are emphasized, as are connections to the proposed
rail trail and other proposed bikeways and pedestrian paths.
EXISTING CONDITIONS:           OA -3 is located directly north of the northern edge of the Downtown Vista
Specific Plan and includes portions of both North Santa Fe Avenue and West Bobier Drive. Portions of both
of these streets were included in one opportunity area because they are both key circulation corridors that
connect two SPRINTER stations at each end and provide an opportunity for mixed -use, transit -oriented
development.       This opportunity area is primarily automobile- oriented, although students and nearby
residents often access the uses on foot, and both streets are served by transit. A Class z bikeway currently
exists on both North Santa Fe Avenue and West Bobier Drive.
The properties on North Santa Fe Avenue are characterized by a mix of local and chain retail and service
commercial uses, auto -repair facilities, public schools and civic land uses, and residential uses, including a
mobile home park and single -family residences. The development pattern on North Santa Fe Avenue varies
significantly. For example, lot sizes vary considerably, ranging from small, narrow parcels south of East
Drive to larger parcels farther north; setbacks are very inconsistent; landscaping is often lacking; and the
building types range from houses converted to commercial uses to integrated shopping centers. There are
several vacant parcels along this corridor, and many others are underutilized. Several low- and moderate -
income neighborhoods are adjacent to this corridor.       The portion of OA -3 on North Santa Fe Avenue is
within a Redevelopment Area; the southern part is also part of the Townsite Specific Plan.        Land uses on
West Bobier Drive include commercial uses at the Bobier Drive / North Santa Fe Avenue intersection, Bobier
Elementary School, a senior mobile home park, churches, and single -family residential uses.
OA -3 also has regional significance, as North Santa Fe Avenue is identified as a potential SANDAG Mixed
Use Transit Corridor ( both a route and the site of a future Corridor station), while the Melrose Drive
SPRINTER station and the surrounding area, including property at the western edge of the City, are
identified as a potential SANDAG Community Center (VS 5). The southern end of OA -3 also overlaps the
City' s proposed SANDAG Smart Growth Area around the Vista Village Transit Center.
PROPOSED PLAN: The majority of the land use designations in OA -3 ( shown on Figure LUCI -g) have been
changed to mixed use, with the exception of Bobier Elementary School and the Vista Academy of Visual and
Performing Arts and Adult Literacy School.          The mixed    use designation    is intended to encourage
 December 2011                                                                                         Page 2- 37
                                                                                                              vR A L P,
                                                                                                          0
                                                                                                                     G
                                                                                                            U----   TA,
   Land Use and Communityy dentity Element                                                                  2030
redevelopment and /or revitalization of vacant, underutilized, and poor performing properties. This multi -
modal OA provides an ideal opportunity for a mix of pedestrian- and transit -oriented residential and
neighborhood and community serving commercial land uses, with emphasis on providing a community
center and urgent care facility, both of which are high priorities for area residents. Implementation of the
policies for OA -3 is intended to improve the quality of development and visual appeal of both corridors, and
increase safety and security of the residents.
Improvements proposed in the Circulation Element will enhance OA -3, as well.              A Class 3 bikeway is
proposed on Los Angeles Drive, which will connect with the existing bikeways on North Santa Fe Avenue
and West Bobier Drive and the proposed rail trail.       Gaps in sidewalks will be completed, and a proposed
sidewalk and pedestrian trail on Los Angeles /Townsite Drives will support pedestrian connections into and
through the adjacent neighborhoods.
OA -3 Policies
          LUCI Policy OA -3. 3.: Promote pedestrian- and transit -oriented mixed -use development on vacant
         sites and on underutilized or poor performing existing commercial developments.
          LUCI Policy OA -3. 2: Intensify development at key nodes to promote compact, integrated, mixed -
         use development that is pedestrian- and transit- supportive.
          LUCI Policy OA -3. 3: Encourage Work /Live uses, especially where lots are small and are adjacent to
         single -family residential development.
          LUCI Policy OA -3. 4: Promote neighborhood- serving uses, including a community center and urgent
         care facility.
          LUCI Policy OA -3. 5:  Incorporate outdoor public spaces, paseos, courtyards, and /or mini -parks into
         the design of development to promote gathering spaces and community connections.
          LUCI Policy OA -3. 6: Encourage visual and physical connections between OA -3, Downtown Vista,
         and adjacent neighborhoods.
          LUCI Policy OA -3. 7: Establish consistent building setbacks as commercial properties redevelop to
         create a more cohesive look and a pedestrian -friendly scale.
          LUCI Policy OA -3. 8: Locate parking lots to the rear of buildings; entrances should face the street.
          LUCI Policy OA -3. 9: Reduce curb cuts on North Santa Fe Avenue to the extent possible. Encourage
         cross -access easements or alley access to minimize curb cuts.
 December 2011                                                                                           Page 2- 38
                                PR
                                                   ML :                         MHD                     1111
                                                                                                                     CA
                                                                          H
                                                                                                                       C
                                                                   MLD        MA
                                                                                        LJ
       f    f         IG                                                                                     ca H AN
                   d .
                                                                                           I
                       CA
                 as
NO
               CIS                                   IG
  P
                                     MD
                                                                                                                 PR
                                                                                        1 I ` rl,
                                                                                                     1
                                 i
      Legend                             T                                                                  MHD
       44 Sprinter                                                                                1                      MHD
         Q  Sprinter Stations
                                                                                              1
                                                                                                       N'F VA !], q
      UJ vista city Boundary                           MD
                                                                                                           HD
            Opportunity Areas
            SANDAG Smart
            Growth Areas
                                                                                                                    MD
            Proposed SANDAG                                                                         AH °
                                  Ali
            Smart Growth Area                                                                   1
            Transit Stops                                                                           iail_ ..
0           Transit Corridor
NNN    1
O           Gateways
N                                           CA .              C
0
         5] School
Y
  N         Existing Trail
                                                        H'
  0         Proposed Bike/
            Pedestrian Trail
                                                                      MD
  060                                Please refer to the City' s
            Enhanced Pedestrian
                                   most current Land Use Map
            Connection
                                   regarding land use categories.
  Y
                                                                                                               Figure LUCI -9
                                                                  OA -3: North Santa Fe Avenue /West Bobier Drive

This page left intentionally blank
                                                                                                           vRAL P,
                                                                                                       0
                                                                                                                   G
                                                                                                          U----   TA,
   Land Use and Communityy dentity Element                                                                2030
          LUCI Policy OA -3. 3.o: Improve the look of West Bobier Drive to soften the view from the roadway,
          improve its overall appearance as a gateway corridor, and create a more pleasing environment for
          pedestrians.   Encourage the consistent use of wall /fencing material for residential properties that
          abut West Bobier Drive; also encourage consistent location of perimeter fences /walls along the
          property line. Install street trees and other landscaping where space permits to create a buffer
          between pedestrians and moving traffic.
          LUCI Policy OA -3. 3.3.: Emphasize design and amenities that promote safety and defensible space,
          such as adequate lighting and windows facing the street (the " eyes on the street" concept).    Avoid
          creating isolated courtyards or other outdoor spaces.
OA -4: Southern South Santa Fe Avenue
VISION: The Southern South Santa Fe Avenue Opportunity Area ( Figure LUCI -1o) is an attractive residential
district that also serves as a welcoming gateway to the City. It includes a variety of multifamily housing
developments that are affordable to a range of residents.       Community- serving commercial uses are within
walking distance of the residential developments, and access to transit, the proposed urban bike /pedestrian
trail, and the proposed rail trail system are readily available. The streetscape and public amenities provide a
safe, comfortable pedestrian environment and an attractive image.
EXISTING CONDITIONS:            The Southern South Santa Fe Avenue Opportunity Area ( OA -4) is located on
South Santa Fe Avenue between Monte Vista Drive and Vista' s border. Its northern end abuts the southern
edge of the Downtown Vista Specific Plan, while its southern end serves as a gateway to the City. It is an
automobile- oriented corridor with a range of uses, including vacant land, stand -alone commercial uses, two
strip commercial centers, and single -family residences behind commercially developed property.             The
SPRINTER right -of -way runs along the western edge of the area. Utility lines are underground along this
stretch of South Santa Fe Avenue. The street is wide, the right -of -way is devoid of landscaping, and the
sidewalks have no buffer between the street and pedestrians. A Class z bikeway exists on South Santa Fe
Avenue in OA -4, and the corridor is served by bus transit. There are only two signalized intersections within
OA -4, which limits the ability of residents to cross South Santa Fe Avenue conveniently.
PROPOSED PLAN:          The majority of properties in OA -4 ( shown on Figure LUCI- 3.o) have been changed to
Mixed Use and Medium High Density Residential, with the exception of a node at Mar Vista Drive, which
retains its Neighborhood Commercial designation to support the commercial and service needs of area
residents. The maximum density allowed forthe mixed use areas would be zi dwelling units /gross acre. The
intent is to encourage redevelopment of property to provide a mix of residential types for a range of income
levels, consistent with the goals and policies of the City' s Housing Element, while allowing for commercial
uses. Implementation of the policies for OA -4 will support the redevelopment of this area to an attractive,
pedestrian- and transit -friendly residential district and welcoming southern gateway to the City.
 December 2011                                                                                         Page 2- 39
                                                                                                           vR A L P,
                                                                                                       0
                                                                                                                  G
                                                                                                          U----  TA,
   Land Use and Communityy dentity Element                                                                2030
There is a substantial distance between traffic signals and crosswalks in this area, and there is no safe place
for people to cross the street to get to bus stops or commercial uses between Mar Vista and Monte Vista
Drives. To improve pedestrian access, consideration should be given to allow people to cross South Santa Fe
Avenue at Service Place.       A connection to the proposed rail trail is proposed to be enhanced, as is a
connection to the proposed hiking trail on Monte Vista Drive. Installation of a vegetative buffer between the
street and pedestrians is also proposed to enhance walkability in this OA.
OA -4 Policies
         LUCI Policy OA -4. 3.: Encourage the transition of existing uses to a mix of Medium High and High
         Density Residential types for a range of income levels.
         LUCI Policy OA -4. 2: Encourage Commercial Neighborhood uses at the intersection of South Santa
         Fe /Mar Vista Drive that support the needs of the residents in the area.
         LUCI Policy OA -4. 3:     Create  a consistent streetscape    theme with   street trees  and   median
         improvements where appropriate.
         LUCI Policy OA -4. 4: Improve comfort and safety for pedestrians by installing a buffer between the
         sidewalk and moving traffic, and enhance crosswalks at intersections.
         LUCI Policy OA -4. 5:   Consider installing a traffic signal and pedestrian crosswalk at a midpoint
         location between Monte Vista and Mar Vista Drives when considering any new development or
         redevelopment proposals in this area.
         LUCI Policy OA -4. 6: Improve the gateway on South Santa Fe Avenue at the City' s border.
         LUCI Policy OA -4. 7:    Encourage lot consolidation along South Santa Fe Avenue to facilitate
         redevelopment projects within this area.
 December 2011                                                                                        Page 2- 40
                                                                                                        LD —
                                                         MLD
                                                                                                               Owl
                                                                                                        r    RR
                                                                                                            L
                                                                  MLD ;
                                                                                             RR
V
J
6
E
                                          i
                                  r                                          a
                         OR _     r
o    Legend
                                                                h        R !
                                                                                              1
                                                                                             a \             INA
            Sprinter
      0     Sprinter Stations
    1   J Vista City Boundary
                                           ML D
a®          Opportunity Areas
    FI SANDAG Smart
            Growth Areas
g-
D
            Transit Stops
            Transit Corridor
      1                                                                         rift# :
                                                                                            MD
            Gateways
            Proposed Bike/
                                                                                        t
            Pedestrian Trail
o..         Proposed Hiking Trail
                                     Please refer to the City' s
                                                                              I, t„       i      Soo      1, 00 1
              Enhanced Pedestrian  most current Land Use Map
              Connection           regarding land use categories.
Y
                                                                                                 Figure LUCI -10
                                                                        OA -4: Southern South Santa Fe Avenue

This page left intentionally blank
                                                                                                              vR A L P,
                                                                                                        0
                                                                                                                     G
                                                                                                           U----   TA,
   Land Use and Communityy Identityy Element                                                               2030
OA -5: West Vista Way
VISION: The West Vista Way Opportunity Area (Figure LUCI -11) is an attractive commercial and transit corridor
that provides a positive image and identity of the City from the gateways at the west end of Vista and when
entering the City from SR -78 at Emerald Drive, as well as when viewed from vehicles traveling along SR -78.
Commercial uses support both the local residents and regional patrons, and properties are well designed and
maintained. Private development and public infrastructure along West Vista Way promotes a visually attractive
and safe environment for pedestrians, cyclists, and transit users. High- density residential development north of
the commercial property on West Vista Way provides additional housing opportunities that are within walking
distance of services, transit, and the interregional bikeway system.            Connections to the residential
neighborhoods, the City, and the region are strong.
EXISTING CONDITIONS: The West Vista Way Opportunity Area ( OA -5) includes commercial uses on the
north side of West Vista Way from the western edge of the City to Hill Drive, and multi -family and single -
family residential development directly north of the commercially designated property between Cedar Road
and Hill Drive. It is bounded by the western City border on the west, SR -78 on the south, and Hull Drive on
the east; its northern boundary varies ( see Figure LUCI -ii).The property along this corridor is characterized
by a wide range of uses, including automobile, equipment, and RV rentals; a credit union; food market; gas
station; commercial center; restaurant; several small local businesses; a motel; and vacant lots.        Tri -City
Medical Center, a major medical center in northern San Diego County, isjust west of the City border on West
Vista Way.
OA -5 is an important transit corridor in the City, with transit stops along West Vista Way and North Emerald
Drive. There is a need for safe crosswalks for pedestrians accessing transit stops on the south side of West
Vista Way.
The condition of both the private property and public improvements is very inconsistent along this corridor.
Private development ranges from metal buildings, outdoor storage, no landscaping, unstriped parking lots,
and chain link fencing at the front property line to attractive, well- maintained development, landscaped
setbacks, and striped and landscaped parking lots. Curbs, gutters, and sidewalks are in place in some areas,
and absent in others. Utility lines have been undergrounded in some areas, and not in others.
There are two gateways to Vista in this opportunity area: from Oceanside on the west and from SR -78 at
Emerald Drive. In addition to gateways, the entire stretch of this opportunity area is visible from SR -78. An
unattractive chain link fence separates the SR -78 right -of -way from West Vista Way. OA -5 also has regional
significance because the area around West Vista Way and Emerald Drive is identified as a potential SANDAG
Community Center ( VS 6).         The commercially designated property in this opportunity area is in a
Redevelopment Area.
 December 2011                                                                                          Page 2- 41
                                                                                                           vR A L P,
                                                                                                       0
                                                                                                                   G
                                                                                                         U----    TA,
   Land Use and Communityy Identityy Element                                                              2030
PROPOSED PLAN: The majority of properties along West Vista Way within OA -5 ( shown on Figure LUCI-
11) will retain their General Commercial land use designation, although the intent is for much of the existing
development to redevelop to appropriate local- and regional -serving uses, such as integrated shopping
centers with a mix of local and nationally known retailers, restaurants, and grocery stores /supermarkets, as
well as other commercial and service uses to support the residential neighborhoods of West Vista to the
north.   Because West Vista Way is a gateway both at the west City boundary and from the off -ramps at
Emerald Drive and can be seen from SR -78, the quality and visual appeal of private development and public
infrastructure in OA -5 will be improved as a part of implementation of this plan. Certain properties have
been redesignated from Medium Low Density to Medium High Residential and from General Commercial to
High Density Residential to provide increased housing opportunities within walking distance to transit and
commercial uses.
Improvements proposed in the Circulation Element will enhance OA -5, as well. West Vista Way is proposed
to be widened to a 4 -lane collector, and sidewalks will be installed in areas where they are currently absent.
Other pedestrian enhancements are proposed, including sidewalks on Cedar Road, Emerald Drive, and
Grapevine Road, which will support pedestrian connections into and through the adjacent neighborhoods
and provide safe routes to the bus stops on West Vista Way. A Class 2 bikeway is proposed on Emerald
Drive, while a Class 3 bikeway is proposed on Grapevine Road; both will connect to the existing Class 2
bikeway on West Vista Way and will enhance access to the proposed pedestrian /bike path south of SR -78,
along Buena Vista Creek. The combination of long distances between traffic signals and crosswalks and
curvature of the road in this OA create unsafe conditions for people crossing West Vista Way to access bus
stops. To improve pedestrian access, the plan for OA -5 includes consideration of an appropriate method to
allow people to cross West Vista Way safely at bus stops and other pedestrian connections.
OA -5 Policies
          LUCI Policy OA -5. 1: Improve the streetscape through installation of street trees, other landscape
          and hardscape, curbs, and lighting that is scaled and oriented for pedestrians.
          LUCI Policy OA -5. 2:  Complete the widening and improvement of West Vista Way from Melrose
          Drive to Thunder Drive, including the installation of Class 2 bike lanes, bus stops, and continuous
          sidewalks.
          LUCI Policy OA -53 Strengthen this opportunity area as a gateway into Vista from Oceanside to the
          west and from SR -78 to the south through installation of entry signage, landscaping, and /or other
          gateway treatments.
          LUCI Policy OA -5. 4: Work with Caltrans and SANDAG to design and install attractive fencing /walls
          and landscaping along SR -78 to improve the appearance of this area and to help mitigate sound
          from the freeway upon adjacent uses.
 December 2011                                                                                         Page 2- 42
U
J  U1
i
 7 N
LL
   Q
c
c
0
cv
c
v
vrn
 Q
s
H
                                                                                                              vRAL P,
                                                                                                          0
                                                                                                                      G
                                                                                                             U----   TA,
    Land Use and Communityy dentity Element                                                                  2030
            LUCI Policy OA -5. 5:     Encourage existing development to redevelop to appropriate local and
            regional- serving uses, such as integrated shopping centers with a mix of local and nationally known
            retailers, restaurants, and supermarkets, as well as other commercial uses to support the residential
            population of West Vista to the north.
            LUCI Policy OA -5. 6: Encourage redevelopment of certain properties from Medium Low Density to
            Medium High Density Residential and from General Commercial to High Density Residential to
            provide increased housing opportunities within walking distance of transit and commercial uses.
 OA -6:       East Vista Way
 VISION: The East Vista Way Opportunity Area ( Figure LUCI -12) is a mixed density residential and commercial
 corridor with enhanced neighborhood- serving commercial uses and access to transit within a comfortable
 walking distance from the homes on the corridor and adjacent single-family neighborhoods. It provides          an
 attractive image and identity of Vista from its gateway on the north end of East Way at the City's border.
 EXISTING CONDITIONS: The East Vista Way Opportunity Area ( OA -6) is located on East Vista Way from
just south of West Taylor Street on the west side of East Vista Way to just north of Warmlands Avenue.
 Property in this area is a mix of underutilized commercial development, multi -family residential
 development, and vacant land.         Infrastructure on East Vista Way is under -improved in this area, including
 inadequate street width for the street designation and a lack of sidewalks, curbs, and gutters. This area is
 also a northern gateway to the City.
 PROPOSED PLAN:            Property identified in OA -6 ( shown on Figure LUCI- 3.2) has been redesignated from
 Neighborhood and General Commercial to Medium, Medium High, and High Density Residential to provide
 increased housing opportunities within walking distance of transit and community- serving commercial uses.
 Improvements proposed in the Circulation Element include widening East Vista Way to a 4 -lane undivided
 Major Arterial, the addition of a Class z bikeway, and installation of sidewalks on East Vista Way and Taylor
 Street. The attractiveness of OA -6 will be enhanced through installation of street trees and other landscape
 and hardscape, curbs, lighting that is scaled and oriented for pedestrians, and the undergrounding of
 utilities. Asa gateway from the north, entry treatment will be improved.
 OA -6 Policies:
            LUCI Policy OA -6. 3.:  Improve the streetscape by installing street trees and other landscape and
            hardscape, curbs, and lighting scaled and oriented for pedestrians.
            LUCI Policy OA -6. 2: Complete the widening and improvement of East Vista Way from Taylor Street
           to the northern City boundary, including installation of Class z bike lanes, bus stops, and continuous
            sidewalks.
  December 2011                                                                                           Page 2- 43
                                                                                                    vRAL P,
                                                                                                0
                                                                                                           G
                                                                                                  U----   TA,
 Land Use and Communityy Identityy Element                                                         2030
      LUCI Policy OA -6. 3:  Encourage redevelopment of certain properties from Neighborhood and
      General Commercial to Medium, Medium High, and High Density Residential to provide increased
      housing opportunities within walking distance of transit and community- serving commercial uses.
December 2011                                                                                  Page 2- 44
                                         Legend
                                                 Vista City Boundary
                           RR ®                  Opportunity Areas
                        1-                       Transit Stops
                                                 Transit Corridor
                                          1
                                                 Gateways
                     LD                   4-- 0- Enhanced Pedestrian
                                                 Connection
                                        Please refer to the City' s
                                      most current Land Use Map
                                      regarding land use categories.
            ML
                                                              r
                H
VJ
x
               MH
       fir°        i
                     CN
                CA
   MLa
4
                                                     N
               MH               CA     o     125 2.50
IN                                                    at
                                             Figure LUCI -12
                                   OA -6: East Vista Way

This page left intentionally blank
                                                                                                              vRAL P,
                                                                                                          0
                                                                                                                      G
                                                                                                             U----   TA,
   Land Use and Communityy Identityy Element                                                                 2030
OA -7: Civic Center Drive " Link"
VISION:     The Civic Center Drive " Link" ( Figure LUCI -13) is a mixed -use area that links the Downtown Vista
Specific Plan between its northeast and southeast ends. This opportunity area includes neighborhood- serving
mixed uses that provide additional housing opportunities within proximity to downtown Vista. In addition to
typical mixed -use development, the size and configuration of the lots make work /live units an appropriate
option.
EXISTING CONDITIONS: The Civic Center Drive " Link" Opportunity Area ( OA -7) is characterized by a mix
of single -family houses, some of which have converted to commercial uses, and small commercial
development. The new City Hall, at the intersection of Eucalyptus Avenue and Civic Center Drive, serves as
its northern terminus, while Sierra Verde Drive defines its southern end.        The streetscape is attractive and
utilities are underground.
PROPOSED PLAN: Properties in OA -7 ( shown on Figure LUCI -3.3) have been redesignated to Mixed Use to
provide increased housing opportunities close to Downtown Vista, City Hall, the library, community- serving
commercial uses, and the Civic Center Drive SPRINTER station. Due to the size of the parcels and the lower
intensity of adjacent land uses, a maximum density of 3o dwelling units per acre is proposed; this area also
would be conducive to a Live /Work type of mixed -use development. A Class z bikeway is proposed on Civic
Center Drive. Opportunities to increase the use of bus and SPRINTER transit by those who live and work on
or near OA -7 will be emphasized.
OA -7 Policies
          LUCI Policy OA -7. 3.:   Encourage redevelopment of properties from Neighborhood and General
          Commercial to neighborhood- serving Mixed Use and Live /Work development, with a maximum
          density of 3o dwelling units per acre, to provide increased housing opportunities within walking
          distance of Downtown Vista, City Hall, the library, transit, and community- serving commercial uses.
          LUCI Policy OA -7. 2:   Coordinate with NCTD to ensure that there is an adequate number of bus
          transit stops within a comfortable walking distance ( no more than 0. 25 -mile apart) of the residences
          along Civic Center Drive and from adjacent neighborhoods.
          LUCI Policy OA -7. 3:      Provide safe,  attractive, and   comfortable   bus stops; encourage direct
          pedestrian connections from the bus stops into adjacent development.
          LUCI Policy OA -7. 4: Provide continuous dedicated bike lanes along Civic Center Drive.
          LUCI Policy OA -7. 5:     Enhance and    improve linkages to the adjacent neighborhoods through
          distinctive paving, lighting, and signage.
 December 2011                                                                                            Page 2- 45
                                                                   vR A L P,
                                                               0
 Land Use and Community Identity Element                          2030
                           This page left intentionally blank.
December 2011                                                  Page 2- 46
MU
   IVA
                         r
             r
                          z
                 r
                             VAM
                     OR : -
         MDRNfN'
                   E
                                 r
                      r
                           l
                        J
       Pl-
           Y  /
                                   4
This page left intentionally blank
                                                                                                             vR A L P,
                                                                                                         0
                                                                                                                     G
                                                                                                            U----   TA,
    Land Use and Communityy Identityy Element                                                               2030
OA -8:      East Vista Way /         Foothill Drive
VISION:     The East Vista Way / Foothill Drive Opportunity Area ( Figure LUCI -14) is a community- serving area
that offers a variety of housing options within proximity of a major transit corridor and commercial uses, with
linkages to the Vista Transit Center south on East Vista Way and to the Melrose station on West Bobier Drive.
EXISTING CONDITIONS: The East Vista Way / Foothill Drive Opportunity Area ( OA -8) is located at the
intersection of East Vista Way, which serves the unincorporated County to the north and connects to the
Vista Village Transit Center in Downtown Vista to the southwest, and Foothill and East Bobier Drives, which
provide a connection to the Melrose SPRINTER station on the west. The area is characterized by a mix of
uses —including strip commercial development, Foothill Oak Elementary School, and a range of housing
types —and varying income levels. A portion of the opportunity area is within the Vineyards Specific Plan,
and a Work /Live development has been approved for the southeast corner of East Vista Way and Foothill
Drive. ( OA -8 has been designated as a potential Community Center per the Concept Map).
PROPOSED PLAN: No changes to land use designations have been made to OA -8 ( shown on Figure LUCI -
3-4); instead, intensifying development at the East Vista Way /        Foothill Drive intersection to promote
compact, integrated pedestrian- and transit -supportive development will be encouraged.            Improvements
proposed in the Circulation Element that affect OA -8 include widening East Vista Way to a divided 6 -1ane
Urban Major Arterial south of Foothill Drive and to an undivided 4 -1ane Major Arterial north of Foothill Drive.
A Class z bikeway on Foothill Drive east of East Vista Way is planned. Improved pedestrian accessibility and
neighborhood linkages are proposed via sidewalks on East Vista Way south of Foothill Drive and on Foothill
Drive east of East Vista Way.
OA -8 Policies
          LUCI Policy OA -8. 3.: Intensify development at the East Vista Way /     Foothill Drive intersection to
          promote compact, integrated development that is pedestrian- and transit -supportive.
          LUCI Policy OA -8. 2: Enhance and improve linkages to the adjacent neighborhoods by installing
          sidewalks, distinctive paving, lighting, and signage.
 December 2011                                                                                           Page 2- 47

                                                                   vR A L P,
                                                               0
 Land Use and Community Identity Element                          2030
                           This page left intentionally blank.
December 2011                                                  Page 2- 48
O
ON6
 O
 Y
  U
 Y
  NO
   O6N
   N6
   Y
                           Figure LUCI -14
       OA -8: East Vista Way /Foothill Drive
This page left intentionally blank
                                                                                                             vRAL P,
                                                                                                         0
                                                                                                                     G
                                                                                                            U----   TA,
   Land Use and Communityy Identityy Element                                                                2030
OA -9:      Buena Creek Station
VISION: The Buena Creek Station Opportunity Area ( Figure LUCI -15) is a community -serving area that offers a
variety of housing options, from Rural Residential to Very High Density residential densities, within proximity of
the Buena Creek SPRINTER station.
EXISTING CONDITIONS: The Buena Creek Station Opportunity Area ( OA -9) is within the City' s SOI near
the City' s border at Sycamore Avenue. It has been designated as a potential Community Center per the
SANDAG Smart Growth Concept Plan ( SANDAL CN 4). Anchored by the Buena Creek SPRINTER station,
OA -9 provides an opportunity to serve the east and southeast portions of Vista and its SOI.
PROPOSED PLAN: Due to its proximity to the Buena Creek SPRINTER station and SANDAG' s designation
as a potential Community Center, the City has designated certain property in this portion of its SOI as
Medium High Density and Very High Density Residential, and will pre -zone it accordingly. Further, the City
will cooperate with San Diego County regarding future improvements to South Santa Fe Avenue to ensure
the realignment of Sycamore Avenue and Robelini Drive, as well as the inclusion of pedestrian -, bicycle -, and
transit -supportive amenities and connections to the SPRINTER Station and proposed rail trail.
OA -9 Policies
          LUCI Policy OA -9. 3.: Pre -zone certain property to Medium High and Very High Density Residential in
          this opportunity area.
          LUCI Policy OA -9. 2:   Cooperate with San Diego County regarding future improvements to South
          Santa Fe Avenue to ensure the realignment of Sycamore Avenue and Robelini                Drive and the
          inclusion of pedestrian, bicycle, and transit supportive amenities.
          LUCI Policy OA -9. 3: Improve the pedestrian and transit connections between OA -9 and the major
          retail uses on Sycamore Avenue in the area of University and Shadowridge Drives, and between OA-
          9 and the Vista Business Park.
          LUCI Policy OA -94 Enhance connections to the proposed rail trail.
 December 2011                                                                                           Page 2- 49
                                                                   vR A L P,
                                                               0
 Land Use and Community Identity Element                          2030
                           This page left intentionally blank.
December 2011                                                  Page 2- 50
                        CA
                       MLD              r
0                                                                          HD
                                          MLD
                                              A119 i-7
     0
          Legend
             4 Sprinter
            Il    Sprinter Stations
                                                                 i      a
          UJ Vista City Boundary
                  SANDAG Smart
                  Growth Areas
0                 Transit Stops
NNN00m       pP
                  Transit Corridor
                  School
     0ITI
     U
                  Proposed Bike/
                  Pedestrian Trail
U
     0    Fr Enhanced Pedestrian
                  Connection
                                                                        500f • -
            Please refer to the City' s
          most current Land Use Map
                                              r$              o1  250_.          I, ono
          regarding land use categories.                                Feet
     Y
                                                                     Figure LUCI -15
                                                       OA -9: Buena Creek Station

This page left intentionally blank
                                                                                                             vRAL P,
                                                                                                         0
                                                                                                                     G
                                                                                                            U----   TA,
   Land Use and Communityy dentity Element                                                                  2030
OA -io:       North County Regional Center /                   Breeze Hill Road
VISION:      The North County Regional Center / Breeze Hill Road Opportunity Area ( Figure LOCI -16) provides
employment,
                  housing,  neighborhood -serving,    educational, and  governmental     uses within  a  walkable
community district. This complement of uses in a compact area close to public transit, bicycle and pedestrian
trails, and SR -78 makes it a convenient and desirable location for people to live and work.
EXISTING       CONDITIONS:        This opportunity area is anchored by the North County Regional Center,
commercial properties at the intersection of West Vista Way and Melrose Drive, office and commercial
property on Melrose Drive, and multi -family residential property on Breeze Hill Road. The North County
Regional Center is a full service County branch court that supports most of northern San Diego County.
Melrose Drive is a Major Arterial with median landscaping and utilities that have been placed underground.
A portion of this opportunity area is implemented by Specific Plan No. 6. In addition, a portion of OA- 3.o has
been designated as a potential Community Center per the SANDAG Smart Growth Concept Plan ( VS 2).
OA- 3. o crosses SR -78 at Melrose Drive.
PROPOSED PLAN:           Certain property in OA- 3.o ( shown on Figure LUCI -3.6) has been redesignated to Mixed
Use to provide increased housing opportunities within walking distance of the North County Regional
Center, which is a major employer in the area.         The Mixed Use designation also preserves the commercial
and service uses that support the nearby neighborhoods. Walkability and access to transit will be improved,
as will connections to the proposed bike /pedestrian trail along Buena Vista Creek south of SR -78 and the
North County Regional Center.           Improvements proposed in the Circulation Element include widening
Melrose Drive to a divided 6 -lane Urban Major Arterial and completing the Class z bikeway on Melrose Drive.
Consideration will be given to ensuring that there are sufficient number of places for pedestrians to cross
Melrose Drive safely and conveniently. Gateway treatments will be improved to enhance this opportunity
area as a gateway into Vista from the westbound SR -78 exit onto Melrose Drive.
OA -10 Policies
           LUCI Policy OA- 3.o. 3.:   Promote construction of Mixed Use development to provide increased
           housing and commercial opportunities within walking distance of the North County Regional
           Center.
           LUCI Policy OA- 3.o. 2: Enhance walkability in the area through enhanced pedestrian amenities, such
           as street trees, distinctive paving, lighting, benches, and signage.    Evaluate whether the extensive
           berms in the area are impeding easy pedestrian access to the North County Regional Center and, if
           so, work with the County to determine if additional access points could be created without
           compromising security at the County facility.
 December 2011                                                                                           Page 2- 51
                                                                                                     @RAZ
 Land Use and Community Identity Element                                                            2030
      LUCI Policy OA -3.o. 3: Complete the Class z bikeway connection on Melrose Drive.
      LUCI Policy OA -3.o. 4: Enhance the connection from Melrose Drive to the proposed rural and urban
      bike and pedestrian trail south of SR -78.
      LUCI Policy OA -3.o. 5: Enhance OA- 3.o as a gateway into Vista from the eastbound SR -78 exit onto
      Melrose Drive by installing entry signage, landscaping, and /or other gateway treatments.
December 2011                                                                                   Page 2- 52
   1
                                                      V!,
                                                          Wn
                           I                                                                            As           tip]
       78
                                                                             tie]
                                                      1
                                  jRegional.
                                    North County
                                             Cen ter.
                                                        '
                                                GA
                           CA
                                                                                                       Legend
     MH©
3                                                                       CO                            r J Vista City Boundary
9
                                                                                                                  Opportunity Areas
                                           MV
                         2                                                                              l    7 SANDAG Smart
                                                                                                                  Growth Areas
                    MH D          d                                                                              Transit Stops
                                                                                                                 Transit Corridor
a'  MLa
              LD                                                         CO
                                            MU                                                                    Gateways
                                                                                                          s       School
                                                                                    ML'D                     0    Opportunity Area ( Buena
                                                      CJ                                                         Vista Creek Master Plan)
                N
                                                                                                                  Proposed Bike/
                                                                                                                  Pedestrian Trail
jCA                                                                                                              Enhanced
     0    I50 500            1, 000                                                                              Pedestrian Crossing
                                                                                                              Please refer to the City' s
3
                                                                                                            most current Land Use Map
              FC'@i                                                                                         regarding land use categories.
r
                                                                      v
                                                                                                                   FigureFigure LUCILUCI
                                                                                                                                       - - 1616
                                         OAOA
                                           - - 10:10: NorthNorth CountyCounty RegionalRegional CenterCenter
                                                                                                     / / BreezeBreeze HillHill RoadRoad

This page left intentionally blank
