CHAPTER 2
SAFETY ELEMENT
Table of Contents
INTRODUCTION
Safety Element Statutory Requirements                                      1
Relationship to other General Plan Elements and Program EIR                1
GOALS, OBJECTIVES & POLICIES
Emergency Preparedness Goals, Objectives and Policies                      2
Safety/hazardous mitigation Goals, Objectives and Policies                 4
RELATED AGENCIES, LAWS AND PLANS
California Environmental Quality Act                                       5
Colbey-Alquist Floodplain Management Act                                   5
Alquist-Priolo Earthquake Fault Zoning ACT                                 5
Seismic Hazards Mapping Act                                                6
Landslide Hazard Identification Program                                    6
Federal Clean Air Act                                                      6
City of Duarte Natural Hazard Mitigation Plan                              6
Unified Hazardous Waste and Hazardous Materials Management
        Regulatory Program                                                 7
OVERVIEW OF DUARTE’S SAFETY ISSUES
Fire Hazards                                                               8
State Department of Conservation                                           9
Seismic Hazards                                                           11
Geologic Hazards                                                          11
Flood Hazards                                                             11
Hazardous Materials Management                                            15
Emergency Preparedness                                                    15
Law enforcement                                                           15
Fire Services                                                             16
Peakload Water Supply                                                     16
IMPLEMENTATION MEASURES                                                   17
SAFETY ELEMENT DEFINITIONS                                                19
Safety Element                           i           Duarte General Plan 2005-2020
Table of Contents

CHAPTER 2
SAFETY ELEMENT
List of Tables
Safe – 1 “Safety Element Implementation Measures”                       18
List of Diagrams
Safe – 1 “Wildfire land”                                                10
Safe – 2 “Fault Lines”                                                  12
Safe – 3 “Landslide and Liquefaction”                                   13
Safe – 4 “Flood Inundation”                                             14
Safety Element                        ii          Duarte General Plan 2005-2020
Table of Contents

CHAPTER 2
SAFETY ELEMENT
INTRODUCTION
The aim of the Safety Element is to reduce the potential risk of death, injuries,
property damage, and economic and social dislocation resulting from fires,
floods, earthquakes, landslides, and other hazards. Other locally relevant safety
issues, such as emergency response, hazardous materials spills, and crime
reduction, may also be included.         The safety element overlaps topics also
mandated in the land use, conservation, and open-space elements. Safety
Element Definitions are provided at the end of this document.
Safety Element Statutory Requirements
State law requires that every city and county within California adopt “a safety
element for the protection of the community from any unreasonable risks
associated with the effects of seismically induced surface rupture, ground
shaking, ground failure, tsunami, seiche, and dam failure; slope instability leading
to mudslides and landslides; subsidence, liquefaction and other seismic hazards
identified pursuant to Chapter 7.8 (commencing with Section 2690) of the Public
Resources Code, and other geologic hazards known to the legislative body;
flooding; and wild land and urban fires. The safety element shall include
mapping of known seismic and other geologic hazards. It shall also address
evacuation routes, military installations, peakload water supply requirements, and
minimum road widths and clearances around structures, as those items relate to
identified fire and geologic hazards…”
Relationship to other General Plan Elements and Program EIR
California law requires that all elements of the General Plan be consistent. While
all of the General Plan Elements are independent, they are also interrelated,
some more so than others. As an example certain goals and policies of one
element may also address items that are primary issues of other elements. This
integration of issues throughout the General Plan creates a strong basis for the
implementation of plans, programs and achievement of community goals. The
Safety Element is most directly related to Land Use, Circulation, Conservation
and Open Space Elements.
A Program Environmental Impact Report (EIR) will be part of the 2005-2020
Duarte General Plan. Policies within the Safety Element will also become
mitigation measures within the Program EIR.
Safety Element, August 2007                1            Duarte General Plan 2005-2020

CHAPTER 2
SAFETY ELEMENT
GOALS, OBJECTIVES AND POLICIES
This section provides draft Goals, Objectives, and Policies for the Safety Element
of the Duarte General Plan. Implementation measures for these policies are at
the end of this chapter. The most likely natural or man-made disasters likely to
strike Duarte are associated with wildfires and seismic and geologic hazards. To
minimize the risk from these hazards, the following goal and policies will be
implemented over the life of the plan.
Emergency Preparedness Goals, Objectives and Policies
Safety Goal 1:         To protect the citizens, their property and public facilities
from natural and man- made hazards.
Objective 1.1          Prepare the community for any expected or unexpected
                       disasters resulting from natural or man-made causes.
Policies
        Safe 1.1.1     Implement Section 11 (Multi-Hazard Goals and Action Items)
                       of the City of Duarte Natural Hazards Mitigation Plan which
                       would enable the city to operate in a self sufficient manner
                       following a natural or man-made disaster.
        Safe 1.1.2     Support community programs that train volunteers to assist
                       police, fire, and civil defense personnel to perform
                       effectively after the occurrence of a natural or man-made
                       disaster.
        Safe 1.1.3     Expand and intensify precautionary measures in high risk
                       areas to reduce loss from natural or man-made disasters.
        Safe 1.1.4     Enforce requirements that all development proposals be
                       reviewed in order that they may be analyzed for safety
                       implications.
        Safe 1.1.5     Provide adequate levels of service to ensure the public is
                       protected from natural and man-made disasters.
        Safe 1.1.6     Cooperate with federal, state, and county agencies
                       responsible for the enforcement of all health, safety, and
                       environmental laws.
Safety Element, August 2007                 2              Duarte General Plan 2005-2020
CHAPTER 2
SAFETY ELEMENT
Safety Goal 2:         To establish, maintain, and develop an awareness on the
part of all citizens of Duarte how to react, protect themselves and each other, as
well as how to survive in the event of a natural or man-made disaster or danger.
Objective 2.1          Prepare the citizens of Duarte to be prepared for danger or
                       disaster and, if need be to be self reliant for a length of time
                       in the event of a catastrophic natural or man-made event.
Policies:
        Safe 2.1.1     Establish and support all appropriate media for reaching all
                       segments of the community (English-speaking and non-
                       English speaking) to educate residents concerning
                       emergency preparedness and safety.
        Safe 2.1.2     Present or support an on-going series of community
                       meetings or seminars, and a community handbook on
                       disaster preparedness and procedures. The program should
                       be about minimizing hazards in the home, and precautions
                       to be taken after the occurrence of an earthquake.
        Safe 2.1.3     Establish a citizens notification system regarding natural or
                       man made hazards through AM Radio.
        Safe 2.1.4     The City will work closely with adjacent cities, Department of
                       Fish and Game, County Animal Control, Sheriffs Department
                       and monitor, inform and communicate to residents and
                       schools the presence of wild animals in human habitat areas
                       (including bear, coyote and mountain lion).
Safety Goal 3:         To achieve a greater sense of citizen satisfaction with the
safety services within the community, through constantly monitoring the effective
and efficient staffing of safety service personnel, while alternately considering the
desirability of consolidating all safety services into a single entity.
Objective 3.1          Communicate with Duarte citizens, through all available
                       media, that their safety personnel are current on all aspects
                       of community safety and prepared to effectively assist when
                       needed.
Policies:
        Safe 3.1.1     Maintain high levels of emergency services and monitor
                       safety services annually and evaluate safety services
Safety Element, August 2007                 3               Duarte General Plan 2005-2020
CHAPTER 2
SAFETY ELEMENT
                       alternatives. Review, on an annual basis, the effectiveness
                       of safety services relying on citizen input.
Safety/hazardous mitigation Goals, Objectives and Policies The following
goals (4-6) and supporting policies express the city's concern regarding risks to
citizens involving seismic, fire, and hazardous materials disasters.
Safety Goal 4:         To minimize the risks to lives and property due to seismic
activity.
Objective 4.1          Implement Section 6 (Earthquake Mitigation Action Items)
                       and Section 11 (Multi-Hazard Goals and Action Items) of the
                       Natural Hazards Mitigation Plan.
Policies:
        Safe 4.1.1     Restrict development in areas prone to seismic safety
                       hazards.
        Safe 4.1.2     New construction directly astride or across known active
                       faults, or fault zones, should be regulated.
Safety Goal 5:         To minimize the risk to lives and property due to fire
hazards.
Objective 5.1          Implement Section 7 (Wildfire Mitigation Action Items)
                       and Section 11 (Multi-Hazard Goals and Action Items) of the
                       Natural Hazards Mitigation Plan as updated from time to
                       time though the course of this General Plan.
Policies:
        Safe 5.1.1     Continue to support "mutual assistance" agreements
                       between the fire departments of the local cities, Los Angeles
                       County, and the U.S. Government.
        Safe 5.1.2     Continue to support programs to reduce fire hazards of
                       vegetation in areas of extreme to high fire risk. Such
                       programs may take a variety of forms, but may include weed
                       and brush removal and control and use of fire resistant
                       plantings.
        Safe 5.1.3     Provide an adequate level of fire equipment, peakload water
                       supply and personnel to protect the community.
Safety Element, August 2007                  4              Duarte General Plan 2005-2020
CHAPTER 2
SAFETY ELEMENT
Safety Goal 6:         To minimize the risks to lives and property due to the use
and storage of hazardous materials.
Objective 6.1          Reduce the possibility of hazardous materials becoming a
                       health and safety issue within the community.
Policies:
         Safe 6.1.1    Monitor to the greatest extent possible the location of
                       hazardous materials that could adversely impact Duarte
                       residents, and businesses.
         Safe 6.1.2    Regulate the delivery, use, and storage of hazardous
                       materials within the city limits according to regulations and
                       guidelines set forth by the Los Angeles County Fire
                       Department.
RELATED AGENCIES, LAWS AND PLANS
The following existing laws, plans and programs relate to the goals of the Duarte Safety
Element. These laws, plans and programs, enacted through state and local action, are
administered by various agencies with responsibility for their enforcement.
California Environmental Quality Act
The California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) was adopted by the state legislature in
response to a public mandate for a thorough environmental analysis of projects that
might adversely affect the environment. The provisions of the law, review procedure and
any subsequent analysis are described in the CEQA Statutes and Guidelines as
amended in 1998. Safety hazards, as well as noise and air quality impacts are
recognized as environmental impacts under CEQA.
Colbey-Alquist Floodplain Management Act
The Colbey-Alquist Floodplain Management Act encourages local governments to plan,
adopt and enforce land use regulations for floodplain management, in order to protect
people and property from flooding hazards. This act also identifies requirements which
jurisdictions must meet in order to receive state financial assistance for flood control.
Alquist-Priolo Earthquake Fault Zoning ACT
The Alquist-Priolo Earthquake Fault Zoning Act requires the state Geologist to identify
earthquake fault zones along traces of both recently and potentially active major faults.
Cities and counties that contain such zones must inform the public regarding zone
location.
Safety Element, August 2007                  5                Duarte General Plan 2005-2020
CHAPTER 2
SAFETY ELEMENT
Seismic Hazards Mapping Act
Pursuant to the Seismic Hazards Mapping Act, the state Geologist compiles maps
identifying seismic hazard zones. Development in seismic hazard areas is subject to
policies and criteria established by the State Mining and Geology Board. Additionally,
approval of development on a site within a seismic hazard area mandates the
preparation of a geotechnical report and local agency consideration of compliance with
applicable state requirements.
Landslide Hazard Identification Program
The Landslide Hazard Identification Program requires the state Geologist to prepare
maps of landslide hazards within urbanizing areas.
Federal Clean Air Act
The Federal Clean Air Act established National Ambient Air Quality Standards (NAAQS)
in 1970 for six pollutants: carbon monoxide, ozone, particulates, nitrogen dioxide, sulfur
dioxide, and lead. The Act requires states with air pollution that exceeds the NAAQS to
prepare air quality plans demonstrating how the standards would be met (State
Implementation Plans-SIPs). In 1990, amendments to the Act established categories of
severity for non-attainment areas (“marginal” to “extreme”). In 1994, the California Air
Resources Board adopted a revised State Implementation Plan for ozone to meet the
requirements of the 1990 amendments.
City of Duarte Natural Hazard Mitigation Plan
In August of 2004 the Duarte City Council approved Resolution No. 04-18
adopting Natural Hazards Mitigation Plan of 2004 in accordance with the Federal
Disaster Mitigation Act of 2000. This plan established goals and objectives to
ensure health, safety, and welfare of Duarte citizens, even in the event of a
natural disaster. The plan was a result of a process involving city departments,
local agencies, business people, landowners, developers, and citizens, and
reflects local values and concerns.
The City of Duarte Natural Hazard Mitigation Plan adopted the following Goals:
Protect Life and Property
            • Identify natural and manmade hazards that threaten life and
                property in the City of Duarte.
            • Implement programs and projects that assist in protecting lives by
                making infrastructure, critical facilities, and other property more
                resistant to losses from all hazards.
            • Protect life and property by adopting state-of-the-art standards,
                codes, and construction procedures.
Safety Element, August 2007                  6               Duarte General Plan 2005-2020

CHAPTER 2
SAFETY ELEMENT
           •    Improve hazard assessment information to make recommendations
                for encouraging preventive measures for existing development in
                areas vulnerable to natural hazards.
Increase Public Awareness
           • Increase public awareness of existing threats and the means to
                reduce these threats by conducting educational and outreach
                programs to all the various community groups in the City.
           •    Provide informational brochures, partnership opportunities, and
                funding resource information to assist in implementing mitigation
                activities.
Strengthen Partnerships
           • Strengthen communication and coordinated participation among
                public agencies, residents, organizations, businesses and
                industries to aid in the implementation of mitigation measures.
           • Encourage leadership within the public and the private sectors to
                promote and implement local hazard mitigation activities.
City Emergency Services
           • Establish policy to ensure the importance of mitigation programs
                and projects for critical facilities, services, and infrastructure.
           • Continue providing emergency services with training and
                equipment to address all identified hazards.
           • Continue developing and strengthening coordination and
                cooperation among the various emergency service agencies.
Environmental
           • Balance land use planning, natural resource planning and
                watershed management, with natural hazard mitigation measures
                to protect life, property, and the environment.
           • Preserve existing natural systems and enhance man-made
                systems to promote natural hazard mitigation programs.
Unified Hazardous Waste and Hazardous Materials Management Regulatory
Program
The Los Angeles County Fire Department Health Haz Mat Division administers
the Unified Hazardous Waste and Hazardous Materials Management Regulatory
Program for the City of Duarte.
Senate Bill 1082 (1993) established the "Unified Hazardous Waste and
Safety Element, August 2007                  7                Duarte General Plan 2005-2020

CHAPTER 2
SAFETY ELEMENT
Hazardous Materials Management Regulatory Program". The Unified Program
consolidates, coordinates, and makes consistent the following hazardous
materials and hazardous waste programs (Program Elements):
     •  Hazardous Waste Generation (including onsite treatment under Tiered
        Permitting),
     •  Aboveground Petroleum Storage Tanks (only the Spill Prevention Control
        and Countermeasure Plan or "SPCC"),
     •  Underground Storage Tanks (USTs),
     •  Hazardous Material Release Response Plans and Inventories,
     •  California Accidental Release Prevention Program (Cal ARP), and,
     •  Uniform Fire Code Hazardous Material Management Plans                    and
        Inventories.
OVERVIEW OF DUARTE’S SAFETY ISSUES
Fire Hazards
Duarte’s location at the base of the San Gabriel Mountains creates an
urban/wildland interface that makes Duarte more susceptible to wildfires than
cities that do not border the foothills. When surveys were mailed to Duarte
residents and businesses in preparation of this Natural Hazard Mitigation Plan,
many residents expressed their concern that wildfires pose the “highest threat “
to their home. This was particularly true of residents living north of Royal Oaks
Drive who reside closest to urban/wildland interface areas. Several of the
surveys expressed a concern that Duarte could experience another fire like the
Stable Fire that occurred in 1980.
Historic Wildfires in the City of Duarte
1953 Duarte Fire
This fire originated between Spinks Canyon and Maddock Canyon in wildland
area. A total of 561 acres burned in this fire. Of the 561 acres that burned, 256
acres were considered within the “Duarte area”.
1958 Norum Fire
This fire burned in the foothills north of Monrovia, Duarte, Bradbury, and Azusa.
A total of 6,440 acres burned in the Norum Fire. Of the 6,440 acres, 2,505 acres
of land were within Duarte’s boundaries. (Mostly wilderness areas).
Safety Element, August 2007                8            Duarte General Plan 2005-2020

CHAPTER 2
SAFETY ELEMENT
1980 Stable Fire
On November, 16, 1980 a fire storm that had been fanned by Santa Ana Wind
conditions swept down from the foothills and destroyed 35 homes in the City of
Duarte and 14 homes in the City of Bradbury. Reports indicated that the fire had
moved from the City of Azusa, east of the San Gabriel River to the Duarte and
Bradbury homes in 8 to 10 minutes, due to a strong shift in winds.
Immediately after the fire, city and county personnel began taking measures to
deal with the devastation. A Disaster Assistance Center was established at City
Hall and Federal and State agencies were contacted for help. The Los Angeles
County Fire District set up a mobile command center and the City set up an
emergency shelter. In the weeks that followed the fire, the City established
several programs to deal with possible floods and mudslides that could occur due
to the bare slopes where all vegetation had been burned off.         Mud diversion
structures were constructed, 50,000 sandbags were distributed, and parking was
restricted on streets with potential slides. Since the Stable Fire occurred during
California’s rainy season, “Storm Watch” flyers were also issued to residents in
Duarte’s hillside areas. The Disaster Center at City Hall monitored weather
reports and storm situations and kept residents informed of these situations. City
staff was also prepared to mobilize personnel and equipment if needed to clear
mud flows from the public streets and parkways. As quickly as possible, several
temporary debris basins were constructed and existing debris basins were
cleared and reinforced with sandbags. Parts of Duarte are still susceptible to
wildfires as shown on Diagram Safe – 1.
State Department of Conservation
State law requires the Division of Mines and Geology of the Department of
Conservation and the Office of Emergency Services be consulted for the purpose
of including information known by and available to the department in the General
Plan. Robert H. Sydnor, the Senior Engineering Geologist for the California
Geological Survey, of the Department of Conservation, computed Earthquake
Ground Motion for Duarte. The Earthquake Ground Motion report along with an
Engineering Geology and Seismology Bibliography for the City of Duarte can be
found in the General Plan Background/Existing Conditions Report. Mr. Sydnor’s
calculations show that residential & commercial buildings in Duarte can use the
standard default earthquake values found in the Uniform Building Code.
However, public schools are plan checked by the State Division of State Architect
who reviews and approves the plans. Hospital plans are reviewed and approved
by the Office of Statewide Health Planning and Development. As with public
schools, hospitals use higher earthquake values applied by structural engineers
consistent with the Earthquake Ground Motion report provided by Mr. Sydnor.
Safety Element, August 2007                9            Duarte General Plan 2005-2020

                                                                                                                                                                              ANGELES
                                                                                                                                                                              NATIONAL
                                                                                                                                                                               FOREST
                                                                                                                       !
                                                                                                                       (
                                                                                                                       !
                                                                                                                       (
                                                                                                                       EE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Wildfire Risk Areas Diagram
                                                                                                                            !
                                                                                                                            (
                                                                                                                            M
                                                                                                                            H                                                                                                                                                                                                 Diagram Safe - 1
                                                                                                                            !
                                                                                                                            (
                                                                                                                            L
                                                                                                                                                                                                     !
                                                                                                                                                                                                     (
                                                                                                                                                                                                     E
                                                                                                   (
                                                                                                   g
                                                                                                   &
                                                                                                   %               (
                                                                                                                   o
                                                                                                                   &
                                                                                                                   %
                                                                                                                                BRADBURY
                                                                                                                                                 Overview Map
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     H
                                                                                                                                                                               BRADBURY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         LAS LOMAS RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        L
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ROYAL OAKS DR           LEGEND
                                                                   MONROVIA                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           City Limits
                                                                                     MOUNTAIN AV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                (
                                                                                                                                                                                   ROYAL OAKS DR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Extremely High Fire Hazard
                                                                                                                                                                                                          MT OLIVE DR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                E
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      AZUSA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                H      High Fire Hazard
                                                                                                       HUNTINGTON DR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                L      Low Fire Hazard
                                                                                                                                                                HIGHLAND AV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        HU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             NT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  IN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       GT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ON
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 DR
                                                                       CENTRAL AV                                                                                                                                       CENTRAL AV
                                                                                                                                                      (
                                                                                                                                                      g
                                                                                                                                                      &
                                                                                                                                                      %                                             (
                                                                                                                                                                                                    o
                                                                                                                                                                                                    &
                                                                                                                                                                                                    %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Source: City of Duarte - June 2006
                                                                         DUARTE RD
M:mdata/10104371/basemap_24X36_Wildfire.mxd DiagramSafe-1.pdf KO
                                                                                                                                BUENA VISTA ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Feet
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0        950       1,900         3,800
                                                                                                                                                                                              IRWINDALE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          July 10, 2006
CHAPTER 2
SAFETY ELEMENT
Seismic Hazards
Duarte is within the Sierra Madre, Duarte, and Lower Duarte faults. On May 25,
2005, the Southern California Earthquake Center reported: “A temblor on the
Puente Hills fault might kill up to 18,000 people, new computer models predict.
But it may not hit for 3,000 years. The northern boundary of the Puente Hills fault
zone includes Duarte and could destroy 11% - 40% of the building in a 7.5
magnitude earthquake. Diagram Safe – 2 identifies sections of the Sierra Madre
Fault in proximity to the City of Duarte.
Geologic Hazards
There are geologic conditions within and around Duarte that cause problems if
proper precautions are not taken. The northeast mountainous areas of the City
are generally too steep and bedrock is too unstable for typical construction.
Erosion, landslides and shaking from earthquakes can be severe hazards within
these areas. Diagram Safe – 3 identified the portions of Duarte susceptible to
landslide and liquefaction.
Flood Hazards
The Federal Emergency Management Administration has not mapped Duarte
and no part of the City is within the 100 year flood plain. Three major dams in
the upper watershed of the San Gabriel River provide flood protection for the City
of Duarte. Two of these dams, Cogswell Dam and San Gabriel Dam, were built
in San Gabriel Canyon between 1934 and 1937 respectively. A third dam,
known as Morris Dam was constructed in 1934 by the City of Pasadena. There
is a fairly low possibly for a severe earthquake to cause flooding due to the
failure of Morris, San Gabriel and/or Cogswell dams.
Diagram Safe - 4 (Flood Inundation Areas) shows how long it would take for flood
waters to reach different parts of Duarte in the unlikely possibility of a flood.
Should this happen flood waters would last about one hour then recede.
The City of Duarte entered the National Flood Insurance Program on September
7, 1984. The City was given a Community Panel Number (#065026) however,
there have been no Flood Insurance Studies (FIS) completed by NFIP for the
City of Duarte, to date. The flood hazard zone designation for the City of Duarte
is “Zone D”. The Zone D designation on NFIP maps is used for areas where
there are possible but undetermined flood hazards. In areas designated as Zone
D, no analysis of flood hazards has been conducted. Mandatory flood insurance
Safety Element, August 2007               11           Duarte General Plan 2005-2020

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Fault Lines
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Diagram Safe-2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  LEGEND
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         City Limits
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Roads
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Raymond fault
                                                                                                                  ANGELES                                                                                                Sierra Madre fault zone, Clamshell-Sawpit section
                                                                                                                  NATIONAL                                                                                               Sierra Madre fault zone, Sierra Madre C section
                                                                                                                      FOREST                                                                                             Sierra Madre fault zone, Sierra Madre D section
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Source: City of Duarte - June 2006
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          USGS Earth Quake Hazards Program
                                                                                                              BRADBURY
                                                                                                                                                             LAS LOMAS RD
                                                                                                                                                                                          ROYAL OAKS DR
                                               MONROVIA
                                                                                                                                ROYAL OAKS DR
                                                               MOUNTAIN AV
                                                                                                                                                                                                          AZUSA
                                                                                                                  HIGHLAND AV
                                                                                              HUNTINGTON DR
                                                                                                                                                                            HU
                                                                                                                                                                               NT
                                                                                                                                                                                  I   NG
                                                                                                                                                                                         TO
                                                  CENTRAL AV                                                                                                                               N
                                                                                                              (
                                                                                                              g
                                                                                                              &
                                                                                                              %                                 CENTRAL AV                                     DR
                                            DUARTE RD
                                                                                                                                         (
                                                                                                                                         o
                                                                                                                                         &
                                                                                                                                         %
                                                                             BUENA VISTA ST
                                                                                                                                        IRWINDALE
M:mdata/10104371/basemap_24X36_Faults.mxD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Feet
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0          2,000       4,000                     8,000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               July 11, 2006

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Diagram Safe - 4
                                                                                                                             ANGELES
                                                                                                                             NATIONAL
                                                                                                                              FOREST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         LEGEND
                                                                                                                  BRADBURY                                                                                                 20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  City Limits
                                                                                                                                                                   LAS LOMAS RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                      30         ROYAL OAKS DR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Elapsed time in minutes from
                                                  MONROVIA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          35
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  dam failure to arrival of first water
                                                                                                                                 ROYAL OAKS DR
                                                                MOUNTAIN AV
                                                                                                                                                                                                       San Gabriel
                                                                                                                                                                                  35                    Reservoir                AZUSA
                                                                                                                                                 40                                                                                      Source: City of Duarte - June 2006
                                                                                                        HUNTINGTON DR
                                                                                                                                                                                       HU
                                                                                                                                                                                          N   TI
                                                                                                                                                                                                 N   GT
                                                       CENTRAL AV                                                                                                                                      ON
                                                                                                              (
                                                                                                              g
                                                                                                              &
                                                                                                              %                                  (
                                                                                                                                                 o
                                                                                                                                                 &
                                                                                                                                                 %    CENTRAL AV                                            DR
DiagramSafe-4_GIS.pdf ko
                                                                                               Sawpit
                                                   DUARTE RD
                                                                                                Dam
                                                                                                         20
data/10104371/basemap_24X36_FloodInundation.mxd
                                                                              BUENA VISTA ST                                             IRWINDALE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Feet
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0   700 1,400     2,800   4,200
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    July 10, 2006
CHAPTER 2
SAFETY ELEMENT
purchase requirements do not apply, but coverage is available. The flood
insurance rates for properties in Zone D are commensurate with the uncertainty
of the flood risk.
Hazardous Materials Management
The Los Angeles County Fire Department Health Haz Mat Division administers
the Unified Hazardous Waste and Hazardous Materials Management Regulatory
Program for the City of Duarte. Refer to page 6 of this chapter to find more about
the “City of Duarte Natural Hazard Mitigation Plan” which addresses hazardous
materials within the city.
Emergency Preparedness
In August of 2004 the Duarte City Council approved the Natural Hazards
Mitigation Plan of 2004 in accordance with the Federal Disaster Mitigation Act of
2000. This plan established goals and objectives to ensure health, safety, and
welfare of Duarte citizens, even in the event of a natural disaster. The plan was
a result of a process involving city departments, local agencies, business people,
landowners, developers, and citizens, and reflects local values and concerns.
Refer to page 6 and 7 of this chapter to find out more about the “City of Duarte
Natural Hazard Mitigation Plan” which addresses emergency preparedness.
There are no above or below ground petroleum storage facilities in Duarte other
than those used by service stations and individual businesses. City staff did not
have any information on pipelines within the city. Regarding other potential
hazardous condition, the Rancho Duarte Golf Course was formerly a landfill. The
City of Duarte owned this 18.5 acre golf course until about ten years ago. This
golf course is designated Open Space in the Open Space and Land Use
Elements.
Law enforcement
Police protection is provided by the Los Angeles County Sheriff out of the Duarte
Satellite Station. The Duarte Satellite Station is the launching center for 30 male
and female officers that begin and end their shift to provide Duarte, Bradbury and
the unincorporated area west of Duarte with law enforcement services 24 hours a
day. The station does not have dispatch or booking ability. Special Assignment
Deputies, including two Night Special Assignment Deputies, handle gang
identification, operations pertaining to narcotic sales, managing D.R.A.G.N.E.T.
Safety Element, August 2007               15              Duarte General Plan 2005-2020

CHAPTER 2
SAFETY ELEMENT
(Duarte Residents Against Graffiti Neighborhood Enhancement Team) and
overall trouble shooting of crimes that may be on the increase. A School
Resource Officer works pro-actively with Duarte schools to provide prevention,
intervention and suppression services. In addition to working with the schools,
this officer also assists in Duarte’s gang enforcement and D.A.R.T. Program.
Detective services and a variety of other services are provided by the Sheriff’s
office as prescribed by the contract between the City and County Sheriff.
Fire Services
Fire protection in the City of Duarte is provided by the Los Angeles County Fire
Department. Fire (LACFD) station 44 is located at 1105 S. Highland Avenue.
This station provides the following apparatus and personal including engines #
44, # 244, and # 544, patrol truck # 44, and water truck # 44. The station is
typically staffed by a seven member crew.
Los Angeles County Fire also provides Hazardous Material services. The U. S.
Forest Service in San Dimas provides wildfire service in the Angeles National
Forest.
Peakload Water Supply
Peakload water supply is defined as the supply of water available to meet both
domestic water and fire fighting needs during the particular season and time of
day when domestic water demand on a water system is at its peak. California –
American Water Company provides potable water to the Duarte service area
which includes about 300 metered connections in Bradbury and all of the
incorporated area of Duarte. Potable water is provided from eight wells in and
around Duarte.
The San Gabriel groundwater basin has been found to be contaminated with
volatile organic compounds (VOCs). A strategy for addressing the problem and
ultimately removing the contamination is being successfully implemented. In
1999, the California – American Water Company determined that the quality of
water from the Mountain Avenue Well, which has been out of service for many
years, has improved to the point where it meets State and Federal Drinking
Water Standards. The well equipment is proposed to be rehabilitated so the
facility can be placed back in service, increasing the areas groundwater
production capacity.
Storage in the Duarte Service Area is provided by 7 reservoirs and 4 steel tanks
with a total storage capacity of 11.2 million gallons, the equivalent of about
Safety Element, August 2007               16              Duarte General Plan 2005-2020

CHAPTER 2
SAFETY ELEMENT
175% of an average day’s supply. All of the reservoirs are covered to reduce
evaporation and control losses.
Peakload water supply on August 11, 2005 was 19.5 million gallons a day.
Peakload water demand is always highest during the hottest summer months
and is important to know so that adequate water is available in case of an
emergency.
IMPLEMENTATION MEASURES
Government Code 65400 requires the legislative body to consider and adopt
reasonable and practical means for implementing the general plan. This is
necessary so that the plan will serve as an effective guide for orderly growth and
development, preservation and conservation of open-space land and natural
resources, and the efficient expenditure of public funds relating to the subjects
addressed in the general plan. The State also requires an annual report to the
legislative body, State Department of Housing and Community Development
(HCD) and State Office of Planning and Research on the status of the plan and
progress in implementing the plan. HCD checks to see if the city is making
progress in meeting its fair share of regional housing needs.
This section provides an implementation matrix for policies found in the Safety
Chapter. The matrix identifies the policy to be implemented, the implementation
measure to be used for that policy, the responsible agency or department that
will be implementing the measure, the funding source and the estimated
timeframe to complete the implementation.
Responsible Agency:
        All = All Departments                    AS = Administrative Services
        CD = Community Development               PS = Public Safety
        CM = City Manager                        P&R = Parks and Recreation
Funding Source:
        GF = General Fund                        SF= State funds
        RA = Redevelopment Agency                FF = Federal Funds
         G = Grants                              OF = Other Funds
        DF = Development Fees
Implementation Timeframe (or as resources provide):
        ST = Short-term by 2009                  LT = Long Term by 2020
        MT = Mid-term by 2015                    On = Ongoing
Safety Element, August 2007              17             Duarte General Plan 2005-2020

    CHAPTER 2
    SAFETY ELEMENT
                                            Table Safe - 1
                          Safety Element Implementation Measures
                                                               Responsible    Funding       Time
Policy #     Implementation Measure                            Agency         Source        frame
Safe 1.1.1   Conduct periodic emergency exercises among        PS             GF            On
             city staff members and other key personnel and
             implement and update the city's emergency
             preparedness plan on an on-going basis.
Safe 1.1.2   Prepare a registry of volunteers who live and     PS             GF, G         ST
             work in the city and will be able to perform
             medical assistance, security, and damage
             assistance in an emergency.
Safe 1.1.3   Identify high risk areas and prepare programs     PS             GF, G, FF,    ST
             which will help minimize loss.                                   SF
Safe 1.1.4   Continue to update and enforce the city's fire    CD             GF            On
             and building codes as appropriate.
Safe 1.1.5   Incorporate fire and police department            AS             GF,      FF,  On
             expansion needs in each year's operating                         SF, G
             budget as the yearly budget provides.
Safe 1.1.6   Support federal, state, and county regulations    CM, PS,        GF,           On
             pertaining to health and safety, and fire
             regulations and ordinances.          Train city
             personnel to help identify hazardous materials
             and associated violations.
Safe 2.1.1   Develop and support public information and        PS             GF, G         ST
             education programs to familiarize the citizens of
             Duarte with seismic safety.
Safe 2.1.2   Develop      and     disseminate   a     disaster PS             G, FF, SF     ST
             preparedness plan and acquire the related
             resources which will enable the community to
             be self sufficient for a minimum of 7 days
             following a natural or man- made disaster.
Safe 2.1.3   Investigate how best to provide local AM band     PS             G, SF, FF,    ST
             width to communicate emergency messages to                       GF
             Duarte residents and businesses.
Safe 2.1.4   Consider establishing a wild animal task force to PS             G, SF, FF,    ST
             study providing hard copy and web material,                      GF
             how to store and secure trash, relocation of
             bear and mountain lions, installing bear and
             mountain warning signs.
Safe 3.1.1   Establish a minimum level of emergency            PS             GF, FF, SF    On
             service. Ensure that these services are
             responsive to the community's needs by
             periodically evaluating these services through
             the use of surveys and questionnaires.
Safe 4.1.1   Comply with the provisions of the Alquist-Priolo  CD             GF            On
             Act requiring site-specific soils, geologic, or
             geotechnical engineering studies prior to
             development approval of sites potentially
             subject to seismic activities.
Safe 4.1.2   Require appropriate engineering and design        CD             GF            On
    Safety Element, August 2007                    18              Duarte General Plan 2005-2020
    CHAPTER 2
    SAFETY ELEMENT
             mitigations for structures proposed in these
             areas.
Safe 5.1.1   Continue to participate in the mutual assistance PS            GF            On
             program.
Safe 5.1.2   Ensure that all buildings and areas be           CD            GF            On
             accessible to fire vehicles and firefighting
             equipment. Support fire department policy of
             controlled burns in high risk areas.
Safe 5.1.3   Develop a system of fire hazard mitigations      PS            FF, SF, GF    ST
             based upon the probability of occurrence and
             number of people at risk. Replace out- of-date
             apparatus and equipment on a scheduled basis.
             Determine peakload water demand and supply.
Safe 6.1.1   Prepare a hazardous materials storage permit     PS            GF, G         ST
             ordinance.
    Safety Element Definitions
    Alquist-Priolo Earthquake Fault Zone: A regulatory zone, delineated by the
    State Geologist, within which site-specific geologic studies are required to identify
    and avoid fault rupture hazards prior to subdivision of land and/or construction of
    most structures for human occupancy.
    Critical Facility: Facilities that either (1) provide emergency services or (2)
    house or serve many people who would be injured or killed in case of disaster
    damage to the facility. Examples include hospitals, fire stations, police and
    emergency services facilities, utility facilities, and communications facilities.
    Fault: A fracture or zone of closely associated fractures along which rocks on
    one side have been displaced with respect to those on the other side. A fault
    zone is a zone of related faults which commonly are braided, but which may be
    branching. A fault trace is the line formed by the intersection of a fault and the
    earth’s surface.
    Active Fault: A fault which has exhibited surface displacement within Holocene
    time (approximately the past 11,000 years).
    Potentially Active Fault: A fault which shows evidence of surface displacement
    during Quaternary time (the last 2 million years).
    Flooding: A rise in the level of a water body or the rapid accumulation of runoff,
    including related mudslides and land subsidence, that results in the temporary
    inundation of land that is usually dry. Riverine flooding, coastal flooding , mud
    flows, lake flooding, alluvial fan flooding , flash flooding, levee failures, tsunamis,
    and fluvial stream flooding are among the many forms that flooding takes.
    Safety Element, August 2007                    19            Duarte General Plan 2005-2020

CHAPTER 2
SAFETY ELEMENT
Ground Failure: Mudslide, landslide, liquefaction or soil compaction.
Hazardous Building: A building that may be hazardous to life in the event of an
earthquake because of partial or complete collapse. Hazardous buildings may
include:
        1. Those constructed prior to the adoption and enforcement of local codes
        requiring earthquake resistant building design.
        2. Those constructed of unreinforced masonry.
        3. Those which exhibit any of the following characteristics:
            • exterior parapets or ornamentation which may fall on passersby
            • exterior walls that are not anchored to the floors, roof or foundation
            • sheeting on roofs or floors incapable of withstanding lateral loads
            • large openings in walls that may cause damage from torsional
                forces
            • lack of an effective system to resist lateral forces
            • non-ductile concrete frame construction
Hazardous Material: An injurious substance, including pesticides, herbicides,
toxic metals and chemicals, liquefied natural gas, explosives, volatile chemicals,
and nuclear fuels.
Landslide: A general term for a falling, sliding, or flowing mass of soil, rocks,
water, and debris. Includes mudslides, debris flows, and debris torrents.
Liquefaction: A process by which water-saturated granular soils transform from
a solid to a liquid state during strong ground shaking.
Peakload Water Supply: The supply of water available to meet both domestic
water and fire fighting needs during the particular season and time of day when
domestic water demand on a water system is at its peak.
Seiche: An earthquake-induced wave in a lake, reservoir, or harbor.
Seismic Hazard Zone: A regulatory zone, delineated by the State Geologist,
within which site-specific geologic, soils, and foundation engineering studies are
required to identify and avoid earthquake-caused ground-failure hazards, or
selected other earthquake hazards, prior to subdivision of land and for
construction of most structures for human occupancy.
Subsidence: The gradual, local settling or sinking of the earth’s surface with little
or no horizontal motion (subsidence is usually the result of gas, oil, or water
extraction, hydrocompaction, or peat oxidation, and not the result of a landslide
or slope failure).
Safety Element, August 2007               20              Duarte General Plan 2005-2020

CHAPTER 2
SAFETY ELEMENT
Seismically Induced Surface Rupture: A break in the ground’s surface and
associated deformation resulting from the movement of a fault.
Tsunami: A wave, commonly called a tidal wave, caused by an underwater
seismic disturbance, such as sudden faulting, landslide, or volcanic activity.
Wildland Fire: A fire occurring in a suburban or rural area which contains
uncultivated lands, timber, range, watershed, brush or grasslands. This includes
areas where there is a mingling of developed and undeveloped lands.
Safety Element, August 2007            21              Duarte General Plan 2005-2020

CHAPTER 3
OPEN SPACE and CONSERVATION
Table of Contents
INTRODUCTION
Conservation Element Statutory Requirements                                1
Open Space Element Statutory Requirements                                  1
Relationship to other General Plan Elements and Program EIR                2
GOALS, OBJECTIVES & POLICIES
Conservation Goals, Objectives and Policies                                3
Open Space Goals, Objectives and Policies                                  6
Air Quality Goals, Objectives and Policies                                 8
RELATED AGENCIES, LAWS AND PLANS
U.S. Environmental Protection Act                                         12
California Air Resources Board                                            12
South Coast Air Quality Management District (AQMD)                        12
AQMD Rule 403 (Reduction of Fugitive Dust                                 14
The Regional Air Quality Management Plan                                  15
Quimby Act                                                                15
California Water Code                                                     16
OVERVIEW OF DUARTE’S OPEN SPACE RESOURCES
Angeles National Forest                                                   18
Flora and Fauna in and around Duarte’s Wilderness Area                    19
Parks and Recreation Facilities                                           20
IMPLEMENTATION MEASURES                                                   24
List of Tables
Table OS-1 Parks and Designated Open Spaces                               21
Table OS-2 Open Space, Conservation and Air Quality Implementation        24
List of Diagrams
Diagram OS-1 Diagram of Parks, trails and Designated Open Spaces          23
Open Space, Conservation Element         i          Duarte General Plan 2005-2020
Table of Contents

CHAPTER 3
OPEN SPACE and CONSERVATION
INTRODUCTION
The Open Space and Conservation Elements include a description of the lands
and waterways that are unimproved and are to be devoted to natural and/or
recreational uses. These Elements also provide a description of existing and
planned recreational lands and facilities. These lands and waterways will be
designated in the general plan land use diagram. Within Duarte’s General Plan,
the Open Space and Conservation Elements are combined into one because the
topics discussed within these elements are closely related.
Recreational goals, policies, and programs are not specifically addressed in this
document. For purposes of the general plan, recreational programs are viewed
as implementation tools to be discussed at a later date.
Conservation Element Statutory Requirements
California law requires that each city’s general plan includ a Conservation
Element.      The Conservation Element must address “…the conservation,
development, and utilization of natural resources including water and its hydraulic
force, forests, soils, rivers and other waters, harbors, fisheries, wildlife, minerals,
and other natural resources...” The conservation element must also “…consider
the effect of development within the jurisdiction, as described in the land use
element, on natural resources located on public lands...”
Recently, State law has been added to require provisions that a portion of the
conservation element, including waters, shall be developed in coordination with
any countywide water agency and with all district and city agencies that have
developed, served, controlled or conserved water for any purpose for the county
or city for which the plan is prepared. “…Coordination shall include the
discussion and evaluation of any water supply and demand information
described in Section 65352.5, if that information has been submitted by the water
agency to the city or county…”
Open Space Element Statutory Requirements
State law defines open-space land as “any parcel or area of land or water that is
essentially unimproved and devoted to an open-space use, and that is
designated on a local, regional or state open-space plan as any of the following:
         (1) Open space for the preservation of natural resources including, but
not limited to, areas required for the preservation of plant and animal life,
including habitat for fish and wildlife species; areas required for ecologic and
Open Space, Conservation Element, August 2007 1              Duarte General Plan 2005-2020

CHAPTER 3
OPEN SPACE and CONSERVATION
other scientific study purposes; rivers, streams, bays and estuaries; and coastal
beaches, lakeshores, banks of rivers and streams, and watershed lands.
          (2) Open space used for the managed production of resources, including
but not limited to, forest lands, rangeland, agricultural lands and areas of
economic importance for the production of food or fiber; areas required for
recharge of groundwater basins; bays, estuaries, marshes, rivers and streams
which are important for the management of commercial fisheries; and areas
containing major mineral deposits, including those in short supply.
          (3) Open space for outdoor recreation, including but not limited to, areas
of outstanding scenic, historic and cultural value; areas particularly suited for
park and recreation purposes, including access to lakeshores, beaches, and
rivers and streams; and areas which serve as links between major recreation and
open-space reservations, including utility easements, banks of rivers and
streams, trails, and scenic highway corridors.
          (4) Open space for public health and safety, including, but not limited to,
areas which require special management or regulation because of hazardous or
special conditions such as earthquake fault zones, unstable soil areas, flood
plains, watersheds, areas presenting high fire risks, areas required for the
protection of water quality and water reservoirs and areas required for the
protection and enhancement of air quality.”
Relationship to other General Plan Elements and Program EIR
California law requires that all elements of the general plan be consistent. While
all of the general plan elements are independent, they are also interrelated, some
more so than others. As an example certain goals and policies of one element
may also address items that are primary issues of other elements. This
integration of issues throughout the general plan creates a strong basis for the
implementation of plans, programs and achievement of community goals. The
Open Space and Conservation Elements are most directly related to Land Use,
Circulation, and Historic Preservation.
A Program Environmental Impact Report (EIR) will be part of the 2005-2020
Duarte General Plan. Policies within the Open Space and Conservation
Elements will also become mitigation measures within the Program EIR.
Open Space, Conservation Element, August 2007 2            Duarte General Plan 2005-2020

CHAPTER 3
OPEN SPACE and CONSERVATION
GOALS, OBJECTIVES AND POLICIES
This section provides draft Goals, Objectives and Policies for the Open Space
and Conservation Elements of the Duarte General Plan. Conservation of natural
and recreational resources, open space, and air quality goals, objectives and
policies are provided.
Conservation Goal 1:            To protect the valuable watershed and natural habitat
areas within and to the north of the urbanized areas.
Objective 1.1           Preserve Duarte’s natural hillsides which provide significant
                        wildlife habitat, open space, aesthetic and a visual backdrop
                        to the community.
Policies
       Con 1.1.1        Continue to support the United States Department of
                        Agriculture and their conservation efforts in the forest lands
                        in Duarte.
       Con 1.1.2        Work with the San Gabriel Mountains Conservancy in its
                        efforts to protect the wilderness area within Duarte.
       Con 1.1.3        To preserve the characteristics of the mountains, river beds,
                        and canyons and to protect the valuable watershed, grading
                        of lots should be kept to a minimum. Streets should be
                        carefully designed to reduce or eliminate the possibility of
                        erosion in the hillside and mountainous areas.
       Con 1.1.4        Promote and encourage multi-agency involvement in
                        identifying opportunities for hillside preservation and
                        protection.
       Con 1.1.5        Form partnerships with Federal, State, County, other
                        agencies, and private entities to help protect and preserve
                        hillside land.
       Con 1.1.6        Continue to investigate open space land opportunities for the
                        preservation of natural resources and sensitive habitat.
Open Space, Conservation Element, August 2007 3                Duarte General Plan 2005-2020

CHAPTER 3
OPEN SPACE and CONSERVATION
Conservation Goal 2:            To protect and maintain the local water supply to
ensure that the city's growing demand for water can be met.
Objective 2.1           Assist in the preservation, recharge and clean-up of water as
                        a precious natural resource.
Policies:
       Con 2.1.1        Work to conserve current water supplies and seek new
                        sources of water.
       Con 2.1.2        Maintain groundwater recharge areas to protect water quality
                        and ensure continued recharge of groundwater basins.
       Con 2.1.3        Require the use of native and other drought-resistant plants
                        to reduce the amount of water used for landscaping.
       Con. 2.1.4       Require the installation of water saving irrigation systems for
                        all new development.
       Con 2.1.5        Reduce the amount of impervious surfaces through the use
                        of porous ground cover materials.
       Con 2.1.6        Encourage water conservation in residential, commercial,
                        and industrial development.
Conservation Goal 3:            To protect Duarte’s environment through proper
consideration of the environmental implications of new development in the city.
Objective 3.1           Keep current on environmental legislation to protect Duarte’s
environment.
Policies:
       Con 3.1.1        Update Duarte’s California Environmental Quality Act
                        (CEQA) standards as provided by State guidelines.
       Con 3.1.2        Analyze all projects as defined in the California
                        Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) for potential impacts on
                        the community and utilize the proper mitigation measures to
                        mitigate any potential adverse impacts on the community.
Open Space, Conservation Element, August 2007 4               Duarte General Plan 2005-2020

CHAPTER 3
OPEN SPACE and CONSERVATION
       Con 3.1.3        Minimize the aesthetic impacts of signs through the strict
                        enforcement of the Municipal Sign Ordinance.
Conservation Goal 4:            To prolong the life and safety of landfills and find an
environmentally safe alternative means for the disposal of solid waste.
Objective 4.1           Reduce the solid waste disposal stream through recycling.
Policies:
       Con 4.1.1        Work towards achieving waste-reduction and diversion
                        goals.
       Con 4.1.2        Remove as much as possible from the waste stream, and,
                        preferably, to reuse it and to continue to increase alternative
                        ways to create diversion.
       Con 4.1.3        Promote the city's recycling program as a viable alternative
                        to trash disposal.
       Con 4.1.4        Consider increasing bulk community round-ups from twice a
                        year to more frequent round-ups.
Conservation Goal 5             To restrict future surface streets from cutting up areas
of open space.
Objective 5.1           Promote the preservation of open space by discouraging
                        development that is not sensitive to this resource.
Policies:
       Con 5.1.1        Encourage the planned unit development or specific plan
                        approach to land use which will minimize streets and provide
                        more open space or green belts.
       Con 5.1.2        Discourage the extension of urban service into areas which
                        are to remain open as open space. Streets and roadways
                        should avoid large open areas as much as possible.
       Con 5.1.3        Maintain open space areas around noise generators to
                        buffer the noise impacts on noise sensitive uses including
Open Space, Conservation Element, August 2007 5                 Duarte General Plan 2005-2020
CHAPTER 3
OPEN SPACE and CONSERVATION
                        schools and residential areas.
        Con 5.1.4       To protect the public health, safety, and welfare, the city
                        should designate open space where there is danger of flood,
                        fire, or earthquake, unless these risks can be adequately
                        mitigated.
Conservation Goal 6             To ensure that developments in the mountain and
hillside areas are sensitive to the local environment.
Objective 6.1           Assure that development maintains the character of open
                        space natural resources.
Policies:
        Con 6.1.1       Maintain very low densities in the northernmost portion of the
                        city not included in the national forest. Further development
                        must be sensitive to the terrain, natural environment and
                        aesthetics.
Open Space Goal 1               Protect     and/or enhance   Duarte’s    Open       Space
acreage.
Objective 1.1           Ensure that open space is available and accessible to both
                        existing and future residents.
Policies:
        OS 1.1.1        Work with conservation groups to identify and conserve
                        open space and protect lands accessible to public use.
        OS 1.1.2        Continue to conserve open space through public-private
                        funding sources and management strategies, including
                        conservation easements.
Open Space Goal 2:              To develop enough park acreage to meet the needs
of the population and upgrade existing facilities.
Objective 2.1           To provide open space ratios for current and future Duarte
                        residents at current acreage per capita.
Open Space, Conservation Element, August 2007  6              Duarte General Plan 2005-2020

CHAPTER 3
OPEN SPACE and CONSERVATION
Policies:
       OS 2.1.1         Continue to cooperate with the Duarte Unified School District
                        in providing open space amenities for Duarte residents and
                        students.
       OS 2.1.2         Require new development to mitigate the burden it creates
                        on existing parks through parkland dedication, recreational
                        space development and/or mitigation fees.
       OS 2.1.3         Provide for the future expansion of existing parks in a way
                        that does not adversely affect adjacent areas.
       OS 2.1.4         Coordinate circulation and recreation developments in
                        Duarte with those planned for the Santa Fe Dam regional
                        recreation area.
       OS 2.1.5         Provide recreation programs for all age groups, utilizing first
                        those facilities now existing and developing new facilities as
                        the need arises.
       OS 2.1.6         Establish neighborhood parks designed and located to
                        conveniently serve the needs of various segments of the
                        community.
        OS2.1.7         Protect Duarte's natural foothill areas by maintaining low
                        overall residential densities and by utilizing their potential for
                        recreational and open space purposes.
Open Space Goal 3:              To provide parks throughout the city, on a pedestrian
scale as much as possible. Neighborhood parks generally should have a one-half
mile service radius.
Objective 3.1           Make parks facilities convenient to all Duarte residents
                        without having to use a motorized vehicle.
Policies:
       OS 3.1.1         Multiple recreation uses for open space areas should be
                        encouraged. For example, horseback trails entwined with
                        pedestrian paths can be enjoyable for both parties. Trail
Open Space, Conservation Element, August 2007 7               Duarte General Plan 2005-2020
CHAPTER 3
OPEN SPACE and CONSERVATION
                        markers can be used to point out interesting views and
                        directions (e.g., the direction to the waterfall in Fish Canyon).
        OS 3.1.2        Develop new city parks when and where this is possible to
                        meet the future recreational needs of the community.
        OS 3.1.3        Expand and improve recreational facilities at existing parks
                        within the city.
        OS 3.1.4        Promote the development of new neighborhood and
                        recreation facilities, as appropriate, including parks of 4
                        acres or more to be used as satellite parks.
Air Quality Goal 1:             Create Land Use policies that address the
relationship between land use and air quality to protect public health and
minimize impacts on existing land use patterns and future land use
developments.
Objective 1.1           Through land use plans provide heightened consideration of
                        policies and strategies to minimize exposure of sensitive
                        receptors and sites (e.g. schools, hospitals, and residences)
                        to health risks related to air pollution.
Policies:
        AQ 1.1.1        Facilitate communications among residents, businesses and
                        the Southern California Air Quality Management District
                        (AQMD) to quickly resolve air pollution nuisance complaints.
                        Distribute information to advise residents on how to register
                        a complaint with the AQMD (cut smog program).
        AQ 1.1.2        Promote and support mixed-use land patterns that allow the
                        integration of retail, office, institutional and residential uses.
Objective 1.2           Reduce mobile source emissions by reducing vehicle trips
                        and vehicle miles traveled associated with land use patterns.
Policies:
        AQ 1.2.1        Establish a Mixed-Use Zoning District that offers incentives
                        for mixed-use developments.
Open Space, Conservation Element, August 2007  8                   Duarte General Plan 2005-2020
CHAPTER 3
OPEN SPACE and CONSERVATION
       AQ 1.2.2         Create opportunities to receive State transportation funds by
                        adopting incentives (e.g. and expedited review process) for
                        planning and implementation infill development projects that
                        include job centers and clean transportation nodes (e.g.
                        preparation of a “transit village” plan).
Air Quality Goal 2:             Reduce air pollution from mobile sources.
Objective 2.1           Reduce motor vehicle trips and vehicle miles traveled.
Policies:
       AQ 2.1.1         Collaborate with local transit agencies to:
                                • Develop programs and educate employers about
                                    employee rideshare and transit.
                                • Establish mass transit mechanisms for the
                                    reduction of work-related and non-work related
                                    vehicle trips.
                                • Promote mass transit ridership through careful
                                    planning of routes, headways, origins and
                                    destination, and types of vehicles.
       AQ 2.1.2         Provide merchants with fliers/posters that publicize mass
                        transit schedules to encourage their customers to use mass
                        transit.
       AQ 2.1.3         Consider providing incentives such as preferential parking
                        for alternative-fuel vehicles (e.g., compressed natural gas
                        (CNG) or hydrogen).
Objective 2.2           Reduce mobile source emissions through efficient
                        management of transportation facilities and system
                        infrastructure using cost-effective management and
                        innovative demand-management techniques.
Policies:
       AQ 2.2.1         Synchronize traffic signals throughout the City and with
                        adjoining cities while allowing free flow of mass transit
Open Space, Conservation Element, August 2007  9                Duarte General Plan 2005-2020

CHAPTER 3
OPEN SPACE and CONSERVATION
                        systems.
       AQ 2.2.2         Monitor traffic and congestion to determine when and where
                        the city needs new transportation facilities to achieve
                        increased mobility and efficiency.
       AQ 2.2.3         Consider replacing existing vehicles in the City fleet with the
                        cleanest vehicles commercially available.
Objective 2.3           Secure all available funding from local, state and federal
                        sources to improve Transportation System Management
                        (TSM) cost effectiveness.
Policies:
       AQ 2.3.1         Develop and coordinate a plan with local agencies for cost-
                        effective use of AB 2766 (emissions reductions benefits)
                        funds so that revenue is used for projects and programs
                        identified in the AQMP.
       AQ 2.3.2         Develop and adopt a policy to utilize federal Congestion
                        Mitigation and Air Quality Improvement (CMAQ) funds in
                        coordination with regional agencies in a manner consistent
                        with projects approved in the AQMP.
       AQ 2.3.3         Apply annually to the AQMD Mobile Source Reduction
                        Committee (MSRC) for AB 2766 “Local Government Match
                        Program” grants for projects that reduce mobile source
                        emissions (e.g. purchases of alterative-fueled vehicles).
       AQ 2.3.4         Seek opportunities to pool AB 2766 revenue with
                        neighboring cities to fund programs that will reduce mobile
                        source emissions (e.g., traffic synchronization, fueling station
                        infrastructure, teleconferencing facilities).
Air Quality Goal 3:             Achieve ambient levels of particulate matter that
meets state and federal clean air standards.
Objective 3.1           Reduce the amount of fugitive dust that is re-entrained into
                        the atmosphere from unpaved areas, parking lots,
                        construction sites and nearby quarries.
Open Space, Conservation Element, August 2007 10                Duarte General Plan 2005-2020

CHAPTER 3
OPEN SPACE and CONSERVATION
Policies:
       AQ 3.1.1         Where fugitive dust is causing a chronic public nuisance or
                        the air quality is in exceedance of PM 10 standards, consider
                        adopting a dust control policy that requires preparation and
                        approval of a dust control plan.
       AQ 3.1.2         Cooperate with local, regional, state and federal jurisdictions
                        to better control fugitive dust from stationary, mobile and
                        area sources.
       AQ 3.1.3         Ensure that vehicles do not transport aggregate or similar
                        material upon a highway unless the material is stabilized or
                        covered, in accordance with state law and AQMD
                        regulations.
       AQ 3.1.4         Consider rerouting the Duarte fixed route bus system to help
                        minimize vehicle trips.
Open Space, Conservation Element, August 2007 11              Duarte General Plan 2005-2020
CHAPTER 3
OPEN SPACE and CONSERVATION
RELATED AGENCIES, LAWS AND PLANS
U.S. Environmental Protection Act
The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (USEPA) is responsible for
establishing the national ambient air quality standards and enforcing the federal
Clean Air Act. This agency also regulates emission sources under the exclusive
authority of the federal government, such as aircraft, certain types of ships and
locomotives. The USEPA has jurisdiction over emission sources outside state
waters (e.g., beyond the outer continental shelf) and establishes various
emission standards, including those for vehicles sold in states other than
California. Automobiles sold in California must also meet the often stricter
emission standards established by the California Air Resources Board (CARB).
For additional information about the USEPA, contact the USEPA’s general
internet address at www.epa.gov. Information on the programs and activities in
USEPA Region IX, which includes California, can be found at
www.epa.gov/region9, and additional information on mobile source emissions is
available from the Office of Mobile Sources at www.epa.gov/otaq/index.htm.
California Air Resources Board (CARB)
The CARB became part of the California Environmental Protection Agency
(CalEPA) in 1991. The agency is responsible for ensuring implementation of the
California Clean Air Act, meeting state requirements of the federal Clean Air Act,
and establishing state ambient air quality standards. It is also responsible for
setting vehicle emission standards and fuel specifications, and regulating
emissions from other sources such as consumer products and certain types of
mobile equipment (e.g., lawn & garden equipment, industrial forklifts). The
internet address for CalEPA is www.calepa.ca.gov; the internet address for
CARB is www.arb.ca.gov .
South Coast Air Quality Management District (AQMD)
Because Southern California has one of the worst air quality problems in the
nation, the AQMD was created by the 1977 Lewis Air Quality Management Act.
Four county air pollution control agencies were merged into one regional district
to better address the issue of improving air quality in Southern California. Under
the act, revised and renamed the Lewis-Presley Air Quality Management Act in
1988, the AQMD is the agency principally responsible for comprehensive air
pollution control in the South Coast basin. Specifically, the AQMD is responsible
for monitoring air quality and planning, implementing, and enforcing programs
designed to attain and maintain state and federal ambient air quality standards in
Open Space, Conservation Element, August 2007 12            Duarte General Plan 2005-2020

CHAPTER 3
OPEN SPACE and CONSERVATION
the district. Programs developed include air quality rules and regulations that
regulate stationary source emissions, including area and point sources and
certain mobile source emissions. The AQMD is also responsible for establishing
permitting requirements and issuing permits for stationary sources and ensuring
that new, modified, or relocated stationary sources do not create net emissions
increases. The AQMD enforces air quality rules and regulations through a variety
of means, including inspections, educational and training programs, and fines.
The AQMD has jurisdiction over an area of 10,743 square miles, referred to in
this document as the South Coast Air District. This area includes all of Orange
county, all of Los Angeles county except for the Antelope Valley, the non-desert
portion of western San Bernardino county, and the western and Coachella Valley
portions of Riverside county. The South Coast basin is a sub-region of the district
and covers an area of 6,745 square miles. The South Coast basin includes all of
Orange county and the non-desert portions of Los Angeles, Riverside, and San
Bernardino counties.
Both the district and the South Coast basin are surrounded by mountains, which
tend to restrict air flow and concentrate pollutants in the valleys or “basins”
below. The South Coast basin is almost entirely urban, and its pollution is
typically related to dense population and associated area sources, heavy
vehicular traffic, and industrial sources.
The AQMD is organized according to procedures established by the California
Legislature and specified in the Lewis-Presley Air Quality Management Act. The
AQMD is organized into three branches. The first branch is the 12-member
Governing Board, which is the decision-making body of the AQMD that adopts
rules, regulations, and plans, such as the Air Quality Management Plan (AQMP).
The Governing Board is comprised of nine elected officials, one county
supervisor from each of the four counties in the district and five members
representing the cities of each county. Because of its size, Los Angeles county
has both an eastern and western cities representative. The three remaining
board members are appointed to the board by state elected officials: one is
appointed by the governor, another is appointed by the Speaker of the Assembly,
and the third is appointed by the state Senate Rules Committee. Several
advisory committees review and recommend actions to the Governing Board. For
example, the Local Government and Small Business Assistance Advisory Group
is made up of local government officials, small business representatives, and
members of the general public. This committee, therefore, offers local
governmental agencies the opportunity to comment on the AQMD’s rule-making
and planning processes.
Open Space, Conservation Element, August 2007 13          Duarte General Plan 2005-2020

CHAPTER 3
OPEN SPACE and CONSERVATION
The second branch of the AQMD is the Hearing Board, which is a quasi-judicial
panel authorized to provide relief to regulated facilities from AQMD regulations.
Relief from regulations can only occur under specific circumstances, such as
emergencies, etc. State law requires that the Hearing Board be appointed by the
Governing Board, but the Hearing Board acts independently of the Governing
Board.
The third branch is management/staff, which is the bulk of the agency and
reports to the AQMD Governing Board. This branch includes the divisions
responsible for: developing rules and rule amendments; permitting of air pollution
sources and rule compliance; planning programs such as the AQMP; air quality
monitoring; public outreach and small business assistance; and prosecuting
cases of rule violations. Additional information on the AQMD is available at
AQMD’s internet address - www.aqmd.gov .
In late 2005, as a result of Duarte’s concerns of possible dust and other
pollutants resulting from nearby quarries, Royal Oaks School at 2499 Royal Oaks
Dr., was selected for the monitoring station, by AQMD, based on weather
patterns and air flow. The site provides an open plain area of the city where
potential emissions can be measured as they flow from the northeast at the
Vulcan facility (an active quarry operation located in adjacent Azusa) down into
the City of Duarte.
AQMD Rule 403 (Reduction of Fugitive Dust)
Fugitive dust is a generic term used to describe any solid particulate matter that
becomes airborne, other than that emitted from an exhaust stack, directly or
indirectly as a result of the activities of any person. Fugitive dust can vary in size
and composition, depending on the location, wind direction, time of the day, and
the time of season for its source. The AQMD includes two air basins that exceed
state and federal ambient air quality standards for PM10 (fine particulate matter
less than 10 microns in diameter). Studies indicate that approximately one-third
of the South Coast basin’s ambient PM10 concentrations and over ninety percent
of Coachella Valley’s ambient PM10 levels are a result of fugitive dust.
AQMD regulates fugitive dust via several district rules. For example, Rule 403
(Fugitive Dust) requirements are applicable to the South Coast Air District and to
the Coachella Valley portion of the Salton Sea Air Basin. The purpose of Rule
403 is to reduce the amount of particulate matter entrained in the ambient air as
a result of anthropogenic (man-made) fugitive dust sources. Rule 403 requires
implementation of control measures to prevent, reduce, or mitigate fugitive dust
emissions and includes a performance standard that prohibits visible emissions
Open Space, Conservation Element, August 2007 14              Duarte General Plan 2005-2020

CHAPTER 3
OPEN SPACE and CONSERVATION
from crossing any property line. Under Rule 403, large operations (projects
greater than 50 acres and/or more than 5,000 cubic yards of daily earth-
movement) are required to notify the AQMD of the project location and
implement Table 2, and, if necessary Table 3, control measures and maintain
recordkeeping. Rule 403 can be viewed or downloaded at the following web site
http://www.aqmd.gov/rules/reg/reg04/r403.pdf Forms for large operation
submittals can be viewed or downloaded from the following AQMD web site
http://www.aqmd.gov/comply/Forms/403N_8_2004.doc.
Rule 403 requires all projects and activities in the South Coast Air Basin to
control dust generation, with specified control measures for large operations of
50 acres or more. In spite of these basin-wide requirements, ground
disturbances, geological conditions, or meteorological conditions may result in
dust generation that constitutes a chronic public nuisance, or would prevent
attainment of federal PM10 standards. These limited areas may warrant
additional dust control efforts on the part of local governments. A local dust
control policy that requires preparation and approval of a dust control plan for all
projects seeking a grading permit in such limited areas may be needed to
supplement current Rule 403 requirements. Local governments may also choose
to apply specific control measures crafted to address their chronic public
nuisance dust problems or PM10 exceedances.
The Regional Air Quality Management Plan
The AQMD has authority to reduce emissions from stationary sources, some
area sources, and certain indirect sources. The AQMD is the lead agency in
charge of, with input from the Southern California Association of Governments
(SCAG) and CARB, developing the AQMP. The AQMP is a comprehensive plan
that includes control strategies for stationary and area sources, as well as for on-
road and off-road mobile sources. SCAG has the primary responsibility for
providing future growth projections and the development and implementation of
transportation control measures. CARB in coordination with federal agencies
provides the control element for mobile sources.
Quimby Act
The City of Duarte has adopted a Quimby Act ordinance to require the dedication
of land and/or the payment of in-lieu fees for the purpose of providing park and
recreational facilities. Section 66477 of the Government Code provides local
jurisdictions with the authority to acquire park land in association with new land
divisions. Commonly referred to as the Quimby Act, this provision of state law
allows a city, by ordinance, to require the dedication of land, payment of an in-
Open Space, Conservation Element, August 2007 15           Duarte General Plan 2005-2020
CHAPTER 3
OPEN SPACE and CONSERVATION
lieu fee, or a combination of both, for park and recreational purposes as a
condition on approving a subdivision map
California Water Code
California Water Code §10644(a) requires urban water suppliers to file with the
Department of Water Resources, the California State Library, and any city or
county within which the supplier provides water supplies, a copy of its Urban
Water Management Plan, no later than 30 days after adoption. California Water
Service Company provides Duarte’s potable water supply.               Urban water
suppliers are required to file an Urban Water Management Plan (UWMP) at least
once every five years on or before December 31, in years ending in five and
zero.
The 2005 Urban Water Management Plans were due December 31, 2005. All
urban water suppliers as defined in Section 10617 (including wholesalers), either
publicly or privately owned, providing water for municipal purposes either directly
or indirectly to more than 3,000 customers or supplying more than 3,000 acre-
feet annually are required to prepare an Urban Water Management Plan.
An UWMP is considered to be a source of information for Water Supply
Assessments (Senate Bill 610) Water Code §10613 et seq. (Added by Stats.
2001, c. 643), and Written Verifications of Water Supply (SB 221) Water Code
§66473.7 (Added by Stats. 2001, c. 642). In addition, an UWMP may serve as a
long-range planning document for water supply, a source of data for
development of a regional water plan, and a source document for cities and
counties as they prepare their general plans.
A complete UWMP could be a foundation document and source of information
for a Water Supply Assessment and a Written Verification of Water Supply. An
UWMP also serves as:
       • A long-range planning document for water supply,
       • Source data for development of a regional water plan, and
       • A source document for cities and counties as they prepare their General
       Plans.
       • A key component to Integrated Regional Water Management Plans.
General plans are source documents for water suppliers as they prepare their
UWMPs. General plans and UWMPs may be linked, as their accuracy and
usefulness are interdependent. Therefore cities, counties, and public and private
water suppliers will find it useful to work closely when developing and updating
these planning documents. Cities, counties, water districts, property owners, and
Open Space, Conservation Element, August 2007 16          Duarte General Plan 2005-2020

CHAPTER 3
OPEN SPACE and CONSERVATION
developers will all be able to utilize the UWMP when planning for and proposing
new projects. The UWMP is discussed again in the Safety Element.
OVERVIEW OF DUARTE’S OPEN SPACE RESOURCES
About 3.6 square miles (about 53%) of the 6.8 square miles of Duarte’s
incorporated land area is undeveloped and within or adjacent to the Angeles
National Forest along the west slope of the San Gabriel Mountains. While much
of this land is within the Angeles National Forest, Duarte's open spaces take
many forms and serve a variety of functions. The community surveys conducted
in September of 2005 revealed that open space areas including the City’s many
parks represent a significant and desirable component of the community's
character.
Duarte’s open space maintains natural, recreational, and visual resources for
current and future community use and enjoyment. Duarte’s open space is
valuable for both passive and active uses. The city has done a good job of
designating and preserving lands as open space for: protection of natural
habitats and species; managed production of natural resources such as forest
products; recreational uses; scenic, aesthetic resources; and avoidance of
development on such areas as steep slopes, faults, and flood zones that are
potentially hazardous to the community.
Open space for the preservation of natural resources includes the recently
acquired 329 acres of wilderness land. In November 2005, the City was awarded
a $4 million grant from the State of California Wildlife Conservation Board. This
money was combined with the previous $3.5 million awarded by the San Gabriel
Rivers and Mountains Conservancy Board. In December 2005, escrow closed on
this site making this large site a very significant city owned open space. The City
of Duarte also owns 70 acres of vacant hillside adjacent to the 329 acres
previously mentioned.
Within and abutting Duarte significant natural waterway resources include the
San Gabriel River, and the following intermittent seasonal streams within
canyons in the wilderness area of the city: Fish Canyon, Fern Canyon and Van
Tassel Canyon, Spinks Canyon and Maddock Canyon. Fortunately, the Angeles
National Forest abutting Duarte’s urbanized area is protected from urbanization.
Open space for the managed production of resources includes Angeles National
Forest lands on the west slopes of San Gabriel Mountains, water recharge lands
within the San Gabriel River and other seasonal waterway. These areas are
Open Space, Conservation Element, August 2007 17             Duarte General Plan 2005-2020

CHAPTER 3
OPEN SPACE and CONSERVATION
important for protection of flora and fauna and maintaining water quality and
other ecological functions.
Open space for outdoor recreation can be found on the following pages under
“Parks and Recreation Facilities”. City owned parks and lands owned by the
Duarte Unified School District used for recreation purposes in coordination with
the City of Duarte are specifically identified in more detail in that section. In
2005, the City opened the .78 acre Lena Valenzuela Park located on Mountain
Avenue further adding to its active park acreage. Edison and flood control
easements are also considered open space.
Open space for public health and safety includes earthquake fault zones, steep
sloped hillsides, liquefaction areas, and 100-year floodplains. The Open Space
and Conservation Elements are closely linked to the Safety Element. In addition,
they are closely linked to the bike trails component of the Circulation element.
Open space is also valuable for preserving scenic views and other aesthetic
considerations. The overall system is also enhanced when open space lands are
linked by natural biological corridors, greenways, easements, and other types of
connections.
In many cases, open space can provide multiple benefits. The steep slopes and
valleys making up the Angeles National Forest on the western slopes of San
Gabriel Mountains provide an important watershed to the San Gabriel River.
Utility easements are not to be built upon. All of these lands are important for
their natural and resource production capabilities. These lands also retain natural
drainage systems, sustain natural habitats, enhance the community's viewshed
and provide an aesthetic resource. Designating these and other open spaces in
the general plan documents their value to the community. It also allows City
decision-makers to identify open space as an important resource when
considering proposed changes in community form.
Angeles National Forest
The terrain within the City of Duarte is divided into three districts: the San Gabriel
Mountain Range of the Angeles National Forest, the foothills and canyons of the
San Gabriel Mountains, and the alluvial slopes of the mountains. The latter is the
area where the City's urban development is concentrated.
The San Gabriel Mountains are an east to west-trending mountain range that
extend for approximately 60 miles from the San Fernando Valley on the west to
Cajon Pass on the east, near the western edge of the San Bernardino
Open Space, Conservation Element, August 2007 18             Duarte General Plan 2005-2020

CHAPTER 3
OPEN SPACE and CONSERVATION
Mountains. The San Gabriel Mountains are part of the Transverse Ranges
physiographic province of southern California.
The Angeles National Forest consists of 693,667 acres of forest and chaparral in
the San Gabriel Mountains. It was designated in 1892 by President Harrison as
the first national forest in the state of California, and one of the earliest in the
nation, its purpose being to protect the local watershed.
This mountainous area provides riparian habitat and is partially covered with
coastal sage brush, chaparral, and woodlands. The San Gabriel River, adjacent
to the City of Duarte originates from the foot of the 10,064-foot Mt. San Antonio
(Old Baldy) and carries snow melt and runoff from a 635 square mile watershed.
Flora and Fauna in and around Duarte’s Wilderness Area
Information taken from various environmental impact reports within and
surrounding Duarte’s hillside area revealed typical flora and fauna found with the
undeveloped areas. Vegetation consists of chaparral, Southern coast live oak
riparian forest, and small isolated islands of common coastal sage scrub species
(Salvia and Artemisia) which were limited to the south-facing slope exposures.
California live oak (Quercus agrifolia) visually dominates the north-facing slopes.
California live oak, scrub oak, elderberry (Sambucus mexicana), and California
sycamore (platanus racemosa) are the largest plants in the mesic canyon
bottoms. The sagebrush, oak, and sycamore are indicator species of coastal
sage scrub, Southern oak woodland and Sycamore-Alder riparian forest are plant
communities but these species do not occur in sufficient quantity to constitute
vegetation units. Despite the extreme variations in topography, vegetation
throughout the area is remarkably consistent. The vegetation is low in diversity
and undisturbed except along the roads and the shallow soils on ridges where
nonnative annuals can represent as much as 50 percent of the cover.
No endangered/threatened wildlife areas are believed to be within Duarte’s
wilderness area. Two bird species are restricted to nesting in riparian habitat and
could potentially occur if suitable habitat exists. Only one species, the least Bell's
vireo (Vireo bellii pusillus) , has been recorded near the area (CNDDB, 1998).
The least Bell's vireo, a federal endangered species, has a low potential to occur
in the area. This vireo is an obligate resident of willow dominated riparian
woodland. The riparian habitat within the area contains little or no willow
understory and is unlikely to support breeding vireos. The southwestern willow
flycatcher (Empidonax traillii extimus), another federal endangered bird species,
occupies similar habitat in southern California. Neither of these two endangered
species are believed to be within the area but more study may be necessary.
Open Space, Conservation Element, August 2007 19            Duarte General Plan 2005-2020

CHAPTER 3
OPEN SPACE and CONSERVATION
For more specific information please refer to the “City of Duarte General Plan
Update Background/Existing Conditions Report”.
Parks and Recreation Facilities
The National Recreation and Parks Association (NRPA) recommend a minimum
of .6 to 1 acre of developed open space per 1,000 population for minimum needs
of the community and 5 acres of developed open space per 1,000 population to
provide a middle level of service to the community. Duarte has approximately 84
acres of developed recreation and parkland. The City owns 39.2 active park
acreages and leases 26.5 acreages from the Duarte Unified School District for
recreational purposes. In addition the 18.55 acre nine hole golf course, which is
designated open space on the Duarte General Plan, is also used for recreational
purposes.
The Parks and Recreation Department is responsible for youth sports, adult
sports, special events, recreation classes, senior, youth and adult excursions,
cultural events, senior services and programs, the Fitness Center, teen services
and programs, beautification awards, aquatics, and supervised parks. The Parks
and Recreation Department is also responsible for maintenance of all City
facilities. This includes repairs to buildings and park sites, custodial services,
supervision of activities held in City facilities, and overseeing contractual
maintenance agreements. For purposes of the general plan recreation programs
are considered implementation tools to the Open Space Element and are not
addressed in this document.
The City has recently negotiated an arrangement with Vulcan to allow access to
the Fish Canyon Trail and the Fish Canyon Falls. Not included as park acreage
is the 70 acres and 329 acres parcels of wilderness area owned by the City of
Duarte, and the 22.7 acres recently dedicated to the City by Attalla Ranch.
Table 2-1 provides an inventory of parks
and other open spaces within Duarte’s
city limits. These assets are made up of
city parks, school parks, privately held
open space, city owned wilderness
areas and undeveloped public utility
acreage.
Open Space, Conservation Element, August 2007 20         Duarte General Plan 2005-2020

CHAPTER 3
OPEN SPACE and CONSERVATION
Table OS-1
Parks and Designated Open Spaces
City           Parks Size                   Amenities
Location
Duarte Park              2.96 acres         Recreation building, restrooms, picnic and barbecue
1344 Bloomdale Street                       area, lighted basketball court, playground equipment
                                            and the teen center
Encanto Park             11.5 acres         Equestrian trail, multipurpose field, picnic area with
751 Encanto Parkway                         shelters and barbecues, playground equipment,
                                            tennis courts, basketball courts and sand volleyball
                                            courts, restrooms – 11.5 acres
Hacienda Park            1.64 acres         Picnic and barbecue area, playground equipment
2695 Hacienda Drive
Moore Park               1.13 acres         Picnic and barbecue area, playground equipment
1100 Duarte Road
Royal Oaks Park          7.40 acres         Recreation       building,    restrooms,      playground
2627    Royal     Oaks                      equipment, picnic and barbecue area, lighted tennis
Drive                                       and basketball courts, volleyball courts
Royal Oaks Park
Extension
2701    Royal     Oaks
Drive
Third Street Park        .36 acres          Picnic and barbecue area, playground equipment
1626 Third Street
Town Center              2.9 acres          A major recreational facility is located in the Civic
                                            Center/Town Center complex. Facilities include a
                                            fitness      center      with     two      pools,     two
                                            racquetball/wallyball courts, an exercise room, and
                                            locker and shower facilities. The Community Center
                                            is equipped with a senior center, an auditorium,
                                            meeting room, arts and crafts room, and kitchen.
Bike Path                9.96 acres         The Duarte Bike Trail extends essentially along Royal
                                            Oaks Drive and is 1.6 mile long and consist of 9.96
                                            acres. The majority of the trail is a class 1 bike trail
                                            and is improved with asphalt with parallel dirt
                                            treadway from Buena Vista Street to Vineyard
                                            Avenue. The bike trail becomes a class 3 bike trail
                                            from Vineyard Avenue to the easterly city limit line.
Lena Valenzuela Park     .78 acres          This facility provides picnic, barbecue and playground
2120 Mountain                               facilities.
Thornsen Park            .45 acres          This is a passive park
Entrance Park            .13 acres          This is a passive park
   Total City Parks      39.21 acres
Open Space, Conservation Element, August 2007   21                      Duarte General Plan 2005-2020

CHAPTER 3
OPEN SPACE and CONSERVATION
Table OS-1
Parks and Open Space Continued
School                   Size               Amenities
Parks
Location
Beardslee Park           4.91 acres         Picnic area and barbecue pits, playground
2000 Buena Vista St.                        equipment, restrooms, amphitheater and soccer field.
                                            This facility is leased by the City from the Duarte
                                            Unified School District for recreational uses.
Glen Miller Park         1.38 acre          Improvements         provided       include     playground
205 Mel Canyon Rd.                          equipment and picnic area. This facility is leased by
                                            the City from the Duarte Unified School District for
                                            recreational uses.
Otis Gordon Sports       5.50 acres         Picnic and barbecue area, playground equipment,
Park                                        lighted softball fields. This facility is leased by the City
2351 Central Av.                            from the Duarte Unified School District for
                                            recreational uses.
Sports Park              12.25 acres        Improvements include three lighted softball fields,
1401 Central Ave.                           one lighted baseball field, six tennis courts (four
                                            lighted), a snack bar with restroom facilities and skate
                                            park. This facility is leased by the City from the
                                            Duarte Unified School District for recreational uses.
Northview Park            2.02 acres        Multipurpose field. This facility is leased by the City
1433 Highland Avenue                        from the Duarte Unified School District for
                                            recreational uses.
Andres Duarte              .48 acres        Improvements include playground equipment tot lot
 Total School Parks      26.54 acres
Wilderness Areas and              Size                                Amenities
Other Open Spaces
City     Owned    Wilderness      422 acres of purchased and          No amenities other           than
Open Space                        dedicated property                  natural open space
Utility Easements                 95 acres of Edison and Los          Edison & flood control
                                  Angeles Co. Flood Control
Golf Course                       18.55 acres                         This facility consists of a nine-
100 Los Lomas                                                         hole executive course and a
                                                                      restaurant. This golf course, a
                                                                      former landfill, was once
                                                                      owned by the City and is now
                                                                      privately owned. The general
                                                                      plan land use designation on
                                                                      this site is Open Space.
 Total Wilderness &
         Private                  535.55 acres
 Total Parks and
         Open Space               601.3 acres
Open Space, Conservation Element, August 2007   22                      Duarte General Plan 2005-2020
CHAPTER 3
OPEN SPACE and CONSERVATION
Insert Diagram OS-1?
Parks, trails and Designated
Open Spaces
Open Space, Conservation Element, August 2007 23 Duarte General Plan 2005-2020
                                                                                                                                                   ANGELES
                                                                                                                                                   NATIONAL
                                                                                                                                                    FOREST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Parks, Trails and
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Designated Open Spaces
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Diagram OS-1
                                                                                                BRADBURY
                                                                                                                 Overview Map
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                º
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ¹
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ES
                                                                                                                                                    BRADBURY
                                                                                                                                                                                                          LAS LOMAS RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ROYAL OAKS DR
                                           MONROVIA                                                                                                                                                                                                                   LEGEND
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            City Limits
                                                             MOUNTAIN AV
                                                                                                                                                        ROYAL OAKS DR
                                                                                                                                                                               MT OLIVE DR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              AZUSA    º
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ¹       School
                                                                           HUNTINGTON DR
                                                                                                                                     HIGHLAND AV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         HU
                                                                                                                          º
                                                                                                                          ¹
                                                                                                                          HS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           NT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                IN
                                                                                                                                                                                                º
                                                                                                                                                                                                ¹
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  GT
                                                                                                                                º
                                                                                                                                ¹
                                                                                                                                MS
                                                                                                                                                                                                 ES
                                                                                                                                                                                             CENTRAL AV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ON
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         DR
                                               CENTRAL AV
                                                                                                                      (
                                                                                                                      g
                                                                                                                      &
                                                                                                                      %                                                  (
                                                                                                                                                                         o
                                                                                                                                                                         &
                                                                                                                                                                         %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Source: City of Duarte - June 2006
                                                 DUARTE RD
                                                                                           º
                                                                                           ¹
                                                                                           ES
M:mdata/10104371/basemap_24X36_OS.mxd KO
                                                                                                BUENA VISTA ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Feet
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  0         950       1,900         3,800
                                                                                                                                                                   IRWINDALE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    July 10, 2006

  CHAPTER 3
  OPEN SPACE and CONSERVATION
  IMPLEMENTATION MEASURES
  Government Code 65400 requires the legislative body to consider and adopt
  reasonable and practical means for implementing the general plan. This is
  necessary so that the plan will serve as an effective guide for orderly growth and
  development, preservation and conservation of open space land and natural
  resources, and the efficient expenditure of public funds relating to the subjects
  addressed in the general plan. The State also requires an annual report to the
  legislative body, State Department of Housing and Community Development
  (HCD) and State Office of Planning and Research on the status of the plan and
  progress in implementing the plan. HCD checks to see if the city is making
  progress in meeting its fair share of regional housing needs.
  This section provides an implementation matrix for policies found in the Open
  Space and Conservation chapter. The matrix identifies the policy to be
  implemented, the implementation measure to be used for that policy, the
  responsible agency or department that will be implementing the measure, the
  funding source and the estimated timeframe to complete the implementation.
  Responsible Agency:
          All = All Departments                        AS = Administrative Services
          CD = Community Development                   PS = Public Safety
          CM = City Manager                            P&R = Parks and Recreation
  Funding Source:
          GF = General Fund                            SF= State funds
          RA = Redevelopment Agency                    FF = Federal Funds
           G = Grants                                  OF = Other Funds
          DF = Development Fees
  Implementation Timeframe (or as resources provide):
          ST = Short-term by 2009                      LT = Long Term by 2020
          MT = Mid-term by 2015                        On = Ongoing
  Table OS - 2
  Open Space, Conservation and Air Quality Implementation Measures
                                                         Responsible     Funding        Time
Policy #     Implementation Measure                      Agency          Source         frame
Con1.1.1     Implement the Land Use Policy which         CD              GF             On
OS 2.1.7     designates forest land as open space
Con 1.1.2    Stay in contact with the Conservancy        CM              GF             On
Con 1.1.3    Implement the general plan land use policy. CD              GF             On
             Implement the hillside ordinance
  Open Space, Conservation Element, August 2007 24              Duarte General Plan 2005-2020
  CHAPTER 3
  OPEN SPACE and CONSERVATION
Con 1.1.4   Work with other cities and agencies to partner CD, CM, P&R     GF, G, SF,     On
Con 1.1.5   in preserving open space                                       FF, OF
OS 1.1.1
OS 1.1.2
Con 1.1.6   Keep abreast of funding opportunities          CM, P&R         G, SF, FF      On
Con 2.1.1   Work with Cal Am. Water to develop a water     CM              GF, G          ST
            conservation handbook for distribution
Con 2.1.2   Comply with NPEDS/SUSMP requirements           CD              GF             On
Con 2.1.3   Expand the Development Code to include all     CD              GF             ST
Con 2.1.4   zones
Con 2.1.5   Amend the Development Code to require          CD              GF             MT
            impervious materials where warranted.
Con 2.1.6   Continue to examine water consumption          CD              GF             On
            impacts of new development in conjunction
            with environmental review
Con 3.1.1   Review current environmental review process    CD              GF             On
            and city guidelines and update as needed
Con 3.1.2   Comply with CEQA law and guidelines            CD              GF             On
Con 3.1.3   Continue enforcing sign ordinance              CD              GF             On
Con 4.1.4   Work with solid waste hauler to provider more  CM              GF, G          ST
            frequent bulk round-ups
Con 4.1.1   Continue implementing policies and programs    CM              GF             On
            pursuant to AB 939
Con 4.1.2   Support ongoing recycling programs             CM              GF             On
Con 4.1.3   Advertise the current recycling program in the CM              GF             On
            waste hauler newsletter and City website
Con 5.1.1   Implement the general plan land use policy     CD              GF             On
Con 5.1.2
Con 5.1.3   Consider open space as a noise mitigation      CD              GF             On
            device in the review of future development
Con 5.1.4   Consider open space as a device for            CD              GF             On
            hazardous mitigation in the review of future
            development
Con 6.1.1   Implement the general plan land use policy     CD              GF             On
            Implement the city’s hillside development
            ordinance
OS 2.1.1    Continue to update joint use agreements with   CM              GF             On
            the Duarte Unified School District
OS 2.1.2    Continue to enforce Quimby Act, impact fees    CD              DF, OF         On
            and condition developments
OS 2.1.3    Review multiple listings for parcels for sale  CD, P&R         GF, DF, G      On
OS 3.1.3    adjacent to parks
OS 2.1.4    Review development proposal of Santa Fe        CM, P&R         GF, G          On
            Dam with Los Angeles County Department of
            Parks and Recreation
OS 2.1.5    Prepare and implement a parks master plan      P&R, CD         GF, G, DF      MT
OS 2.1.6    including new and expanded parks
OS 3.1.1
OS 3.1.2
OS 3.1.4
  Open Space, Conservation Element, August 2007  25               Duarte General Plan 2005-2020

  CHAPTER 3
  OPEN SPACE and CONSERVATION
AQ 1.1.1    Prepare an information brochure & distribute    CD               GF, G          ST
AQ 2.1.1    through different media
AQ 2.1.2
AQ 1.1.2    Designate Planned Unit Development or           CD               GF, SF, G      ST
AQ 1.2.1    Specific Plan areas where appropriate                            RA
AQ 1.2.2
AQ 2.1.3    Work w/AQMD and other agencies to receive       CM, CD           GF, RA, G,     ST
AQ 2.3.1    grants for alternative modes of transportation                   SF, FF, DF
AQ 2.3.2    and improved traffic flow
AQ 2.3.4
AQ 2.2.1    Continue to collaborate with adjacent cities to CD, PS, CM       GF, SF, FF     On
            improve traffic flow
AQ 2.2.2    Perform traffic studies yearly and/or require   CD               GF, SF, FF     On
            traffic studies as development occurs                            G
AQ 2.2.3    Prepare a vehicle replacement plan              AS, CD           GF, SF, G      ST
AQ 2.3.3    Apply annually for Mobile Source Reduction      CD,              GF, G, SF      On
            and AQMD funds                                                   FF
AQ 3.1.1    Prepare and enforce a dust reduction            CD               GF             ST
AQ 3.1.2    ordinance that addresses mobile and
AQ 3.1.3    stationary sources
AQ 3.1.4    Review Duarte’s fix route system annually to    CD               SF, GF         ST
            provide service and efficiency
  Open Space, Conservation Element, August 2007  26                 Duarte General Plan 2005-2020

CHAPTER 4
NOISE
Table of Contents
INTRODUCTION                                                               1
Noise Element Statutory Requirements                                        2
Relationship to other General Plan Elements and Program EIR                 2
GOALS, OBJECTIVES and POLICIES                                              2
Reduce noise impacts from transportation sources                            2
Measures to control non-transportation noise impacts                        3
Establish land uses which are compatible with community noise levels        4
NOISE SCALES AND DEFINITIONS                                                4
Community Noise Equivalent Level (CNEL)                                     7
Equivalent Noise Level (LEQ)                                                7
Day Night Average (Ldn)                                                     7
Other Noise Matrices                                                        8
RELATED AGENCIES, LAWS AND PLANS
Federal Noise Standards                                                     8
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency                                        9
State of California                                                         9
City Noise Standards                                                       10
NOISE ANALYSIS
Existing Conditions                                                        12
Projected Noise Conditions                                                 26
DESCRIPTION OF NOISE PLAN
Typical Noise Attenuation Rates                                            29
Noise and Land Use Planning Integration                                    31
Transportation Noise Control                                               31
Non-Transportation Noise Control                                           31
IMPLEMENTATION MEASURES                                                    31
List of Tables
N -1 Land Use Compatibility Noise Guidelines — California                  10
N -2 City of Duarte Noise Ordinance Standards                              11
Noise Element                           i            Duarte General Plan 2005-2020
Table of Contents

CHAPTER 4
NOISE
N -3 Corrections to Noise Limits                                 11
N -4 Sensitive Receptors                                         14
N -5 Existing Traffic Noise Levels                               18
N -6 Field Noise Measurements                                    22
N -7 Projected 2020 Traffic Noise Levels                         28
N -8 Noise Implementation Measures                               32
List of Exhibits
N -1 Common Environmental Noise Levels                            6
N -2 Sensitive Uses                                              16
N -3a Field Noise Measurement Sites                              23
N -3b Field Noise Measurement Sites                              24
N -3c Field Noise Measurement Sites                              25
List of Diagrams
N – 1 1989 Noise Contours                                        17
N – 2 2020 Noise Contours                                        27
Noise Element                           ii Duarte General Plan 2005-2020
Table of Contents

CHAPTER 4
NOISE ELEMENT
INTRODUCTION
The Noise Element of the General Plan provides a framework to limit noise
exposure within the City. Existing and future noise environments and the
compatibility of land uses are considered in the Element, as well as sensitive
receptors and generators of stationary noise. Projected noise levels are included
to help guide future land use policy and prevent high noise levels in sensitive
areas at buildout. In addition, noise contours in the form of community noise
equivalent level (CNEL) or day-night average level (Ldn) are provided for all
referenced sources.
Various measures are described in order to mitigate potential noise conflicts.
These measures are designed to lessen impacts from unavoidable noise
conflicts within the City of Duarte. The Noise Element also serves as a guideline
for compliance with the State’s Noise Insulation Standards.
The State of California requires every jurisdiction to include a Noise element in
their General Plan. The Noise element for this General Plan presents several
different aspects of noise evaluation. The City’s goals, objectives, and policies
for meeting noise standards are first identified, and then the method in which the
noise levels are measured are described. The most general ways to quantify
noise levels are by CNEL, Leq, and Ldn, which are measured in decibels using
the A-weighted sound pressure level (dBA). Community Noise Exposure Level
(CNEL) is a long-term noise measurement that is an average of noise levels
gathered over 24 hours. Equivalent sound level (Leq) is more short-term noise
measurement taken over a given period of time, which can vary from one hour to
24 hours. The 24-hour measurement period is how the CNEL is derived. The
average day/night noise level (Ldn) is another way to analyze community noise
exposure. The Ldn noise level is measured by taking noise measurements over
a 24-hour period, similar to CNEL, meaning the two are generally equivalent.
Also presented in the Noise element are Federal, State, and Local noise
standards, and related laws, standards, ordinances, and regulations, such as the
U.S. Noise Control Act and California Office of Planning and Research
Guidelines. The noise analysis follows and includes an evaluation of existing
noise conditions, including sensitive receptors, noise generated by traffic and
stationary sources, and ambient noise levels. Existing traffic noise levels are
evaluated, as well as projected traffic noise levels for 2020. A description of the
noise plan, including attenuation rates and other noise controls, and
implementation measures suggesting how to go about meeting established goals
concludes the Noise element of the General Plan.
Noise Element, August 2007               1               Duarte General Plan 2005-2020

CHAPTER 4
NOISE ELEMENT
Noise Element Statutory Requirements
The State of California Government Code Section 65302(f) requires that a
General Plan include:
    “... a noise element which shall identify and appraise noise problems in the
    community. The Noise Element shall recognize the guidelines established
    by the Office of Noise Control in the State Department of Health Services
    and shall analyze and quantify…current and projected noise levels for all
    of the following sources: (1) highways and freeways; (2) primary arterials
    and major local streets; (3) passenger and freight on-line railroad
    operations and ground rapid transit systems; (4) commercial, general
    aviation, heliport, and military airport operations, aircraft overflights, jet
    engine test stands, and all other ground facilities and maintenance
    functions related to airport operation; (5) local industrial plants, including
    but not limited to, railroad classification yards; (6) other ground stationary
    noise sources identified by local agencies as contributing to the
    community noise environment.”
Relationship to Other General Plan Elements and Program EIR
California law requires that all elements of the General Plan be consistent. While
each of the General Plan elements could be characterized as independent
documents, they are also interrelated in the common goal of providing a long-
range integrated plan for the ongoing development of the city. The Noise Element
is most directly related to the Land Use, Circulation, and Air Quality section of the
Open Space and Conservation Elements.
A Program Environmental Impact Report (EIR) will be prepared in conjunction
with the Duarte General Plan. Policies and mitigation measures presented in the
Noise Element will also be presented as mitigation measures in the Program
EIR.
GOALS, OBJECTIVES AND POLICIES
This section presents the goals, objectives, and policies for the Noise Element of
the Duarte General Plan.
Noise Goal 1:          To reduce noise impacts from transportation sources.
Objective 1.1:         Maintain and reduce where feasible background noise levels
                       emanating from citywide transportation sources.
Noise Element, August 2007                  2              Duarte General Plan 2005-2020

CHAPTER 4
NOISE ELEMENT
Policies:
       Noise 1.1.1 Ensure noise mitigation measures are included in the design
                       of new developments.
       Noise 1.1.2 Encourage the State Department of Transportation
                       (Caltrans) to continue Programs that lead to the reduction of
                       the noise levels on I-210 and I-605.
       Noise 1.1.3 Continue the City’s beautification program along arterials to
                       help reduce noise levels.
       Noise 1.1.4 Encourage acoustical materials in all new residential and
                       commercial developments where noise levels exceed the
                       compatibility standards outlined in the Noise Element.
       Noise 1.1.5 Limit construction, delivery, and through truck traffic to
                       designated routes.
       Noise 1.1.6 Ensure Community Noise Equivalent Levels (CNEL) for
                       noise sensitive land uses meet or exceed normally
                       acceptable levels, as defined by State of California
                       standards.
       Noise 1.1.7 The City should encourage, support, and enforce all State
                       and Federal legislation designed to abate and control noise
                       pollution.
       Noise 1.1.8 The City should encourage the use of rubberized asphalt city
                       streets.
Noise Goal 2:          Develop measures to control non-transportation noise
                       impacts.
Objective 1.2:         Commercial and industrial uses, construction activity and
                       other non-transportation related sources of noise can
                       contribute negatively to the noise environment. Identifying
                       and mitigating these potential noise sources will reduce
                       negative impacts.
Noise Element, August 2007                  3              Duarte General Plan 2005-2020

CHAPTER 4
NOISE ELEMENT
Policies:
        Noise 2.2.1 Continuously review the Noise Ordinance to ensure noise-
                       generating uses are adequately addressed.
        Noise 2.1.2 Strive to resolve existing and potential conflicts between
                       noise generating uses and human activities.
        Noise 2.1.3 Reduce noise from rock quarrying operations.
        Noise 2.1.4 Prohibit significant noise generating activities from locating
                       adjacent to residential neighborhoods and near schools.
        Noise 2.1.5 Evaluate the noise impacts from projects and existing uses
                       in adjacent cities and work cooperatively with these cities to
                       develop mitigation measures that will improve ambient noise
                       conditions in Duarte.
Noise Goal 3:          To establish land uses which are compatible with noise
                       levels within the community.
Objective 1.3:         Land use planning decisions directly relate to potential noise
                       impacts. Therefore, careful consideration of noise impacts
                       should be a part of all land use decisions.
Policies:
        Noise 3.1.1 Establish a system of locating land uses according to the
                       maximum noise levels they generate.
        Noise 3.1.2 Enforce limits set by the State to control noise levels,
                       particularly those governing motor vehicles.
        Noise 3.1.3 Ensure that construction noise does not cause an adverse
                       impact to the residents of the City.
        Noise 3.1.4 Minimize noise and light spillage onto other residential
                       properties.
NOISE SCALES AND DEFINITIONS
Sound pressure level is a measure of the sound pressure of a given noise source
relative to a standard reference value. The reference pressure is typical of the
quietest sound that a young person with good hearing is able to detect. Sound
Noise Element, August 2007                  4               Duarte General Plan 2005-2020
CHAPTER 4
NOISE ELEMENT
pressure levels are measured in decibels (dB). Decibels are logarithmic
quantities, relating the sound pressure level of a noise source to the reference
pressure level.
An important characteristic of sound is frequency. This is the rate of repetition of
sound pressure oscillations (waves) as they reach our ears; frequency is
expressed in hertz (Hz). When analyzing the total noise of any source, the
frequency components are sometimes analyzed to determine the relative
amounts of low-frequency, middle-frequency, and high-frequency noise. This
breakdown is important for two reasons:
    x  Our ear is better equipped to hear mid- and high-range frequencies than
       lower frequencies. Thus, we find mid- and high-frequency noise to be
       more annoying. High-frequency noise is also more capable of producing
       hearing loss.
    x  Engineering solutions to a noise problem are different for different
       frequency ranges. Low-frequency noise is generally harder to control.
The normal frequency range of hearing for most people extends from a low
frequency of about 20 Hz to a high frequency of about 10,000 to 15,000 Hz.
People respond to sound most readily when the predominant frequency is in the
range of normal conversation, typically around 1,000 to 2,000 Hz. Several filters
have been developed that match the sensitivity of our ear and thus help us to
judge the relative loudness of various sounds made up of many different
frequencies. The so-called “A” filter is the best measure for most environmental
noise sources. Sound pressure levels measured through this filter are referred to
as A-weighted levels, and are measured in A-weighted decibels or (dBA). Exhibit
N -1 (Common Environmental Noise Levels) provides examples of common
environmental noise levels.
The A-weighted filter significantly de-emphasizes those parts of the total noise
that occur at lower frequencies (those below about 500 Hz) and also those at
very high frequencies (above 10,000 Hz) the frequencies that we do not hear as
well. The filter has very little effect, or is nearly “flat,” in the middle range of
frequencies (between 500 and 10,000 Hz), where our ears are most sensitive.
Because this filter generally matches our ears’ sensitivity, sounds having a higher
A-weighted sound level are usually judged to be louder than those with lower A-
weighted sound levels, a relationship that otherwise might not be true.
Noise Element, August 2007                5               Duarte General Plan 2005-2020

*ULY  
CHAPTER 4
NOISE ELEMENT
Community Noise Equivalent Level (CNEL)
Cumulative noise metrics were developed to assess community response to
noise. They are useful because they attempt to take into account the loudness
and duration of the noise, the total number of noise events, and the time of day
these events occur in one single-number rating scale. They are designed to
account for the known health effects of noise on people. The community noise
equivalent level (CNEL) is a 24-hour, time-weighted energy-average noise level
based on dBA that measures the overall noise during an entire day. Noise that
occurs during certain sensitive time periods is penalized for occurring at these
times (by adding decibels to its Leq measurement). On the CNEL scale, noise
between 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. is penalized by approximately five dB, to
account for the greater potential for noise to interfere during these hours, as well
as the typically lower ambient (background) noise levels during these hours.
Noise during the night (from 10:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m.) is penalized by 10 dB to
attempt to account for our higher sensitivity to noise in the nighttime and the
expected further decrease in ambient noise levels that typically occur in the night.
Equivalent Noise Level (LEQ)
The equivalent sound level, abbreviated Leq, is a measure of the exposure
resulting from the accumulation of A-weighted sound levels over a particular time
period (e.g., 1 hour, 8 hour, a school day, nighttime, or a full 24-hour day).
However, because the length of the period can be different depending on the
time frame of interest, the applicable period should always be identified or clearly
understood when discussing the metric. Such durations are often identified
through a subscript, for example, “Leq (24)”.
Conceptually, Leq may be thought of as a constant sound level over the period of
interest that contains as much sound energy as the actual time-varying sound
level with its normal peaks and valleys. It is important to realize, however, that
the two signals (the constant one and the time-varying one) would sound very
different from each other if compared in real life. Variations in the “average”
sound level suggested by Leq is not an arithmetic value, but a logarithmic
(“energy-averaged”) sound level. Thus, loud events clearly dominate any noise
environment described by the metric.
Day Night Average (Ldn)
Another commonly used noise metric is the day/night average noise level (Ldn).
The Ldn is a measure of the 24-hour average noise level at a given location. It
was adopted by the EPA for developing criteria to evaluate community noise
exposure. Ldn is based on a measure of the average noise level over a given
Noise Element, August 2007                7              Duarte General Plan 2005-2020

CHAPTER 4
NOISE ELEMENT
time period. The Ldn is calculated by averaging the Leq for each hour of the day
at a given location after penalizing the sleeping hours (from 10:00 p.m. to 7:00
a.m.) by 10 dBA to take into account the increased sensitivity of people to noises
that occur at night. The sound level exceeded over a specified time frame can
be expressed as Ln (i.e., L90, L50, L10, etc.). L50 equals the level exceeded 50
percent of the time; L10, 10 percent of the time; etc.
Other Noise Matrices
As previously mentioned, people tend to respond to changes in sound pressure
in a logarithmic manner. In general, a 1 dBA change in the sound pressure
levels of a given sound is detectable only under laboratory conditions. A 3 dBA
change in sound pressure level is considered a detectable difference in most
situations. A 5 dBA change is readily noticeable and a 10 dBA change is
considered a doubling (or halving) of the subjective loudness. It should be noted
that a 3 dBA increase or decrease in the average traffic noise level is realized by
a doubling or halving of the traffic volume; or by about a 7 mile per hour (mph)
increase or decrease in speed.
For each doubling of distance from a point noise source, the sound level will
decrease by 6 dBA. In other words, if a person is 100 feet from a machine, and
moves to 200 feet from that source, sound levels will drop approximately 6 dBA.
For each doubling of distance from a line source, like a roadway, noise levels are
reduced by 3 to 5 decibels, depending on the ground cover between the source
and the receiver.
Noise barriers can provide approximately a 5 dBA CNEL noise reduction
(additional reduction may be provided with a barrier of appropriate height,
material, location and length). A row of buildings provides up to 5 dBA CNEL
noise reduction with a 1.5 dBA CNEL reduction for each additional row up to a
maximum reduction of approximately 10 dBA. The exact degree of noise
attenuation depends on the nature and orientation of the structure and
intervening barriers.
RELATED LAWS, ORDINANCES, REGULATIONS, AND
STANDARDS
Federal Noise Standards
The United States Noise Control Act of 1972 (NCA) recognized the role of the
Federal government in dealing with major commercial noise sources in order to
Noise Element, August 2007                8             Duarte General Plan 2005-2020
CHAPTER 4
NOISE ELEMENT
provide for uniform treatment of such sources. As Congress has the authority to
regulate interstate and foreign commerce, regulation of noise generated by such
commerce also falls under congressional authority. The Federal government
specifically preempts local control of noise emissions from aircraft, railroad and
interstate highways.
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
The EPA offers guidelines for community noise exposure in the publication Noise
Effects Handbook – A Desk Reference to Health and Welfare Effects of Noise.
These guidelines consider occupational noise exposure as well as noise
exposure in homes. The EPA recognizes an exterior noise level of 55 dB Ldn as
a general goal to protect the public from hearing loss, activity interference, sleep
disturbance, and annoyance. The EPA and other Federal agencies have adopted
suggested land use compatibility guidelines that indicate that residential noise
exposures of 55 to 65 dB Ldn are acceptable. The EPA notes, however, that
these levels are not regulatory goals, but are levels defined by a negotiated
scientific consensus, without concern for economic and technological feasibility
or the needs and desires of any particular community.
State of California
The State Office of Planning and Research (OPR) Noise Element Guidelines
include recommended exterior and interior noise level standards for local
jurisdictions to identify and prevent the creation of incompatible land uses due to
noise. The OPR Guidelines contain a land use compatibility table that describes
the compatibility of various land uses with a range of environmental noise levels
in terms of CNEL. A noise environment of 50 to 60 CNEL is considered to be
“normally acceptable” for residential uses. The OPR recommendations also note
that, under certain conditions, more restrictive standards than the maximum
levels cited may be appropriate. As an example, the standards for quiet suburban
and rural communities may be reduced by 5 to 10 dB to reflect their lower
existing outdoor noise levels in comparison with urban environments. Table N -1
(Land Use Compatibility Noise Guidelines – California) illustrates the State
guidelines established by the State Department of Health Services for acceptable
noise levels for each county and city.
Noise Element, August 2007                9               Duarte General Plan 2005-2020

     CHAPTER 4
     NOISE ELEMENT
                                                                  Table N -1
                         Land Use Compatibility Noise Guidelines — California
                                                                            Community Noise Exposure (Ldn or CNEL, dBA)
                        Land Use Category                              Normally Conditionally             Normally              Clearly
                                                                      Acceptable Acceptable Unacceptable Unacceptable
Residential - Low Density, Single-Family, Duplex, Mobile
                                                                        50 - 60          55 - 70             70-75               75-85
Homes
Residential - Multiple Family                                           50 - 65          60 - 70            70 - 75             70 - 85
Transient Lodging - Motels, and Hotels                                  50 - 65          60 - 70            70 - 80             80 - 85
Schools, Libraries, Churches, Hospitals, Nursing Homes                  50 - 70          60 - 70            70 - 80             80 - 85
Auditoriums, Concert Halls, Amphitheaters                                 NA             50 - 70              NA                65 - 85
Sports Arenas, Outdoor Spectator Sports                                   NA             50 - 75              NA                70 - 85
Playgrounds, Neighborhood Parks                                         50 - 70            NA              67.5 - 75          72.5 - 85
Golf Courses, Riding Stables, Water Recreation, Cemeteries              50 - 70            NA               70 - 80             80 - 85
Office Buildings, Business Commercial and Professional                  50 - 70        67.5 - 77.5          75 - 85               NA
Industrial, Manufacturing, Utilities, Agriculture                       50 - 75          70 - 80            75 - 85               NA
NA: Not Applicable
Source: General Plan Guidelines, Office of Planning and Research, California, October 2003.
Normally Acceptable – Specified land use is satisfactory, based upon the assumption that any buildings involved are of normal conventional
construction, without any special noise insulation requirements.
Conditionally Acceptable – New construction or development should be undertaken only after a detailed analysis of the noise reduction
requirements is made and needed noise insulation features included in the design. Conventional construction, but with closed windows and
fresh air supply systems or air conditioning, will normally suffice.
Normally Unacceptable – New construction or development should be discouraged. If new construction or development does proceed, a
detailed analysis of the noise reduction requirements must be made and needed noise insulation features included in the design.
Clearly Unacceptable – New construction or development should generally not be undertaken.
     City Noise Standards
     The City of Duarte maintains a comprehensive Noise Ordinance within the Municipal
     Code that sets standards for noise levels citywide and provides the means to enforce the
     reduction of obnoxious or offensive noises. Chapter 9.68 of the Duarte Municipal Code
     establishes noise standards and enforcement procedures.
                City Noise Ordinance
     The City of Duarte has adopted a number of policies that are directed at
     controlling or mitigating environmental noise effects. A Noise Ordinance
     establishes acceptable noise levels generated on private property in residential
     neighborhoods. It is designed to control unnecessary, excessive and annoying
     sounds generated from a stationary source impacting an adjacent property. It
     differentiates between environmental and nuisance noise. Environmental noise
     is measured under a time average period while nuisance noise cannot exceed
     the established Noise Ordinance levels at any time. Chapter 9.68 of the City of
     Noise Element, August 2007                                      10                     Duarte General Plan 2005-2020

    CHAPTER 4
    NOISE ELEMENT
    Duarte Municipal Code controls unnecessary, excessive and annoying noise.
    The City’s noise regulations have established in the Ambient Base Noise Levels
    that “It is unlawful for any person within the city of Duarte to make, cause or allow
    to be produced noise which is received on property occupied by another person
    with the designated zone, in excess of the following levels, except as expressly
    provided otherwise”. Table N -2 (City of Duarte Noise Ordinance Standards)
    provides the City of Duarte’s noise regulations.
                                                             TABLE N - 2
                            CITY OF DUARTE NOISE ORDINANCE STANDARDS
                                                                                     Noise Level (dBA)
                                          Zone
                                                                      Day: 7AM – 9PM                Night: 9PM – 7AM
                R-1 and R-2                                                   55                            45
                R-3 and R-4                                                   55                            50
                Commercial                                                    60                            55
                Industrial and Light Manufacturing                            70                            70
                Source: City of Duarte Municipal Code, Chapter 9.68.050 (Ambient base noise levels)
    At the boundary line between a residential property and a commercial and
    manufacturing property, the noise level of the quieter zone shall be used. Table N -3
    (Corrections to Noise Limits) illustrates how the numerical limits given in Table N -2 (City
    of Duarte Noise Ordinance Standards) shall be adjusted by the following corrections
    when appropriate.
                                                             TABLE N - 3
                                              CORRECTION TO NOISE LIMITS
                                              Noise Condition                                                  Correction (in dB)
Repetitive impulsive noise, pure tones and sound with cyclically varying amplitude                                    –5
Steady whine, screech or hum                                                                                          –5
Noise occurring more than 5 but less than 15 minutes per hour*                                                        +5
Noise occurring more than 1 but less than 5 minutes per hour*                                                        + 10
Noise occurring less than 1 minute per hour*                                                                         + 15
* The Following corrections apply to day only
Source: City of Duarte Municipal Code, Chapter 9.68.050 (Ambient base noise levels)
    The major sources of noise in the City of Duarte are transportation related.
    These sources include I-210, local surface streets, railroads, and rapid transit.
    The major traffic noise sources include vehicles operating on the major arterials
    that serve the city, such as, Huntington Drive, Buena Vista Street, Highland
    Noise Element, August 2007                                      11                     Duarte General Plan 2005-2020

CHAPTER 4
NOISE ELEMENT
Avenue, and Duarte Road. Also, I-210 generates significant noise levels
because the freeway is elevated at its closest point within the city. The noise
generated by the traffic noise represent a constant noise; while railroads, on the
average, generate a higher level of noise but only for a short duration of time. In
the areas throughout the city where industrial operations are located in close
proximity to homes, there is a potential for noise impacts from machinery, work
activities, and truck traffic during certain periods of the day. Over the recent
years, noise levels throughout the community have escalated as development
and traffic have increased.
Residents are protected from excessive noise through established local and state
laws and standards. The Duarte Noise Ordinance will also serve as a primary
implementation measure or reducing excessive noise in the city. The California
Department of Transportation (Caltrans) has established, according to Section
215.5 of the State Streets and Highway Code, a priority system for erecting
sound walls along freeway routes. The state has also established noise
insulation standards pursuant to Title 25, Section 1092 of the California
Administrative Code. This code protects multiple-family residential dwelling units
from excessive and unnecessary noise.
NOISE ANALYSIS
The following sections describe the existing noise conditions in the City of Duarte
and present the projected noise for the future buildout year of 2020.
Existing Conditions
Human response to noise varies widely depending on the type of noise, time of
day, and sensitivity of the receptor. The effects of noise on humans can range
from temporary or permanent hearing loss to mild stress and annoyance due to
such things as speech interference and sleep deprivation. Prolonged stress,
regardless of the cause, is known to contribute to a variety of health disorders.
Noise, or the lack of it, is a factor in the aesthetic perception of some settings,
particularly those with religious or cultural significance.
Table N - 4 (Sensitive Receptors) and Exhibit N - 2 (Sensitive Uses) illustrate
some of the sensitive receptors that are located within the City of Duarte and can
be affected by excess noise levels.
        Computer Modeling
Roadway noise levels throughout the City were projected using the Federal
Highway Administration’s Highway Noise Prediction Model (FHWA RD-77-108)
Noise Element, August 2007                 12               Duarte General Plan 2005-2020

CHAPTER 4
NOISE ELEMENT
together with several roadway and site parameters.               These parameters
determine the projected impact of vehicular traffic noise and include the roadway
cross-section (i.e., number of lanes), the roadway width, the average daily traffic
(ADT), and the vehicle travel speed. The percentages of auto and truck traffic,
the roadway grade, the angle-of-view, the site conditions (“hard” or “soft”), and
the percent of total ADT that flows each hour throughout a 24-hour period. The
model does not account for ambient noise levels (i.e., noise from adjacent land
uses) or topographical differences between the roadways and adjacent land
uses. Various vehicle speeds were assumed throughout the City based on
empirical observations and posted maximum speeds. Noise projections are
based on vehicular traffic as derived from the Duarte General Plan Circulation
Element.
        Traffic Noise
Traffic noise levels can be reliably predicted using formulas that take into account
traffic volume, speed and percentage of trucks. Existing noise contours were
calculated for all the City’s primary and major arterials, as well as I-210 that
traverse the City. In addition, a number of secondary and commuter streets were
modeled as well. Noise generation for each roadway segment was calculated
and the distance to the 60, 65, and 70 dBA CNEL contours was determined. A
noise contour is a line behind which the noise level does not exceed a certain
value. For instance, the 60 dBA CNEL contour indicates that the CNEL between
the street and the contour line is equal to, or greater than 60 dBA; the CNEL
beyond the contour line - away from the street - is less than 60 dBA). Refer to
Exhibit N - 3 (Existing Noise Contours), for the approximate location of existing
noise contours based on average daily traffic (ADT).
Noise Element, August 2007                13             Duarte General Plan 2005-2020

CHAPTER 4
NOISE ELEMENT
                                                  TABLE N - 4
                                         SENSITIVE RECEPTORS
                         Receptor:                                               Location:
 Institutional:
 Berean Bible Church                                     2302 Mountain Avenue, Duarte, CA 91010
 Church of Christ                                        1330 Highland Avenue, Duarte, CA 91010
 Church of the Nazarene Duarte                           2047 Mountain Avenue, Duarte, CA 91010
 Covenant Life Ministries                                1430 East Huntington Dr, Duarte, CA 91010
 Duarte Christian Church                                 2632 Royal Oaks Drive, Duarte, CA 91010
 Duarte Fellowship Church                                1551 Huntington Drive, Duarte, CA 91010
 First Baptist Church of Duarte                          2200 East Huntington Dr, Duarte, CA 91010
 God's Grace Christian Fellowship Church                 2160 East Huntington Drive, Duarte, CA 91010
 Joy Christian Center                                    822 Bradbourne Avenue, Duarte, CA 91010
 New Life Assembly of God                                822 Bradbourne Avenue, Duarte, CA 91010
 The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-Day Saints         1452 Royal Oaks Drive, Duarte, CA 91010
 City of Hope - National Medical Center                  1500 E. Duarte Road, Duarte, CA 91010
 The Manor at Santa Teresita Hospital                    819 Buena Vista Street, Duarte, CA 91010
 Country Villa Monte Vista (Rehabilitation Center)       802 Buena Vista Street, Duarte, CA 91010
 Monrovia Convalescent Hospital                          1220 Huntington Drive, Duarte, CA 91010
 Duarte Montessori School                                1640 3rd Street, Duarte, CA 91010
 Head Start-State Preschool                              1433 Crestfield Drive, Duarte, CA 91010
 Kidz Excel                                              1014 Highland Av, Duarte, CA 91010
 YMCA of San Gabriel Valley                              1014 Highland Avenue, Duarte, CA 91010
 Andres Duarte Elementary School                         1433 Crestfield Drive, Duarte, CA 91010
 Beardslee Elementary School                             1212 E. Kellwil Way, Duarte, CA 91010
 Royal Oaks Elementary School                            2499 Royal Oaks Drive, Duarte, CA 91010
 Valley View Elementary School                           237 Melcanyon Road, Duarte, CA 91010
 Mount Olive Alternative Education (7-12)                1400 Mount Olive Drive, Duarte, CA 91010
 Northview Intermediate School (7-8)                     1401 Highland, Duarte, CA 91010
 Duarte High School (9-12)                               1565 East Central Avenue, Duarte, CA 91010
 Duarte Public Library                                   1301 Buena Vista Street, Duarte, CA 91010
 Westminster Gardens - Residential Facility              1420 Santo Domingo Avenue, Duarte, CA 91010
 Community Care Center                                   2335 Mountain Avenue, Duarte, CA 91010
 Huntington Oaks Village                                 1657 Huntington Drive, Duarte, CA 91010
 Andres Duarte Terrace                                   1730 East Huntington Drive, Duarte, CA 91010
 Parks:
 Beardslee Park (4.91 acres)                             2000 Buena Vista Street, Duarte, CA 91010
 Duarte Park (2.96 acres)                                1344 Bloomdale Street, Duarte, CA 91010
 Encanto Park (11.5 acres)                               751 Encanto Parkway, Duarte, CA 91010
 Hacienda Park (1.64 acres)                              2695 Hacienda Drive, Duarte, CA 91010
 Lena Valenzuela Park (0.78 acres)                       2120 Mountain Avenue, Duarte, CA 91010
 Moore Park (1.13 acres)                                 1100 Duarte Road, Duarte, CA 91010
 Northview Park (2.02 acres)                             1433 Highland Avenue, Duarte, CA 91010
 Royal Oaks Park (7.40 acres)                            2627 Royal Oaks Drive, Duarte, CA 91010
 Royal Oaks Park Extension                               2701 Royal Oaks Drive, Duarte, CA 91010
Noise Element, August 2007                            14                   Duarte General Plan 2005-2020
CHAPTER 4
NOISE ELEMENT
                                        TABLE N - 4 [CONTINUED]
                                          SENSITIVE RECEPTORS
                          Receptor:                                                      Location:
  Parks [continued]:
  Sports Park (12.25 acres)                                     1401 Central Avenue, Duarte, CA 91010
  Third Street Park (0.36 acres)                                1626 Third Street, Duarte, CA 91010
  Glenn Miller Park (1.38 acres)                                205 Melcanyon Drive, Duarte, CA 91010
  Residential:
                                                                North of I-210/I-605 Intersection
                                                                South of I-210 (Eastbound direction)
                                                                Southwest “corner” of the city – stretching to the City
                                                                boundaries
                                                                East of I-605 and continuing north to the San Gabriel
                                                                Mountains
                                                                Northern area of Duarte
  Source: Google Earth, 2005. Image 2006, NASA; 2006 TerraMetics.
In an effort to reduce the effects of roadway noise generated from I-210 on the
local population, the City of Duarte has constructed soundwalls adjacent to the I-
210 freeway as well as provided landscaping along the soundwalls. Phase One
of the 210 Freeway soundwall project was completed in December 2002 by
Caltrans. Phase two timing has not been determined.
           Existing Noise Contours
As indicated in Table N - 5 (Existing Traffic Noise Levels), none of the roadways
measured generate noise levels at a distance of 100 feet from centerline that
exceed 75 CNEL. Of the 35 roadway links modeled within the City planning
area, eight roadway links generate noise levels at 65 CNEL or greater at 100 feet
from centerline. Eleven of the roadway links modeled generate noise levels
between 60 CNEL and 65 CNEL. These links include Huntington Drive East of
Las Lomas, Duarte Road, segments along Buena Vista, Buena Vista Street
between I-210 Freeway to the south of Duarte Road, segments along Royal
Oaks Road and Mount Olive Drive. Twelve of the thirty-five roadway segments
modeled generate noise levels between 55 CNEL and 60 CNEL. These
segments are along Buena Vista Street, Highland Avenue, Royal Oaks Road,
Bradbourne Avenue, and Las Lomas. Four modeled roadway links with noise
levels below 55 CNEL at 100 feet from centerline are Mountain Avenue south of
Duarte Road, Royal Oaks Road west of Encanto Parkway, and Los Lomas Road
north of Royal Oaks Road. Exhibit N-3 displays the projected 60, 65, and 70
CNEL noise contours calculated from the roadway centerline.
Noise Element, August 2007                                 15                      Duarte General Plan 2005-2020

*ULY  
*ULY  
CHAPTER 4
NOISE ELEMENT
                                              Table N - 5
                                     Existing Traffic Noise Levels
                                                           dBA @ 100              Noise Contour
                                                            Feet from       (distance from centerline)
              Roadway Segment                     ADT
                                                            Roadway
                                                            Centerline  60 CNEL      65 CNEL      70 CNEL
                                             Arterial Roadways:
 Huntington Drive:
 Between Mountain Ave. and Buena Vista St.       26,530        67.1       621           196          62
 Between Buena Vista St. and Highland Ave.       23,810        66.6       557           176          56
 Between Highland Ave. and Bradbourne Ave.       26,460        67.1       620           196          62
 Between Bradbourne Ave. and Mount Olive Dr.     28,640        67.4       672           212          67
 Between Mount Olive Dr. and Las Lomas Rd.       26,750        67.1       627           198          63
 Huntington Dr. East of Las Lomas Rd.            26,170        64.0       221           103          48
 Duarte Road:
 Between Mountain Ave. and Buena Vista St.       11,950        63.8       280            89          28
 Buena Vista St. to Highland Ave.                12,740        64.0       299            94          30
 Mountain Avenue:
 Between Huntington Drive and I-210 Freeway      24,500        65.6       423           134          42
 Between I-210 Freeway and Duarte Road           31,040        66.7       535           169          54
 Mountain Avenue South of Duarte Road             3,550        54.6        48            22          10
 Buena Vista Street:
 Between Royal Oaks Dr. and Huntington Dr.       11,310        63.5       265            84          26
 Between Huntington Drive and I-210 Freeway      18,860        65.7       442           140          44
 Between I-210 Freeway and Duarte Road           15,170        61.8       154            71          33
 Buena Vista Street South of Duarte Road          7,860        58.0        81            38          17
 Highland Avenue:
 Between Royal Oaks Dr. and Huntington Drive     3,750         57.7        65            20           6
 Between Huntington Drive and I-210 Freeway      11,480        63.8       269            85          27
 Between I-210 Freeway and Duarte Road            9,650        60.1       114            53          25
                                             Collector Streets:
 Royal Oaks Drive:
 Royal Oaks Dr. West of Buena Vista Street       10,650        62.2       184            58          18
 Between Buena Vista St. to Highland Avenue       8,550        58.3        86            40          18
 Between Highland Ave. and Bradbourne Ave.        7,610        57.9        79            37          17
 Between Bradbourne Ave. and Mount Olive Dr.      7,870        58.0        81            38          17
 Between Mount Olive Dr. and Las Lomas Road      10,380        59.2        97            45          21
 Royal Oaks Dr. East of Las Lomas Road            8,000        58.1        82            38          18
 Royal Oaks Dr. West of Encanto Parkway           1,400        50.5        26            12           6
Noise Element, August 2007                           18                Duarte General Plan 2005-2020
CHAPTER 4
NOISE ELEMENT
                                                  Table N – 5 (Continued)
                                                Existing Traffic Noise Levels
                                                                                dBA @ 100               Noise Contour
                                                                                  Feet from       (distance from centerline)
                  Roadway Segment                                  ADT
                                                                                  Roadway
                                                                                  Centerline  60 CNEL      65 CNEL      70 CNEL
  Central Avenue:
  Central Avenue West of Buena Vista Street                       3,880             56.5         48            15           5
  Central Avenue East of Buena Vista Street                      12,200             61.5        150            48          15
  Central Avenue West of Highland Avenue                          3,550             56.2         44            14           4
  Between Highland Ave. and Bradbourne Ave.                       7,100             59.2         88            28           9
  Bradbourne Avenue:
  Between Royal Oaks Dr. and Huntington Drive                     1,260             51.0        118            55          25
  Mount Olive Drive:
  Between Royal Oaks Dr. to Huntington Drive                     10,230             60.4        118            55          25
  Mount Olive Drive South of Huntington Drive                    23,870             63.6        208            97          45
  Las Lomas Road:
  Las Lomas Road North of Royal Oaks Drive                        3,200             52.6         36            17           8
  Between Royal Oaks Dr. and Huntington Drive                     9,440             58.4         91            42          20
  Las Lomas Road South of Huntington Drive                        4,080             55.1         52            24          11
  Source: Chapter 4, Circulation Element, prepared by RBF Consulting, April 2006.
           Stationary Noise Sources
Commercial and industrial land uses located near residential areas currently
generate occasional noise impacts. The primary noise sources associated with
these facilities are caused by delivery trucks, air compressors, generators,
outdoor loudspeakers and gas venting. Other significant stationary noise
sources in the City include noise from construction activity, street sweepers and
gas-powered leaf blowers. Residential land uses and areas identified as noise-
sensitive must be protected from excessive noise from stationary sources
including commercial and industrial centers. These impacts are best controlled
through effective land use planning and application of the City Noise Ordinance.
           Irwindale Rock Quarry
Irwindale is in close proximity, southwest of Duarte and is home to seventeen
rock quarries; however, currently, eight of the seventeen quarries are dormant.
According to police records, no noise complaints have been made regarding
these facilities, however, residents, at public meeting indicate they can hear the
quarry operations.
Noise Element, August 2007                                            19                     Duarte General Plan 2005-2020

CHAPTER 4
NOISE ELEMENT
         Azusa Rock Company
The Azusa Rock Company, which is now a part of Vulcan Materials Company, is
a 350-acre Rock Pit on the border of Duarte and it’s easterly neighboring
community, Azusa. Despite the large mining activities, truck traffic is typically not
a major noise source since the material coming out of the Azusa Rock pit is
placed on a conveyor belt, transported to the Reliance Plant and crushed into
sand and gravel. However, residents at public meeting have indicated that when
in full operation, the Azusa Rock Quarry is loud.
         San Gabriel Valley Gun Club
The San Gabriel Valley Gun Club, which was closed in late 2006, was located in
the City of Azusa, at the northeast corner of the City of Duarte. The Gun Club
provided civilians, security agencies, police, government agencies, and the
military a safe and secure location to practice marksmanship. The Gun Club was
open for entry at 6:30 a.m. Tuesday through Sunday. The outdoor rifle and pistol
ranges were open from 8:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. Tuesday through Friday and 8:00
a.m. to 4:45 p.m. Saturday and Sunday and offers eighty-six (86) covered
shooting positions. The air rifle and air pistol range was open the same hours of
operation as the rifle and pistol range and has 20 positions available. In addition
to the rifle and pistol ranges, the Club also offered four shotgun fields that
operated from the hours of 10:00 a.m. to 3:30 p.m. Tuesday, Wednesday and
Friday and from 8:30 a.m. to 4:15 p.m. on Saturday and Sunday. The San
Gabriel Valley Gun Club was a non-conforming use in the City of Azusa. It was
reported that residents in both Azusa and Duarte complained about noise
generated by the facility. The gun club is no longer a noise generator.
         Duarte Gold Line Metro Station
The Duarte Gold Line Metro Station is proposed along Duarte Road,
approximately 500 feet west of Highland Avenue. The proposed station will be a
center platform station with entrances on both ends. The surrounding uses
include commercial and industrial buildings to the northeast and the San Gabriel
Flood Control area to the south. In a baseline study, RBF Consulting conducted
an overnight noise measurement on March 22, 2006.                    The overnight
measurement read 67 Leq; refer to Table N - 6 (Field Noise Measurements). In
addition to the proposed Gold Line Metro Station, the City is anticipating that ten
out of the twenty acres east of the residential areas and west of Highland Avenue
will become mixed use. The development of the Gold Line Station will slightly
increase noise within the vicinity of the station; however, noises would be a result
Noise Element, August 2007                20             Duarte General Plan 2005-2020

CHAPTER 4
NOISE ELEMENT
of the increase in passengers waiting for the train in the morning as well as
departing the train in the evening. The station is located in an industrial area and
thus, the slight increase in noise will not create a disturbance or become a
nuisance to the surrounding uses.
        Irwindale Speedway
The Irwindale Speedway is a new, state-of-the-art motorsports and entertainment
event facility that features 6,000 seats, 12 exclusive Corporate “Sky Box” Suites,
twin paved oval race tracks that are banked at 1/2 and 1/3 mile, sound and
lighting systems, and paved parking for over 3,000 cars. The Irwindale
Speedway is located adjacent to the 605 Freeway and to the southeast of
Duarte. The Speedway accommodates stock cars, sprint cars, midgets,
supermodifieds, legends, and trucks. The venue is home to National Association
for Stock Car Auto Racing (NASCAR) competition on selected Friday and
Saturday evenings with gates opening to the public at 4:00 p.m. and the race
starting at 10:00 p.m and ending at 10:00 p.m. During the week, NASCAR drivers
can be found training around the oval tracks. Drag Racing is held at the venue
every Sunday from 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. and Thursday from 4:00 p.m. to 10
p.m. According to Duarte Sheriff records, there are no noise complaints filed in
regards to the Speedway, however, at General Plan public meetings, residents
stated they can clearly hear the speedway.
        Ambient Noise
In atmospheric sound transmission or noise pollution the ambient noise level is
the sound pressure level at a given location, normally specified as a reference
level to study a new intrusive sound source. Ambient sound levels are often
measured in order to map sound conditions over a specific area to understand
their variation with locale. In this case the product of the investigation is a sound
level contour diagram. Alternatively ambient noise levels may be measured to
provide a reference point for analyzing an intrusive sound to a given
environment. For example, aircraft noise is studied by measuring ambient sound
without the presence of any overflights, and then studying the noise addition by
measurement or computer simulation of overflight events.
Ambient noise level is measured with a sound level meter. It is usually measured
in dB above a reference pressure level of 0.00002 Pascals (Pa), in the
International System of Units (SI). Most frequently ambient noise levels are
measured using a frequency-weighting filter, the most common being the A-
weighting scale, such that resulting measurements are denoted dBA, or decibels
on the A-weighting scale.
Noise Element, August 2007                 21             Duarte General Plan 2005-2020

   CHAPTER 4
   NOISE ELEMENT
   The thirteen ambient noise measurement points were selected based on their
   proximity to sensitive receptors within the City. They were taken in areas that
   had several sensitive uses within one area. The four roadway measurements
   were chosen based on the traffic volume on the roadways. Three roadway
   measurements were taken along Huntington Drive, the main traffic artery within
   the City and the other was along Duarte Road, a local street that runs parallel to
   the eastbound lane of Interstate 210. To quantify the ambient noise levels in the
   City of Duarte, RBF Consulting conducted noise measurements on March 22
   through 23, 2006; refer to Table N - 6 (Field Noise Measurements). The noise
   measurement sites were representative of typical existing noise exposure within
   and immediately adjacent to sensitive uses within the City; refer to Exhibits N-4a
   through N-4c (Noise Measurement Sites). Fifteen-minute measurements were
   taken at each site, between 10:00 a.m. and 4:30 p.m. Meteorological conditions
   were typical, with light wind speeds, low humidity, and clear skies.
                                                          Table N - 6
                                               Field Noise Measurements
       Site                                     Location                                    Leq                Time¹
         1           Duarte High School                                                     63.9            10:40 a.m.
         2           Huntington Drive and Buena Vista Street                                68.7            11:17 a.m.
         3           Second Street between Cotter and Oak Avenues                           52.7            11:42 a.m.
                     Broadland Avenue between Maynard Drive and Bloomdale
         4                                                                                  56.8            12:07 p.m.
                     Street
         5           Aloysia Moore Park                                                     53.1             1:20 p.m.
         6           Duarte Road and Earlington Avenue                                      65.6             1:45 p.m.
         7           City of Hope Hospital – National Medical Center                        59.6             3:00 p.m.
         8           Sandefur Street and Eastford Avenue                                    50.0             3:30 p.m.
                     East Duarte Road between Hope Drive and Highland
        92                                                                                  67.1             4:10 p.m.
                     Avenue
        10           Crestfield Drive and Bashor Street                                     48.5            11:25 a.m.
        11           Fairwood Street between Bernwood and Conata Streets                    48.4            11:45 a.m.
        12           Huntington Drive near Calle Linares                                    70.6            12:10 p.m.
        13           Huntington Drive and Windsor Circle                                    71.1            12:43 p.m.
        14           Westminster Gardens – A Retirement Oasis                               58.2             2:00 p.m.
        15           Maynard Street between Crestfield and Femley Drives                    57.4             2:29 p.m.
        16           Bettyhill Avenue between Conata and Elda Streets                       48.8             2:54 p.m.
        17           Eastern side of Hacienda Park on Hacienda Drive                        54.2             3:23 p.m.
1 Unless otherwise noted, noise measurements were recorded over a period of 15 minutes.
2 Overnight measurement for the duration of 18 hours, 21 minutes, 9.8 seconds.
Leq = equivalent sound level; dBA = A-weighted decibel.
Source: Noise Monitoring Survey conducted by RBF Consulting, March 22 and 23, 2006.
   Noise Element, August 2007                                     22                    Duarte General Plan 2005-2020




CHAPTER 4
NOISE ELEMENT
Measured noise levels ranged from 48.4 to 71.1 dBA Leq. Noise monitoring
equipment used for the ambient noise survey consisted of a Larson Davis
Laboratories Model LDL 820 sound level analyzer equipped with a Larson Davis
Type 2561 microphone. The instrumentation was calibrated prior to use with a
Larson Davis CA250 acoustical calibrator to ensure the accuracy of the
measurements, and complies with applicable requirements of the American
National Standards Institute (ANSI) for Type I (precision) sound level meters. The
accuracy of the calibrator is maintained through a program established by the
manufacturer, and is traceable to the National Bureau of Standards. All
instrumentation meets the requirements of ANSI S1.4-1971.
Projected Noise Conditions
Exhibit N - 5 (2020 Noise Contours) displays the projected 60, 65, and 70 CNEL
noise contours calculated from the roadway centerline.
Table N - 7 “Projected 2020 Traffic Noise Levels” depicts the average daily traffic
(ADT) for projected ADTs and the volume noise levels at 100 feet from the
roadway centerline and the distance from the roadway centerline to the 70, 65
and 60 dBA CNEL contours. Tables in the Circulation Element indicate traffic
volumes on designated street segments. Surface traffic noise has the greatest
impact on the noise environment of residential and sensitive-receptor properties.
Contours between 55 and 60 dBA CNEL are common along City collector
streets, while 65 dBA CNEL or greater contours are common along major streets.
Of the 35 roadway links modeled within the City planning area, nine roadway
links generate noise levels at 65 CNEL or greater at 100 feet from centerline.
Ten of the roadway links modeled generate noise levels between 60 CNEL and
65 CNEL at 100 feet from centerline. These links include Huntington Drive east
of Las Lomas, Duarte Road, segments along Buena Vista, Buena Vista Street
between I-210 Freeway to the south of Duarte Road, segments along Royal
Oaks, Central Ave. east of Buena Vista Street, and Mount Olive Drive. Thirteen
of the thirty-five roadway segments modeled generate noise levels between 55
CNEL and 60 CNEL. These segments are along Mountain Avenue south of
Duarte Road, Buena Vista Street, Highland Avenue, Royal Oaks Drive, Central
Avenue, and Las Lomas. Three modeled roadway links with noise levels below
55 CNEL at 100 feet from centerline are Royal Oaks Drive west of Encanto
Parkway, Bradbourne Avenue, and Los Lomas Road north of Royal Oaks Drive.
In the City of Duarte, soundwalls are adjacent to the I-210 Freeway. These
soundwalls serve as a noise barrier and as noise attenuation. All other noise
impacts are located within commercial or industrial areas in the City, which are
not identified as sensitive receptors.
Noise Element, August 2007              26              Duarte General Plan 2005-2020

*ULY  
CHAPTER 4
NOISE ELEMENT
                                              Table N - 7
                                 Projected 2020 Traffic Noise Levels
                                                          dBA @ 100              Noise Contour
                                                           Feet from       (distance from centerline)
             Roadway Segment                    ADT
                                                           Roadway
                                                           Centerline  60 CNEL      65 CNEL     70 CNEL
                                             Arterial Roadways:
 Huntington Drive:
 Between Mountain Ave. and Buena Vista St.     30,700         67.8       720           228          72
 Between Buena Vista St, and Highland Ave.     27,400         67.3       642           203          64
 Between Highland Ave. and Bradbourne Ave.     31,800         67.9       745           236          75
 Between Bradbourne Ave. and Mount Olive Dr    34,000         68.2       796           525          80
 Between Mount Olive Dr. and Las Lomas Rd.     31,400         67.8       736           233          74
 Huntington Drive east of Las Lomas Road       30,000         64.6       243           113          52
 Duarte Road:
 Between Mountain Ave. and Buena Vista St.     14,000         64.5       328           104          33
 Buena Vista Street to Highland Avenue         17,000         65.3       398           126          40
 Mountain Avenue:
 Between Huntington Drive and I-210 Freeway    28,200         66.3       486           154          49
 Between I-210 Freeway and Duarte Road         36,300         67.3       626           198          63
 Mountain Avenue South of Duarte Road          11,900         59.8       107            50          23
 Buena Vista Street:
 Between Royal Oaks Dr. and Huntington Dr.     13,600         64.3       318           101          32
 Between Huntington Drive and I-210 Freeway    23,400         66.7       548           173          55
 Between I-210 Freeway and Duarte Road         19,000         62.7       179            83          39
 Buena Vista Street South of Duarte Road        9,100         58.6        89            41          19
 Highland Avenue:
 Between Royal Oaks Dr. and Huntington Dr.      4,800         58.7        83            26           8
 Between Huntington Drive and I-210 Freeway    13,500         64.5       316           100          32
 Between I-210 Freeway and Duarte Road         12,800         61.3       137            64          30
                                             Collector Streets:
 Royal Oaks Drive:
 Royal Oaks Drive west of Buena Vista Street   12,100         62.8       209            66          21
 Between Buena Vista St. to Highland Avenue    10,200         59.1        96            45          21
 Between Highland Ave. and Bradbourne Ave.      9,100         58.7        89            41          19
 Between Bradbourne Ave. and Mount Olive Dr     9,300         58.8        91            42          20
 Between Mount Olive Dr. and Las Lomas Rd.     12,000         59.8       107            50          23
 Royal Oaks Drive east of Las Lomas Road        9,100         58.7        89            41          19
 Royal Oaks Drive west of Encanto Parkway       1,700         51.4        29            14           6
Noise Element, August 2007                           28               Duarte General Plan 2005-2020
CHAPTER 4
NOISE ELEMENT
                                                     Table N - 7 [continued]
                                          Projected 2020 Traffic Noise Levels
                                                                               dBA @ 100             Noise Contour
                                                                                Feet from      (distance from centerline)
                 Roadway Segment                                ADT
                                                                                Roadway
                                                                               Centerline  60 CNEL      65 CNEL     70 CNEL
  Central Avenue:
  Central Avenue west of Buena Vista Street                    4,800              57.5        59            19           6
  Central Avenue east of Buena Vista Street                   14,000              62.1       173            55          17
  Central Avenue west of Highland Avenue                       4,300              57.0        53            17           5
  Between Highland Ave. and Bradbourne Ave.                    8,200              59.8       101            32          10
  Bradbourne Avenue:
  Between Royal Oaks Dr. and Huntington Drive                  1, 600             52.1        34            16           7
  Mount Olive Drive:
  Between Royal Oaks Dr. to Huntington Drive                  11,600              60.9       129            60          28
  Mount Olive Drive south of Huntington Drive                 27,900              64.2       231           107          50
  Las Lomas Road:
  Las Lomas Road north of Royal Oaks Drive                     3,900              53.5        41            19           9
  Between Royal Oaks Dr. and Huntington Drive                 10,900              59.0       101            47          22
  Las Lomas Road south of Huntington Drive                     4,700              55.7        57            27          12
  Source: Chapter 4, Circulation Element, prepared by RBF Consulting, April 2006.
DESCRIPTION OF NOISE PLAN
Transportation noise is the most serious noise problem in Duarte. However,
local government has little direct control of transportation noise at the source.
State and federal agencies have the responsibility to control vehicle noise
emission levels.                     The most effective method the City has to mitigate
transportation noise is by reducing noise impact on the community. Mitigation
through site planning and the design and construction of a noise barrier
(generally a wall or berm) are the most common ways of alleviating traffic noise
impacts in existing urban environments.
Typical Noise Attenuation Rates
Noise impacts can be mitigated in three basic ways: by reducing the sound level
of the noise generator, by increasing the distance between the source and
receiver, and by insulating the receiver.
Noise Element, August 2007                                            29                  Duarte General Plan 2005-2020
CHAPTER 4
NOISE ELEMENT
Noise reduction can be accomplished by placement of walls, landscaped berms,
or a combination of the two, between the noise source and the receiver.
Generally, effective noise shielding requires a solid barrier with a mass of at least
four pounds per square-foot of surface area which is large enough to block the
line of sight between source and receiver. Variations may be appropriate in
individual cases based on distance, nature and orientation of buildings behind
the barrier, and a number of other factors. Garages or other buildings may be
used to shield dwelling units and outdoor living areas from traffic noise.
In addition to site design techniques, noise insulation can be accomplished
through proper design of buildings. Nearby noise generators should be
recognized in determining the location of doors, windows and vent openings.
Sound-rated windows (extra thick or multi-paned) and wall insulation are also
effective. None of these measures, however, can realize their full potential unless
care is taken in actual construction: doors and windows fitted properly, openings
sealed, joints caulked, plumbing adequately insulated from structural members.
Of course, sound-rated doors and windows will have little effect if left open. This
may require installation of air conditioning for adequate ventilation. The chain of
design, construction and operation is only as effective as its weakest link.
Noise impacts can be reduced by insulating noise sensitive uses, such as
residences, schools, libraries, hospitals, nursing and carehomes and some types
of commercial activities. But perhaps a more efficient approach involves limiting
the level of noise generation at the source. State and Federal statutes have
largely preempted local control over vehicular noise emissions but commercial
and industrial operations and certain residential activities provide opportunities
for local government to assist in noise abatement. Local ordinances may
establish maximum levels for noise generated on-site. This usually takes the
form of limiting the level of noise permitted to leave the property where it may
impact other uses.
Although vehicular noise emissions standards are established at the State and
Federal levels, local agencies can play a significant part in reducing traffic noise
by controlling traffic volume and congestion. Traffic noise is greatest at
intersections due to acceleration, deceleration and gear shifting. Measures such
as signal synchronization can help to minimize this problem. Likewise, reduction
of congestion aids in reduction of noise. This can be accomplished through the
application of traffic engineering techniques such as channelization of turning
movements, parking restrictions, separation of modes (bus, auto, bicycle,
pedestrian) and restrictions on truck traffic.
Noise Element, August 2007                30             Duarte General Plan 2005-2020
CHAPTER 4
NOISE ELEMENT
Noise reduction through reduction of traffic volumes can also be accomplished
with incentive programs for use of public transit facilities and high-occupancy
vehicles, staggering of work hours and land use controls. Vehicle trips can be
turned into pedestrian trips with integration of housing and employment into the
same project or area, construction of high-density, affordable housing in
proximity to employment, shopping and public transit facilities and other
techniques.
Noise and Land Use Planning Integration
Information relative to the existing and future noise environments within Duarte
should be integrated into future land use planning decisions. This Element
presents the existing and future noise environments so that the City will include
noise impact considerations in development programs. Noise and land use
compatibility guidelines are presented, as well as noise standards for new
developments. Community noise considerations are to be incorporated into land
use planning to the maximum extent feasible.
Transportation Noise Control
The most efficient and effective means of controlling noise from transportation
systems is to reduce noise at the source. However, since the City has little direct
control over source noise levels because of State and federal preemption (for
example, State motor vehicle noise standards and federal air regulations), the
City should focus on reducing the impact of the noise on the community.
Non-Transportation Noise Control
People must be protected from excessive noise from non-transportation sources,
including commercial and industrial centers. These impacts are most effectively
controlled through the application of the City’s Noise Ordinance.
IMPLEMENTATION MEASURES
Government Code 65400 requires the legislative body to consider and adopt
reasonable and practical means for implementing the general plan. This is
necessary so that the plan will serve as an effective guide for orderly growth and
development, and the efficient expenditure of public funds relating to the subjects
addressed in the general plan. The State also requires an annual report to the
legislative body, State Department of Housing and Community Development
Noise Element, August 2007               31             Duarte General Plan 2005-2020

  CHAPTER 4
  NOISE ELEMENT
  (HCD) and State Office of Planning and Research on the status of the plan and
  progress in implementing the plan.
  This section provides an implementation matrix for policies found in the Noise
  chapter. The matrix identifies the policy to be implemented, the implementation
  measure to be used for that policy, the responsible agency or department that
  will be implementing the measure, the funding source and the estimated
  timeframe to complete the implementation.
  Responsible Agency:
          All = All Departments                               AS = Administrative Services
          CD = Community Development                          PS = Public Safety
          CM = City Manager                                   P&R = Parks and Recreation
  Funding Source:
          GF = General Fund                                   SF= State funds
          RA = Redevelopment Agency                           FF = Federal Funds
           G = Grants                                         OF = Other Funds
          DF = Development Fees
  Implementation Timeframe (or as resources provide):
          ST = Short-term by 2009                             LT = Long Term by 2020
          MT = Mid-term by 2015                               On = Ongoing
                                              Table N - 8
                                Noise Implementation Measures
                                                                 Responsible      Funding       Time
 Policy #                Implementation Measure                     Agency        Source       frame
N 1.1.1       Require new developments to pay their fair        CD               DF, OF,      On
              share of mitigating measures.                                      GF
N 1.1.2       In coordination with Caltrans, the City will      CD               FF, SF, GF   On
              continue to participate in the phased program
              for the construction of sound walls along I-210
              and I-605.
N 1.1.3     Require earthen berms, setbacks and other           CD               OF           On
            noise reduction techniques as conditions of
            development where applicable.
N 1.1.4       Require noise mitigation methods as a             CD               OF           On
              condition of approval during the development
              review process. Encourage the use of Sound
              Transmission Glass (STC) or Outdoor Indoor
              Transmission Glass (OITC) rated windows for
              residential uses adjacent to the freeways and
              along major arterials.
N 1.1.5       Limit construction, delivery, and through truck   PS               GF           On
              traffic to designated routes.
  Noise Element, August 2007                        32               Duarte General Plan 2005-2020
  CHAPTER 4
  NOISE ELEMENT
N 1.1.6     Incorporate noise reduction measures into all    CD              GF            On
            development proposals, as necessary.
            Monitor existing noise levels along major
            arterials and enforce the City’s noise
            ordinance where necessary.
N 1.1.7     Support noise abatement legislation through      CM, CD          GF            On
            increased lobbying activities.
N 1.1.8     Support the use of rubberized asphalt on city    CD              GF, OF, SF    On
            streets for projects that require substantial
            paving activity, or roadways with high levels of
            traffic.
N 2.1.1     Strictly enforce the Noise Ordinance to ensure   PS, CD          GF            On
            that noise generating uses are promptly
            abated.
N 2.1.2     Require noise studies to be prepared in          CD              OF, GF        On
            accordance with the City’s environmental
            review procedure for all projects that are not
            “clearly compatible” with the future noise
            levels at the site. Consider developing
            maximum noise standards for ventilation
            systems (i.e., air conditioning units) in
            residential areas. Consider developing
            regulations to prohibit the use of public
            address systems and encourage the use of
            alternative (noise sensitive) communication
            devices (i.e., walkie-talkies, hand-held
            phones, or other similar methods).
N 2.1.3     Continue to monitor activities from the          CM, CD          GF            On
            Irwindale and Azusa Rock Quarries and
            prepare periodic reports, which will analyze
            noise reduction attempts.
N 2.1.4     Require noise studies during the development     CD, CM          OF            On
            review process if a project has the potential to
            generate significant noise.
N 2.1.5     Evaluate the noise impacts from proposed         CD              GF            On
            development projects and existing uses (i.e.,
            Irwindale Raceway and San Gabriel Valley
            Gun Club) in adjacent cities as part of the
            environmental (CEQA) and project review
            process and implement measures to mitigate
            any significant impacts.
N 3.1.1     Prepare noise and land use compatibility         CD              GF            MT
            guidelines that can effectively reduce noise
            exposure to acceptable levels.
N 3.1.2     Review the City’s noise reduction ordinance to   CD              GF            MT
            ensure compliance with State requirements.
N 3.1.3     Condition projects adjacent to                   CD              GF            On
            developed/occupied uses to require the
            developer to submit a construction related
            noise mitigation plan to the Director of
            Community Development for review and
  Noise Element, August 2007                       33             Duarte General Plan 2005-2020

  CHAPTER 4
  NOISE ELEMENT
            approval prior to issuance of grading permits.
N 3.1.4     Refine the Noise Ordinance to reduce spillage  CD            GF            MT
            of noise to adjacent properties and adopt a
            light spillage ordinance
  Noise Element, August 2007                     34           Duarte General Plan 2005-2020
CHAPTER 5
LAND USE
Table of Contents
INTRODUCTION
Land Use Element Statutory Requirements                                    1
Relationship to other General Plan Elements and Program EIR                1
GOALS, OBJECTIVES and POLICIES
Balance of Land Uses                                                       2
Land Use Compatibility                                                     3
Specific Plan Areas                                                        4
RELATED AGENCIES, LAWS AND PLANS
Duarte Zoning Ordinance                                                    5
Specific Plans                                                             5
Duarte Redevelopment Plan                                                  5
Southern California Association of Governments                             6
South Coast Air Quality Management District (AQMD)                         6
Other General Plan Elements                                                6
LAND USE PLAN
Land Use Acreage Calculation                                               7
Land Use Balance                                                           8
        Land Use Diagram                                                   8
        Land Use Classifications                                           9
        Land Use Density and Intensities                                   9
        Land Use Designations                                             13
Specific Plan Areas                                                       19
Zoning Consistency and Land Use Composition                               23
Development Capacity                                                      24
IMPLEMENTATION MEASURES                                                   27
List of Tables
LU – 1 Land Use Classifications and Designations                          12
LU – 2 Approved Specific Plans                                            20
LU – 3 General Plan and Zoning Consistency                                24
Land Use Element                         i          Duarte General Plan 2005-2020
Table of Contents

CHAPTER 5
LAND USE
LU – 4 Density, Population Estimates and Intensity Potentials               26
LU – 5 Land Use Implementation Measures                                     28
List of Diagrams and Figures
Land Use Diagram LU – 1                                                     10
Figure LU – 1 Example of Floor-Area Ratio (FAR)                             11
Land Use Element                       ii             Duarte General Plan 2005-2020
Table of Contents

CHAPTER 5
LAND USE
INTRODUCTION
Many goals and policies within the other General Plan Elements are brought
together in the Land Use Element as land use policy. The Land Use Element
reflects where open space areas will be located, where it is unsafe to build and
how best to protect the community from natural and/or man made hazards,
where jobs and revenue producing businesses will be located, where different
types of housing densities will be located, how people and goods will be
transported throughout the community, and much more. This Element serves as
a central framework for the entire Comprehensive General Plan.
Land Use Element Statutory Requirements
California law requires that each city’s General Plan included a Land Use
Element.
    “… a land use element that designates the proposed general distribution and
    general location and extent of the uses of the land for housing, business,
    industry, open space, including agriculture, natural resources, recreation, and
    enjoyment of scenic beauty, education, public buildings and grounds, solid
    and liquid waste disposal facilities, and other categories of public and private
    uses of land. The land use element shall include a statement of the
    standards of population density and building intensity recommended for the
    various districts and other territory covered by the plan. The land use
    element shall identify areas covered by the plan which are subject to flooding
    and shall be reviewed annually with respect to those areas...”
Relationship to other General Plan Elements and Program EIR
California law requires that all elements of the General Plan be consistent. The
Land Use Element brings together the other eight (8) Duarte General Plan
Elements. This will become evident in that some of the policies found in the
other Elements will appear again in the Land Use Element.
It is a fundamental goal of the City to protect existing residential areas from
higher densities and from redevelopment where practical. However, there are
two general areas that are recommended for change. One is the City Center
area, essentially at the axis of Huntington Drive and Buena Vista, which is slated
for mixed use. Also, part of the industrial area north of the proposed Gold Line
Station is also slated for transit oriented mixed use.
A Program Environmental Impact Report (EIR) will be part of the 2005-2020
Duarte General Plan. Policies and mitigation measures within the Land Use
Element will also become mitigation measures within the Program EIR.
Land Use Element, August 2007               1            Duarte General Plan 2005-2020

CHAPTER 5
LAND USE
GOALS, OBJECTIVES AND POLICIES
This section provides draft Goals, Objectives and Policies for the Land Use
Element of the Duarte General Plan.
Land Use Goal 1: Maintain a balanced community consisting of various
residential housing types and densities, commercial activities, industrial
development, mixed use where appropriate, and open space.
Objective 1.1        Improve on Duarte’s balance of uses.
Policies
       LU 1.1.1      Where appropriate, require and review market studies to
                     determine the mix and type of commercial development
                     necessary to satisfy and sustain the needs for the Duarte
                     trade area.
       LU 1.1.2      Encourage the development of a mix of housing types and
                     densities to ensure a variety of housing to accommodate a
                     range of tastes and incomes.
       LU 1.1.3      Re-designate underutilized non-residential properties, which
                     will result in the rezoning into higher-density residential sites.
                     This will allow the sites to be developed with affordable
                     housing. This program is probably going to occur during the
                     2006-11 Housing Element planning period.
       LU 1.1.4      The Agency will identify sites in project areas where there is
                     a possibility of new construction. Negotiations will most
                     likely center on the offsetting of developer costs and
                     providing acquisition of adequate land.
       LU 1.1.5      As part of the City’s General Plan update, it will consider
                     1515 – 1621 Huntington Drive, east of Cotter as a site for
                     affordable housing, because it is across the street from Las
                     Posadas Homes, another affordable project. At the time the
                     Housing Element was adopted the General Plan designation
                     for these properties was General Commercial and High
                     Density Residential. Some of the current land uses were
                     incompatible with nearby uses. This program is probably
Land Use Element, August 2007              2              Duarte General Plan 2005-2020

CHAPTER 5
LAND USE
                     going to occur during the 2006-11 Housing Element planning
                     period.
       LU 1.1.6      As part of the City’s General Plan update, it will consider
                     1701 – 1723 Huntington Drive as a potential site for
                     affordable housing, as the adjacent use is senior
                     apartments. This project would also address the issue of
                     incompatibility with nearby uses. This program is probably
                     going to occur during the 2006-11 Housing Element planning
                     period.
       LU 1.1.7      Expand regional economic development along the I – 210
                     corridor beyond current uses. In order to maximize revenue
                     and enhance image, the Redevelopment Agency/City should
                     investigate other major draws typical of an international trade
                     center magnitude, hotel/convention complex, etc.
       LU 1.1.8      The Redevelopment Agency owns 2400-2404 Huntington
                     Drive, adjacent to Las Brisas Homes, a first time home
                     buyers project. The Agency intends to provide these parcels
                     for development of low and moderate income housing and
                     will acquire parcels east to provide an adequate
                     development site.
Land Use Goal 2: Develop compatible and harmonious land uses by providing
a mix of uses consistent with projected future social, environmental and
economic conditions.
Objective 2.1        Assure that future development complements surrounding
                     areas.
Policies:
       LU 2.1.1      New infill residential development should be compatible in
                     design, bulk, and height with existing nearby residential
                     development as referenced in Duarte’s Architectural Design
                     Guidelines.
Land Use Element, August 2007             3              Duarte General Plan 2005-2020

CHAPTER 5
LAND USE
       LU 2.1.2      Permitted uses along Huntington Drive should accurately
                     reflect economic market conditions and incompatible uses
                     and activities should be eliminated.
       LU 2.1.3      Provide for the shopping and service needs of residents by
                     conveniently clustering commercial establishments in such a
                     way to encourage “one-stop” shopping.
       LU 2.1.4      Provide and encourage industrial development involved in
                     research and development-oriented uses to help achieve a
                     jobs housing balance.
       LU 2.1.5      Restrict development in areas prone to seismic and other
                     safety hazards.
       LU 2.1.6      Hillside development must be sensitive to the local views of
                     the hills and to the natural environment.
       LU 2.1.7      Make every effort to ensure that industry and residences,
                     where located in close proximity, will be compatible
                     neighbors with non-industrial uses located nearby, and with
                     neighboring cities as well.
Land Use Goal 3: Provide unique areas to better serve the needs of Duarte
residents and businesses.
Objective 3.1        Improve the land use mix in selected areas so that it
                     generates synergies and convenience to patrons and
                     residents.
Policies:
       LU 3.1.1      Develop Specific Plan areas which will provide the flexibility
                     needed to make these places unique.
       LU 3.1.2      Develop a flexible specific and strategic plan for the
                     commercial area along the Huntington Drive and Buena
                     Vista axis capturing traffic off the I - 210 freeway.
       LU 3.1.3      Assess the cost/benefits of providing City and/or
                     Redevelopment        Agency       public     improvements       and
                     assistance within a City Center area.
Land Use Element, August 2007              4                Duarte General Plan 2005-2020

CHAPTER 5
LAND USE
        LU 3.1.4      Create a flexible mixed use Transit Oriented Development
                      Specific Plan for the current non-residential area north of the
                      Gold Line Station.
        LU 3.1.5      If the Duarte Gold Line Station becomes a reality before
                      2020, consider a thorough analysis of a potential
                      amendment to the General Plan to provide expanded Transit
                      Oriented Development for additional area north and west
                      and east of the Gold Line Station.
        LU 3.1.6      Promote the use of mixed land use techniques and
                      construction methods to provide more housing and minimize
                      housing costs without compromising basic health, safety and
                      aesthetic qualities.
RELATED AGENCIES, LAWS AND PLANS
Duarte Zoning Ordinance
The Zoning Ordinance is the principal implementation tool for a General Plan.
State law requires that Zoning Ordinances be consistent with the General Plan.
The Duarte Zoning Ordinance can be found in Title 19 of the Duarte Municipal
Code. The Zoning Ordinance establishes specific regulations for the use and
development of land in zoning districts within the Duarte city limits. The Duarte
Zoning Ordinance has not had a comprehensive update for many years. As a
result, the city should amend selected sections of the Zoning Ordinance to reflect
key issues brought forth by the 2005-2020 General Plan update.
Specific Plans
Duarte has adopted a variety of Specific Plans throughout the community.
Government Code Section 65450 – 65457 provides for the adoption of Specific
Plans. As with the Zoning Ordinance, a Specific Plan is required to be consistent
with the General Plan. A Specific Plan provides flexibility from the Zoning
Ordinance which can provide a unique character to a development.
Duarte Redevelopment Plan
As with the Zoning Ordinance and Specific Plans, Redevelopment Plans must
also be consistent with the General Plan. Duarte has had a very active
Redevelopment Agency in prior years. The Redevelopment Agency was
established in 1974 and seven redevelopment projects areas have been
developed resulting in many accomplishments and elimination of blighting
Land Use Element, August 2007              5             Duarte General Plan 2005-2020

CHAPTER 5
LAND USE
conditions. In 1998 the various project areas were merged into the “Merged
Project Area” which serves today as Duarte’s Redevelopment Project area. The
total Merged Project area is approximately 600 acres occupying a significant part
of Duarte’s urbanized area.
Southern California Association of Governments (SCAG)
SCAG functions as the Metropolitan Planning Organization for six counties: Los
Angeles, Orange, San Bernardino, Riverside, Ventura and Imperial. The region
encompasses a population exceeding 15 million persons in an area of more than
38,000 square miles.
As the designated Metropolitan Planning Organization, SCAG is mandated by
the federal government to research and draw up plans for transportation, growth
management, hazardous waste management, and air quality. Additional
mandates exist at the state level. As an example SCAG is required by State law
to allocate the existing and projected housing needs for each city and county in
its region. SCAG, in cooperation with the San Gabriel Valley Council of
Governments (SGVCOG), the COG in which Duarte is located, prepared the
“Regional Housing Needs Assessment” referenced in the Housing Element.
South Coast Air Quality Management District (AQMD)
The AQMD is the agency principally responsible for comprehensive air pollution
control in the South Coast basin. Specifically, the AQMD is responsible for
monitoring air quality and planning, implementing, and enforcing programs
designed to attain and maintain state and federal ambient air quality standards in
the district. Programs developed include air quality rules and regulations that
regulate stationary source emissions, including area and point sources and
certain mobile source emissions. The AQMD is also responsible for establishing
permitting requirements and issuing permits for stationary sources and ensuring
that new, modified, or relocated stationary sources do not create net emissions.
The AQMD enforces air quality rules and regulations through a variety of means,
including inspections, educational and training programs, and fines. AQMD rules
and regulations have and probably will continue to affect land use decisions
made by the public and private sectors.
Other General Plan Elements
The Safety Element identifies areas which could be flooded due to the failure of
Morris, San Gabriel and/or Cogswell dams. The Safety Element also shows
seismic, wildfire, and geologic hazards which affect land uses in Duarte. The
Circulation Element shows the city’s street and transit systems serving various
Land Use Element, August 2007            6              Duarte General Plan 2005-2020

CHAPTER 5
LAND USE
land uses throughout the community. The Open Space/Conservation Element
identifies the city’s parks, school grounds used as open space, wilderness areas
and the National Forest. The Housing Element includes policies for providing
housing for all economic groups. The Land Use Element Diagram reflects where
this housing can be provided. The Economic Development Element identified
policies which will provide the revenue and jobs necessary to have balanced land
use in the community. The Noise Element provides policies to mitigate noise
generators from noise receptors. And, the Historic Preservation Element
provides policies which will preserve significant resources in the community.
LAND USE PLAN
The Community Attitude Survey conducted in September 2005 revealed that
70% of the residents that responded to the survey (21% of the 8,940 mailed
surveys responded), felt quality of life in Duarte was excellent or good. Also,
Duarte is essentially built out. As a result, the Land Use Plan seeks to keep
things generally as they are with a few exceptions.
The Land Use Plan describes the approach that will be used to build upon the
city’s sound planning base. The Goals, Objectives, Policies and Implementation
Measures provide the basis for the Land Use Plan. The approach is to keep the
small town atmosphere while providing a favorable balance of land uses. Of
utmost importance is to continue to provide a healthy local economy so that the
residents and businesses of Duarte can continue to maintain a high level of city
services.
Land Use Acreage Calculation
Most General Plan Land Use plans are calculated on net acreage instead of
gross acreage. Net acreage is adjusted to exclude the land area devoted to
streets and roadways. Gross acreage includes the land area utilized for streets
and roads. Duarte’s General Plans have always used gross acreage. As a result
the 1989 Duarte Land Use Diagram, which used gross acreage, provided
unattainable residential densities. To be consistent with the General Plan, the
Zoning Code also provided unattainable residential densities. As an example,
the 1989 General Plan provided for 21 units for gross acreage for medium
density residential while in practice only 15 units were being produced. The 1989
General Plan provided for 28 units per gross acre for high density residential
while in reality only 23 units per acre were being produced.            These lower
densities were not solely because of the gross acreage issue. Part of the reason
was market driven because builders wanted to build detached housing with more
private open space area.
Land Use Element, August 2007              7             Duarte General Plan 2005-2020

CHAPTER 5
LAND USE
The 2005 – 2020 General Plan Land Use Element adopts net acreage instead of
gross acreage to make densities and intensities more realistic. Also, because
Duarte is essentially built out, adopting net acreage will bring the General Plan
and eventually the Zoning Code into conformance with what is actually built.
While the 2005-2020 General Plan Land Use Element makes allowable densities
and intensities more realistic, it provides for higher densities in two Mixed Use
areas. These areas are the City Center mixed use area and the Gold Line
Station Area Development Specific Plan areas.
As a result of this change, the Zoning Code relative to densities must be
amended to reflect these more realistic densities and intensities. Other Zoning
Code amendments should be made to reflect new policies in the 2005 – 2020
General Plan.
Land Use Balance
When major stakeholders were asked to define Duarte to someone who had
never been to the community many said “Duarte has a small town feel”, a
“bedroom community” with “wonderful parks and recreation programs”, “quality,
friendly and diverse people and neighborhoods”. Half of the business survey
respondents also lived in Duarte.
Except for businesses with direct access to the I-210 freeway, Duarte businesses
tend to be small mom and pop establishments serving a local market. Duarte’s
location and surrounding geography limit its ability to expand or attract major
retailers.    However, the balance between residential, commercial office
commercial retail and industrial property is quite good. Duarte is home to the
world renowned City of Hope with its 2,500 employees. Duarte’ parks and open
spaces are numerous for such a small community and recreation programs are
the envy of some surrounding communities.
        Land Use Diagram
The Land Use Diagram (LU-1) shows the City’s vision for the development,
redevelopment, and preservation of public and private properties within Duarte
until the year 2020. The Diagram designates the distribution and general
location of land to be used for housing, business, public facilities, open space,
and institutional uses.
The Land Use Diagram is different from a zoning map. First, a Zoning Map is an
implementation tool required to be specific and show individual parcels. Each
land use designation on the Land Use Diagram typically has more than one
Land Use Element, August 2007              8             Duarte General Plan 2005-2020

CHAPTER 5
LAND USE
consistent zoning district. The Land Use Diagram shows a generalized
description of where land use designations are located so that it is not confused
with the zoning map. Also, the Land Use Diagram is only one policy of the
General Plan. Each policy within the General Plan is equally as significant.
        Land Use Classifications
The Land Use Diagram (LU-1) illustrates the various types and distributions of
land uses planned for Duarte. Most land use classifications and designations are
the same as those shown on the 1989 Land Use Plan except for portions along
Huntington Drive and near the proposed Gold Line Station. There are seven
land use classifications which are listed in Table LU-1 (a tabular description of
the Land Use Diagram). These land use classifications serve to provide an
orderly approach to development and maintenance of public open spaces by
identifying the types of development allowed in these areas. Duarte’s land use
classifications include seven general categories: Residential, Commercial,
Hospital, Industrial, Public/Quasi-Public, Open Space and Specific Plan Areas.
Descriptions of each general land use designation are provided in the
subsequent Land Use Designations section of this Plan.
        Land Use Densities and Intensities
Each of the land use classifications is further divided into land use designations.
There are twenty-one (21) designations in Table LU-1. The Land Use Diagram
consolidates some of these designations. The term density is used for
residential uses and refers to the population and development capacities of
residential land. Duarte’s density is described in terms of dwelling units per net
acre of land (du/ac). Maximum density is the top of the range for that category.
As an example, Very low density provides a range of from 0 to a maximum of 3.5
du/ac. Low density provides a range of 3.5 to a maximum of 6 du/ac.
Intensity is used to describe the extent of development on a given parcel of land.
Building floor area ratio, number of stories (floors), percent of lot coverage, or
total building floor area square footage all describe intensity. Intensity is usually
used to describe non-residential development. In the Duarte General Plan, floor
area ratio (FAR) is used as the measure of non-residential development intensity.
Examples of floor area ratio are shown on Figure LU-1. FAR, describes the
relationship between the total square footage of development on a lot and the
area of that lot. Floor area does not include area within parking structures and
parking lots. The FAR is determined by dividing the gross floor area of all
buildings on a lot by the gross land area of the lot, less any portion used for
public roads.
Land Use Element, August 2007              9             Duarte General Plan 2005-2020

                                                                                                                                                                                             ANGELES
                                                                                                                                                                                             NATIONAL
                                                                                                                                                                                              FOREST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Land Use Diagram
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           LU-1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    LEGEND
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          City Limits
                                                                                                                BRADBURY
                                                                                                                  Overview                      Diagram                                                                                                                                                                                      Very Low Density Residential
                                                                                                                                          Not to Scale                                                                                                                                                                                       Low Density Residential
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          º
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ¹
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ES
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Medium Density Residential
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             High Density Residential
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          LAS LOMAS RD
                                                                                                                                                                                              BRADBURY                                                                                                                                       Administrative / Professional
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Neighborhood Commercial
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ROYAL OAKS DR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             General Commercial
                                                         MONROVIA                                                                                                                              ROYAL OAKS DR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Hospital
                                                                             MOUNTAIN AV                                                                                                                           MT OLIVE DR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         13
                                                                                                                                                                                     6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Research & Development
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        AZUSA                Industrial
                                                                                                           7                         CC                   4                              8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      º
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ¹      School; Public/Quasi Public; Utility
                                                                                           HUNTINGTON DR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   9          14
                                                                                                                                     CC       11                   1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     5                                                       Open Space; Park
                                                                                                                                                                       HIGHLAND AV
                                                                                                                                                                                                 15                                                                                HU                                                 2      Specific Plan
                                                                                                                                                     º
                                                                                                                                                     ¹
                                                                                                                                                     HS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              10     NT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          IN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            GT
                                                                                                                                                              º
                                                                                                                                                              ¹
                                                                                                                                                              MS
                                                                                                                                                                                         3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       º
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ¹
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ES
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ON
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   DR
                                                               CENTRAL AV                                                                                                                                                        CENTRAL AV
                                                                                                                                                (
                                                                                                                                                g
                                                                                                                                                &
                                                                                                                                                %                                                              (
                                                                                                                                                                                                               o
                                                                                                                                                                                                               &
                                                                                                                                                                                                               %
                                                                                           12                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Source: City of Duarte - May 2007
                                                                                                                                                              GL
                                                                 DUARTE RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Note:
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               The Land Use Diagram is one of dozens of General Plan Policies which make up
                                                                                                                                 2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               the Duarte 2005-2020 General Plan. Please refer to Chapter 2 Safety Element
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               for policies and diagrams of fault zones, wildfire risk areas, areas of landslides
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               and liquefaction, and potential flood inundation areas. Refer to Chapter 3 Open
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Space and Conservation Elements for policies, diagrams and tables to get more
M:mdata/10104371/basemap_24X36_LandUse.mxd KO 05/23/07
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               data and details on parks and other open spaces. Refer to Chapter 4 Noise
                                                                                                           º
                                                                                                           ¹
                                                                                                           ES
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Element for noise contours, projected 2020 traffic noise levels and projected
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               2020 noise contours. Chapter 6, Housing Element provides quantified objectives
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               for the construction, rehabilitation and conservation of housing units. The Land
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Use Diagram provides generalized locations where these objectives can be
                                                                                                                BUENA VISTA ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               achieved. The Historic Preservation Element, Chapter 7, provides policies for
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               the preservation of historic and cultural resources. Refer to Chapter 8, Economic
                                                                                                                                                                                               IRWINDALE                                       Development, which provides policies which result in job and revenue producing
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               uses. The Land Use Diagram provides the locations for these Economic                                                                    Feet
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Development Policies to be achieved. The Circulation Element, Chapter 9                           0        950     1,900             3,800
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               projects traffic conditions in the year 2020, and provides a circulation system
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               master plan. Chapter 5, the Land Use Element includes a table which estimates
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               the development capacity of the 2005-2020 General Plan and breaks down the                                       May 23, 2007
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               number of housing units and/or building intensity by land use designation. It also
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               provides a table identifying the Specific Plans on this Land Use Diagram.

CHAPTER 5
LAND USE
                                 Figure LU-1
                       Example of Floor-Area Ratio (FAR)
Land Use Element, August 2007         11             Duarte General Plan 2005-2020
CHAPTER 5
LAND USE
                                         Table LU-1
                     Land Use Classifications and Designations
LAND USE               DUs or FAR/net Acres       DESCRIPTON OF LAND
DESIGNATION            Maximum       Anticipated  USE DESIGNATION
Residential Land Use Classification
 Very Low Density 0-3.5 du/ac      2.5 du/ac      Detached homes, typically on large lots
 Low Density         1-6du/ac      6du/ac         Detached single family homes
 Medium Density      7-21du/ac        15 du/ac    Attached and/or detached housing
 High Density        21-28 du/ac      23 du/ac    Attached housing
Commercial Land Use Classification
 Neighborhood        .25:1         .25: 1         Service uses serving neighborhood needs
 General             .5:1          .5:1           General Retail, service and office uses
 Administrative
 Professional        .5:1          .5:1           Office Professional uses
Hospital Use Classification
 Hospital            1.5:1         1.5:1          Properties owned by City of Hope and Santa
                                                  Teresita
 R&D                 1.5:1         1.5:1          Research and development uses
Industrial Use Classification
 Industrial          .50:1         .50:1          Light industrial uses
Public/Quasi Public Classification
 Public School       N/A                          Land owned by Duarte Unified School District
                                                  and used for education, recreation, and
                                                  administrative offices
 City owned          N/A                          City     offices,     recreational    facilities,
          facilities                              maintenance facilities
 County owned        N/A
          facilities                              County Library, fire station
Utility easements    N/A                          Edison, flood control easements, railroad
Streets, Freeway     N/A                          City streets, I 210 Freeway
Open Space Classification
 Parks               N/A                          City owned and dedicated parkland
 Wilderness Area     N/A                          City ownedfor the preservation of natural
                                                  resources, and protection of health and safety
 National Forest     N/A                          Angeles National Forest open space for the
                                                  preservation of natural resources, managed
                                                  production of natural resources, protection of
                                                  health and public safety, outdoor recreation
Specific Plan Areas Classification
 Planned                                          Various single family housing, senior housing,
 communities and varies            varies         multiple family housing, and commercial
 areas                                            shopping centers
 City Center         Commercial                   Horizontal and/or vertical mixed commercial
 Mixed Use Area      use     FAR varies           and high density residential housing
                     varies
 Gold Line Station Commercial                     Horizontal and vertical mixed commercial and
Area Development use         FAR varies           high density residential housing
                     varies
Land Use Element, August 2007                12               Duarte General Plan 2005-2020
CHAPTER 5
LAND USE
         Land Use Designations
All land within the city limits (the planning area) of Duarte is assigned to one of
twenty-one (21) land use designations as follows:
Residential Land Uses:           As a predominately family oriented residential
community, Duarte has four residential land use designations which provide for a
variety of housing types. The maximum density listed for each residential land
use designation may be exceeded by Housing Element policy as provided in
California density bonus law as amended from time to time during the course of
this General Plan. Mobile homes are allowed in all residential land use
categories, subject to design review approval. Second units are allowed when
attached to the primary residence and as authorized by Government Code
Section 65852.2. Until this General Plan update, Duarte has used gross acreage
to calculate densities. As a result, actual land use densities have been
substantially under those found in the General Plan and Zoning Code. In an
effort to make residential densities more realistic, net acres will be used in this
General Plan for all densities and intensities. Also, because of builder’s desires,
other development requirements and, in some cases topography constraints,
densities have been less than those shown in the General Plan and Zoning
Code. As a result, Table LU-1 provides anticipated densities and intensities
based on historical development.
         1. Very Low Density:          The very low density land use designation,
primarily found in the foothills, provides for large lot single family detached
homes. This designation allows a maximum density of 3.5 units per net acre.
Based on historical records, anticipated densities for this land use designation
should be 2.5 units per acre. Uses permitted include single family detached
houses, horses and associated structures. Zoning Districts that correspond with
this land use designation are: R-1F (80,000 sq. ft. lots), the R -1D (20,000 sq. ft.
lots) and the R-1B (10,000 sq. ft. lots). Conditional uses allowed in this category
include the boarding of horses.
         2. Low Density:               The Low Density land use designation is the
predominant residential area within the city. It can be found throughout the
community. This designation allows a maximum density of 6 units per net acre.
Because of the size of the parcels and development standards the anticipated
density for properties in this designation is 6 detached single family units per acre
depending on the zoning district in which the property is located.               Zoning
Districts that correspond with this land use designation are the R -1A (7,500 sq.
ft. lots) and R -1 (6,500 sq. ft. lots) Conditional uses allowed in this category
Land Use Element, August 2007              13              Duarte General Plan 2005-2020

CHAPTER 5
LAND USE
include churches, country clubs, golf courses and related activities, educational
institutions, and publicly owned facilities including parks.
         3. Medium Density:         There are pockets of medium density
residential areas throughout Duarte. The Zoning Districts that correspond with
these land use designations are Planned Unit Development (PUD), R-MH R-2
and R-3. The R -2 zone provides for one or two family detached or attached
dwellings. The R-3 zone provides for denser multiple family dwellings, mixed
detached and attached residential developments, Planned Residential Unit
Development projects and duplexes. The R-MH zone has been created to
accommodate residential mobile homes in planned, integrated mobile home
parks. The purpose of the PUD zone is to allow innovative and flexible design
standards. The Medium Density designation in the 1989 Plan allowed a
maximum of 21 units to the gross acre. Based on historic records it is anticipated
that 15 du/ac can generally be accommodated on Medium Density parcels.
Allowed conditional uses are essentially the same as those in the low density
designation with nursing homes, rest homes and senior housing added.
         4. High Density:           Pockets of high density residential tend to be
concentrated between Royal Oaks Drive and Huntington Drive. Other small
pockets are concentrated south of Duarte Road around Buena Vista. Until this
general plan, this had been the highest residential density allowed with a
maximum of up to 28 units per gross acre (1989 Plan). This plan anticipates an
average of 23 du/ac (net). More recent developments in High Density areas
have provided only 17 du/ac because units tended to be large town-homes, 2-
story buildings (rather than the 3 or 4 stories needed for the higher densities and
developers elected to provide amenities that deducted from the total number of
units provided). Allowable uses in the R-4 zone include multiple dwellings,
including apartment houses, and similar permanent residential facilities and
planned residential unit development projects. Conditional uses are those found
in the R-2 and R-3 zones
Commercial Land Uses: Commercial uses bring revenue and jobs to a
community which sustain the public services required for a healthy city. Because
of physical barriers around Duarte, the mountains to the north, quarries in
surrounding cities and the San Gabriel River and associated spread basin,
Duarte’s market area is limited. This makes retail development a challenge to
attract the typical national retailers most cities seek to help generate much
needed revenue. Even with these constraints, Duarte’s commercial uses
generate substantial revenue.
         1 Administrative Professional:     This is the most restrictive of the
commercial land use designations. There are only two areas with this
Land Use Element, August 2007              14             Duarte General Plan 2005-2020

CHAPTER 5
LAND USE
designation located on Huntington Drive and Buena Vista. The zoning district that
corresponds with this designation is CP. Allowable uses tend to be general
offices; medical offices, clinics, general research not including fabrication and
laboratories or manufacturing/processing. Conditional uses include churches,
child care facilities; general hospitals; lodges and meeting halls.
        2. Neighborhood: This use designation is intended to provide
neighborhood retail, service and office uses for businesses serving the daily
needs of nearby residential areas, while preventing significant adverse effects on
adjoining residential properties. Some smaller shopping centers are along Royal
Oaks and Duarte Rd. The accompanying zoning district for these smaller centers
is C - 1. Uses permitted within this zone are those found in the CP zone,
including additional retail and service uses. Conditional uses include automobile
service stations and drive-in restaurants.
        3. General Commercial: The General Commercial designation is
intended to provide for sites which will meet the shopping needs of the entire
community and provide sites for regionally oriented uses along the I – 210
freeway corridor. The C – 2 zoning district corresponds with this designation.
Permitted uses include those in the CP and C-1 zones, with expanded retail and
service uses. Specific permitted uses in the C-2 zone include: auto sales and
service; building supplies; department stores; furniture stores, sporting goods,
printing and restaurants. Conditional uses include: auto rental; hotels and
motels; theatres and similar uses.
Hospital Land Uses: Duarte is known as the City of Health, primarily because of
the world renowned City of Hope. The City of Hope facility in Duarte has more
than 300 physicians and scientists and more than 2,500 employees. The annual
payroll for the City of Hope Duarte facility in 2005 was $160 million. Santa
Teresita Medical Center currently employs 250 people.
        1.Hospital:                  The Hospital designation is intended to
accommodate hospitals, rest homes, sanitariums and residential uses requiring a
state or county license. The designation is also intended to accommodate
medical professional offices and attendant medical facilities. There are two
areas that have the Hospital designation. One is City of Hope and the other is
Santa Teresita. The zoning district that corresponds with this designation is the
H zone. Uses permitted include general hospitals (excluding sanitariums,
nursing homes, convalescent homes, maternity homes or rest homes); medical
professional offices; attendant medical facilities, including, but not limited to,
pharmacies, physical therapy offices, laboratories, and clinics. Conditional uses
are those typically associated with hospitals such as confectionery stores; florist;
gift shops and the like.
Land Use Element, August 2007               15           Duarte General Plan 2005-2020

CHAPTER 5
LAND USE
        2.R & D:                    This is a new designation in the 2005 – 2020
General Plan. The R & D designation is intended to provide for research and
development uses primarily, but not exclusively for medical related research and
development. This designation will also incorporate standards for office and
administrative uses sometimes associated with R&D activities. In addition, this
designation provides for all uses in the hospital designation.
The City of Hope anticipates building 360,000 sq. ft. of new Science Park on their
campus. In addition, a five story 108,000 sq. ft. Cancer Immunotherapeutics and
Tumor Immunology Center is being planned for groundbreaking in 2007.
Employees for this center will come from work areas now housed in existing
portable trailers on the City of Hope campus.
Industrial Land Use: Duarte’s industrial area is limited with most activities located
in industrial parks at the south east corner of the city.
        1.Industrial:               The Industrial designation is the least
restrictive of the land use designations and in Duarte is intended to provide for
light industrial uses. One larger area within the city has this designation and very
small areas are located elsewhere. The main industrial area is northeast of the
proposed Gold Line station currently improved with an industrial park and across
Highland Avenue with Lewis Business Park.             Under the prior General Plan
accompanying zoning was the I – P zone and the M – 1 zone. The I-P industrial
park zone was intended to provide a district which will assure an environment
conducive to research and development, fabrication and assembly, research
institutions and administrative facilities all well designed and properly
landscaped. There is no property zoned I-P at this time so the proposal is to
eliminate the I - P zoning district. The M – 1 zone (light manufacturing) is
intended to provide for the development of industrial uses which include
fabrication, manufacturing, assembly, or processing of materials that are in
already processed form. Permitted uses include: commercial uses customarily
incidental and directly related to the services or operation of the permitted
industrial uses such as: administrative or sales office; auction house, automobile
repair shop and the like. Manufacturing uses include: optical products, packaging
business, ceramic products, electrical and electronic items, scientific instrument
and precision equipment manufacturing and the like. Wholesaling and
warehousing uses include: wholesaling and warehousing facilities, storage and
distribution agencies. As the least restrictive zoning district in the city, conditional
uses in this zone are many and can be found in section 19.66.030 of the city’s
zoning code.
Public/Quasi Public Land Uses: Public and Quasi Public uses are typically
exempt from the city’s zoning powers and as such are listed separately from
Land Use Element, August 2007             16              Duarte General Plan 2005-2020

CHAPTER 5
LAND USE
other privately regulated land uses. Also, these uses often tend to be on small
parcels almost as a spot land use designation which is usually not the case with
privately held land uses.
        1.Public Schools:           Duarte Unified School District (DUSD) owns all
the public school land in Duarte. All five schools in Duarte include playgrounds,
which are shared through agreement with the City of Duarte as parkland. The
Land Use Diagram shows all public schools with a school symbol and have the
Public/Quasi Public land use designation. However, because of the shared
parkland agreements, a total of 26.54 acres of these sites are counted as open
space. There are five elementary, one intermediate, one high school and one
alternative education campus in Duarte and surrounding area plus administrative
offices and a corporate yard for a total land area of 80 acres.
        2.City Owned Facilities:    The City of Duarte owns the City Hall complex
including a community center, swimming pool, and senior center. A teen center
is located on Buena Vista and two city corporate yards located north and south of
Huntington Drive. These facilities are designated as Public/Quasi Public. City
owned parks are designated as open space are addressed in the next section.
        3.County Owned Facilities: The County of Los Angeles owns a fire station,
library and the City pays the lease payments for the sheriff substation in Duarte.
These facilities as well as a future location of the Sheriff sub-station are
designated as Public/Quasi Public on the Land Use Diagram.
        4. Utility easements: Edison high voltage power lines go through Duarte.
These power lines provide substantial easements where development of
structures cannot occur. The Los Angeles Flood Control also has detention and
retention basins within and around Duarte.              These areas are also not
developable and provide open space for the community. The rail line which
parallels Duarte Road is also classified as a utility.
        5. Streets and Highways: In June 2006, the City of Duarte reported it
maintains the following streets and roadways not including the I-210 (principal
arterial) which is maintained by Cal-Trans:
        3.010 miles of urban principal arterial (I – 210 Freeway)
        5.910 miles of urban minor arterial (Huntington Drive)
        5.593 miles of urban collectors
       35.414 miles of urban local streets
      49.927 miles of streets and roads
Land Use Element, August 2007             17               Duarte General Plan 2005-2020

CHAPTER 5
LAND USE
Open Spaces Uses: Over fifty percent of Duarte’s land area is open space mostly
because of the amount of National Forest within the city boundaries.
        1.Parks:                    The City owns 39.21 active park acreages not
counting the 26.54 acreage it leases from the Duarte Unified School District for
recreational purposes. In addition the 18.55 acre executive golf course, which is
designated open space on the Duarte General Plan, is also used for recreational
purposes. Parkland is designated as Open Space.
        2.Wilderness Area:          In December 2005 the City of Duarte
purchased 329 acres of open space access. This natural hillside area, along
with an additional 70 acres owned by the city is intended to be used as a
preservation area for future generations to enjoy. This area is also designated
Open Space. Attalla Ranch, a low density proposed development in the hillside,
is proposing to dedicate 23 acres of wilderness open space to the City of Duarte.
        3.National Forest:          The largest land use within the city is 2,331
acres (53% of the city’s total land area) of wilderness areas including 1,909 acres
within the Angeles National Forest. As a national forest this land is protected
from urbanization and is designated Open Space.
Specific Plan Areas: This is a new category in the 2005-2020 General Plan.
Duarte’s 1989 General Plan provided for a variety of specific plans and planned
communities.
        1.Planned Communities and Areas:          The 1989 General Plan Diagram
showed a Specific Plan/Hillside Overlay and makes reference to a Planned
Development/Specific Plan Overlay in the text. The text makes reference to
hillside and Westminister Gardens. The 2005-2020 General plan will eliminate
the Planned Development and Overlay designation and replace it with Specific
Plan designations for those projects which already have a Specific Plan. See
Table LU-2 for these existing Specific Plans.
The Specific Plan land use designation for new projects provides for the mixture
of both high density housing and other uses. This designation can be found in
two areas of the city. One is the City Center at the axis of Huntington Drive and
Buena Vista. See City Center Mixed Use Area under Specific Plan Areas below
for more details on allowable uses. The other is an area north of the proposed
Gold Line station. See Gold Line Station Area Development under Specific Plan
Areas below for more details on allowable uses. Specific Plans are typically
Land Use Element, August 2007            18              Duarte General Plan 2005-2020

CHAPTER 5
LAND USE
used to develop unique land uses. Specific Plan development standards are
drafted to be unique to fit the type of land uses desired.
       2. See City Center Mixed Use Area and Gold Line Station Area
Development below for more details on this new designation.
Specific Plan Areas
The City has prepared fifteen specific plans shown on Table LU-2. The column
labeled “Specific Plan #” of Table LU-2 corresponds with numbers on the Land
Use Diagram LU-1. For the most part, the specific plans shown in Table LU-2
were not mixed use and complied with the General Plan designation shown on
the Land Use Diagram at the time they were adopted.
Future specific plans, not shown on Table LU-2 are anticipated for a City Center
area and the Gold Line Station area. During the General Plan update process
these two areas were the only large land use areas anticipated for change.
Land Use Element, August 2007              19            Duarte General Plan 2005-2020

                                                              Table LU – 2
                                             Approved Specific Plans as of May 2007
Specific         Name                       Location                    Description of Sp.      Date        GPLU         Land Area     DU/
 Plan #                                                                         Plan          Approve  Classification                  FAR
                                                                       Housing for very low           Specific Plan (SP)
   1        Andres Duarte              1722 Huntington Dr.          and low-income seniors     4-2003   {High Density    1.77 Acres  45 du/ac
                Terrace                                                      (80 units)                  Residential}
                                                                        32 detached single             Medium Density                  13.4
   2      Buena Vista Villas         1900-1940 Buena Vista             family dwelling units   4-1997 Residential (MDR)  2.39 Acres   du/ac
          Citrus Collection at   Highland Ave./ Santo Domingo           22 Detached single                                             12.9
   3            Duarte II                     Ave.                     family dwelling units      *          MDR         1.70 Acres   du/ac
                                                                       13 detached single-
   4       Duarte Gardens         1569-1615 Huntington Drive          family and 4 attached    6/2006   High Density     1.51 Acres     11
                                                                         single-family units          Residential (HDR)               du/ac
                                                                     40 unit senior housing/                  SP                       13.2
   5      Encanto Parkway            1168 Encanto Parkway           two-story assisted living  2-1998       (MDR)        3.03 Acres   du/ac
                                    820-844 Highland Evens                                                                             14.4
   6       Highland Avenue           852-876 Highland Odds            16 single family units   9-1989        MDR         1.11 Acres   du/ac
          Huntington/ Buena    NW Corner of Huntington/ Buena         Community Shopping                   General           7.38     .35:1
   7             Vista                        Vista                            Center          6-1989 Commercial (GC)       Acres     FAR**
                                                                                                        Neighborhood
   8     Huntington/ Highland  NE corner of Huntington/ Highland        Office/Commercial      7-1982 Commercial (NC)     3.7 Acres     ***
                                   SE corner of Mt. Olive and           41 detached single                                             15.5
   9           Las Brisas                Huntington Dr.                family dwelling units  11-1994        HDR         2.61 Acres   du/ac
                                                                     Industrial development
                                Las Lomas south of Huntington            and provisions for                                           .35:1
   10         Las Lomas          (includes Irwindale properties)        access to Irwindale   10-1982    Industrial (I)  1.90 acres   FAR**
                                                                             properties
                                Huntington Dr. east of Brycedale        46 detached single                                             13.2
   11        Las Posadas                      Ave.                     family dwelling units   3-1996        MDR         1.89 Acres   du/ac
                                   SE corner of Mountain and                                                                13.98     .25:1
   12    Mountain/ Evergreen               Evergreen                Retail Shopping Center    10-1990         GC            Acres     FAR**
                                                                                                                                      Phase
                                                                       116 attached single-                                         I=8 du/ac
                                  N. of Huntington Dr. between            family units, 122                                           Phase
   13       Rancho Verde       Encanto Parkway and Las Lomas         detached single family    9-1992  MDR and Open       55 Acres    II=13
                                               Rd.                  units, a golf course and             Space (OS)                  du/acre
                                                                                park                                                 Overall=
                                                                                                                                     10 du/ac
   14    Spanish Oaks Villas          2516-2526 Huntington         6 detached single family    5-2001        HDR         0.46 Acres  13 du/ac
                                                                            dwelling units

                                                                  Independent and                                                  7.8
15    Westminster Gardens   NE Corner of Santo Domingo and        assisted living for 8-1997       Specific Plan   32.1 acres   residents
                                        Central                  seniors (195 units)                  MDR                         /acre
   *     = Zone Change 98-3, from R-3 to SP, was never approved by Council; however, the development was constructed according to
         development standards of Specific Plan.
   **    = Actual FAR not included in specific plan document. Estimation is provided, using current commercial/industrial floor
         area/property area
   ***   = Information not provided in specific plan so a FAR of .25:1 is estimated
   ()    = Shows related GP classification of the particular specific plan.
CHAPTER 5
LAND USE
        1. City Center Mixed Use Area Specific Plan:
Some citizens of Duarte have wanted a downtown area for years. In 2003 the
Duarte Downtown Task Force studied the creation of a downtown for Duarte. A
“Town Center Concept Plan” was prepared by Moore Iacofano Goltsman, Inc
(MIG). This plan identified Huntington Drive and Buena Vista as the primary axis
of a mixed use Town Center. This document reviewed a series of concepts and
workshop projects and arrived at a recommended concept plan for downtown
which incorporated approximately 114,000 square feet of retail, 50,000 square
feet of office, 388 housing units and 750 parking spaces. These proposed
developments were to be located on two axes, Buena Vista Street as a
north/south axis connecting to the Interstate 210 freeway and Huntington Drive,
the east/west axis that is the main street of the city. The total land area identified
for redevelopment or rehabilitation in the concept plan was approximately 28
acres.
The Town Center Concept Plan document prepared by MIG dealt extensively
with community issues and certain aspects of design but did not deal in particular
detail with either the political or financial commitments required for
implementation of the plan. In mid 2005 the city hired Allan Kotin and
Associates, an economic development consultant, to undertake an explicitly
general but focused analysis of what was involved in implementing the MIG plan.
Kotin gave particular emphasis to the challenges represented by property
acquisition, the financial resources required both for property acquisition and to
make up the “gap” between the cost of developing some of these projects and
their likely completed value. Within the overall assessment of the plan, specific
attention was devoted to issues associated with the prospect of near term
issuance of a request for proposal for development of Phase One (the northeast
corner of Huntington and Buena Vista.
Because of a variety of economic barriers associated with conventional
redevelopment, the Kotin report suggested “It may be more appropriate to follow the
Santa Monica or Old Pasadena model wherein the city makes meaningful investments in
parking and streetscape improvements so as to enable individual merchants without
massive redevelopment to redevelop their stores, enhance them etc. This is a ‘enabling’
approach to redevelopment rather than a buy land, write-down and scrape approach to
redevelopment.”
The concept of creating a specific plan area for a “City Center” whereby the city
promotes mixed use, reduced parking and higher densities will greatly assist the
private sector and existing merchants. Such a specific plan will provide for the
private sector to make the investments necessary to create the desired outcome
of a pedestrian friendly meeting place for Duarte residents.
Land Use Element, August 2007            21               Duarte General Plan 2005-2020

CHAPTER 5
LAND USE
The City Center Mixed Use Area is a new land use designation for the 2005 –
2020 General Plan. This mixed use is intended to create a unique area within
the center of the community as a gathering spot where Duarte residents and
business owners can come together to live, socialize and shop. An objective of
the City Center area is to generate synergy and convenience to patrons and
residents. The specific plan to implement this objective must provide flexibility in
providing vertical and/or horizontal mixed high density and commercial uses.
The high density residential component of the plan is not anticipated to exceed
165 dwelling units and 165,000 sq. ft. of commercial uses. The Specific Plan
which will be the implementation tool for this area must also provide unique
parking standards, sufficient residential densities, housing types and appropriate
pedestrian friendly design to provide the needed synergy to make this project
work economically and visually in the short and long term.
        2. Gold Line Station Area Development Specific Plan:
The Metro Gold Line will eventually provide alternate mobility to residents and
businesses in the San Gabriel Valley from Montclair to downtown Los Angeles.
This light rail system currently runs from South Pasadena to Downtown Los
Angeles with thirteen stations now open. The next phase of the system, known
as Planned Segment 1, will continue from South Pasadena 11.4 miles to Azusa
with six additional stations including one in Duarte. Five additional stations are
planned in Planned Segment 2 from Azusa, 12.5 miles to Montclair. With
congestion expected to double within thirty years, transit oriented development
around the Gold Line stations will provide relief from current and future gridlock.
While timing of the Duarte segment is not certain, it is anticipated this segment
will be operating by 2010 at the earliest.
The Duarte Gold Line station will be located north of Duarte Road and about 400
feet west of Highland Avenue within the vicinity of City of Hope. The area to the
north of the station includes about twenty acres of industrial buildings. For
purposes of this Land Use Element, it is anticipated this area should be
designated a specific plan area. This specific plan should provide for a mixed
use transit oriented development. For planning purposes a maximum of 100,000
sq. ft. of retail and office could be accommodated within this area. In addition up
to 120 multiple family residential units could be built within this area. Gold Line
ridership estimates could eventually require up to 500 parking spaces in close
proximity to the Duarte station. The concept is to work with existing property
owners and businesses to formulate a specific plan that provides for the before
mentioned uses, densities and intensities as well as development standards for a
true transit oriented development.
The Gold Line Station Area Development Specific Plan is a new land use
designation for the 2005 – 2020 General Plan. As with the City Center area, this
Land Use Element, August 2007             22               Duarte General Plan 2005-2020

CHAPTER 5
LAND USE
area is intended to create a unique area oriented towards the future Gold Line
station in Duarte. This flexible mixed use area will be located north of the Gold
Line station in what is now part of the industrial park west of Highland Avenue.
This mixed use area will also use a specific plan as an implementation tool to
achieve the desired objective. The desired objective is to reduce vehicle miles
traveled, provide transportation options for existing and future workforce and
residents around the Gold Line station, provide location efficiency, expanded
mobility, and provide public/private financial return and value recaptured. The
specific plan to implement this objective must provide flexibility in providing
vertical and/or horizontal mixed high density residential, commercial uses, office,
R&D and industrial uses. As with the City Center plan the Gold Line station
Specific Plan which will be the implementation tool for this area must also provide
unique parking standards, sufficient residential densities, housing types and
appropriate pedestrian friendly design to encourage usage of the Gold Line as a
primary mode of travel. Because the timing of the Gold Line station opening is
unknown, this Specific Plan must provide even more flexibility for future needs.
Zoning Consistency and Land Use Composition
State law requires the Zoning Ordinance and Zoning Map to be consistent with
the General Plan. The Zoning Ordinance is the primary tool for implementing
land use policy. Each General Plan land use designation must have one or more
corresponding zone districts.       In addition the land use regulations and
development standards in the Zoning Ordinance must reflect the policy
statements in the Land Use Element. While General Plan policies are general,
Zoning Ordinance regulation and development standards are specific.
Table LU-3 identifies the relationship between land use designation and the
zoning districts.
Table LU-3 also identifies the net acreage within each land use designation as
shown on the Land Use Diagram LU-1. This diagram serves as the guide for
future land use decisions made by City Staff, various City Commissions, and
the City Council. Because Duarte is built out, most of the planned land uses
shown on Diagram LU-1 correspond to existing development on the ground
today. Table LU-3 lists acreage for each land use designation in accordance
with the Land Use Diagram.
Land Use Element, August 2007           23               Duarte General Plan 2005-2020
CHAPTER 5
LAND USE
                                          Table LU-3
                         General Plan and Zoning Consistency
Land Use Designation                    Corresponding Zoning Districts                 Acres
Very Low Density Residential            R-1F, R-1D, R-1B                               120
Low Density Residential                 R-1A, R-1,                                     645
Medium Density Residential              PUD, R-MH, R-2, R-3                            89
High Density Residential                R-4                                            52
Administrative Professional             C-P                                            4
Neighborhood Commercial                 C-1                                            3
General Commercial                      C-2                                            92
Hospital                                H                                              78
R&D                                     R&D                                            15
Industrial                              M-1                                            53
Public School                           P-F                                            80
City Owned Facilities                   P-F                                            12
County Owned Facilities                 P-F                                            2
Edison, Flood Control, Railroad         O                                              95
Streets and Freeway                     None                                           478
Parks                                   O                                              39
Wilderness Areas                        O                                              422
National Forest                         O                                              1,909
Planned Communities and areas           Varies                                         131
City Center Mixed Use Area              SP                                             11
Gold Line Station Area Development      SP                                             20
Total Acres                                                                            4,350
Note: a factor of .0015625 is used to convert acres to square miles. 4,350 acres = 6.8 sq. miles
Development Capacity
The Land Use Element is required to include standards of population density and
building intensity. Table LU-4 provides a statistical description of the anticipated
densities or intensities for the twenty-one (21) General Plan land use
designations within the City. The maximum allowable development on individual
parcels is governed by these measures of density or intensity.
For various reasons, many parcels in the community have not been developed to
their maximum density or intensity. In the future, development is anticipated to
occur in a similar manner with only a limited number of properties being
developed at the maximum density or intensity. Therefore, for much of the
community, the projected (anticipated) future development intensity and density
listed in Table LU-4 is based upon the intensity/density of existing development.
Also, not all the acreage within each land use designation may be developed
during the life of this General Plan which is the year 2020. As an example the
Land Use Element, August 2007                   24                Duarte General Plan 2005-2020
CHAPTER 5
LAND USE
Gold Line Specific Plan development is dependant upon the completion of the
Gold Line through Duarte. This will not happen until about 2010 at the earliest.
Also, depending on the status of future redevelopment law, the City Center
Specific Plan may not occur. However for planning purposes all acreage in all
land use designations was calculated for development.
Anticipated density and intensity is for planning purposes only and exceeding
them on individual properties will not require a General Plan Amendment.
Development can occur up to the maximum allowed density or intensity with
required site and/or design review. Density bonus of at least 25 percent is
required by state law to be offered for certain low or very low income housing
developments.      Table LU-4 also includes the planned land use and/or
development densities/intensities for the “City Center” and “Gold Line Station”
Special Planning Areas. Table LU – 4 shows the 2020 General Plan has a build-
out capacity of 25,418 estimated population, 7,702 estimated units, and
9,953,071 estimated non-residential square footage.
Land Use Element, August 2007          25             Duarte General Plan 2005-2020

CHAPTER 5
LAND USE
                                        Table LU- 4
                 Density, Population Estimates and Intensity Potentials
LAND USE             ANTICIPATED                         ESTIMATED      ESTIMATED        ESTIMATED
DESIGNATION          DEVELOPMENT              ACRES      DWELLING       POPULATION       SQ. FT.
                     DU/ACRE     FAR/ACRE                UNITS                           NON-RES.*
Residential Land Use Classification
 Very Low
     Density         2.5          N/A         120           300         990              N/A
 Low Density         6            N/A         645        3,870          12,771           N/A
 Medium Density 15                N/A         89         1,335          4,406            N/A
 High Density        23           N/A         52         1,196          3,947            N/A
Commercial Land Use Classification
 Neighborhood        N/A          .25:1       3          NA             NA               32,670
 General             N/A          .5:1        92         NA             NA               2,003,760
 Administrative
 Professional        N/A          .5:1        4          NA             NA               87,120
Hospital Use Classification
 Hospital            N/A          1.5:1       78         NA             NA               5,096,520
 R&D                 N/A          1.5:1       15         NA             NA               980,100
Industrial Use Classification
 Industrial          N/A          .5:1        53         NA             NA               1,154,340
Public/Quasi Public Classification
 Public School       N/A          N/A         80         -              -                -
 City owned          N/A
      facilities                  N/A         12         -              -                -
 County owned        N/A
      facilities                  N/A         2          -              -                -
 Utility easements NA             N/A         95         -              -                -
Streets, Freeway     N/A          N/A         478        -              -                -
Open Space Classification
  Parks              N/A          N/A         39         -              -                -
  Wilderness
     Area            N/A          N/A         422        -              -                -
  National Forest    N/A          N/A         1,909      -              -                -
Specific Plan Areas Classification
 Planned
 community and       N/A          N/A         131        716            2,363            333,561
 areas **
 City Center
 Mixed Use Area      varies       varies      11         165            545              165,000
 Gold Line
 Station Area        varies       varies      20         120            396              100,000
 Development
               Total                          4,350      7,702          25,418           9,953,071
Note: Estimated residential dwelling units use California Department of Finance population of
3.3 persons per household (June 2006). * Estimated sq. ft. non-residential is based on the FAR.
Land Use Element, August 2007                26                  Duarte General Plan 2005-2020
CHAPTER 5
LAND USE
** The Planned Community and Areas designation refers to projects already approved. These
are either residential or commercial projects and are not mixed use developments. As a result,
they are counted in the respective residential or commercial land use category.
IMPLEMENTATION MEASURES
Government Code 65400 requires the legislative body to consider and adopt
reasonable and practical means for implementing the general plan. This is
necessary so that the plan will serve as an effective guide for orderly growth and
development, preservation and conservation of open-space land and natural
resources, and the efficient expenditure of public funds relating to the subjects
addressed in the general plan. The State also requires an annual report to the
legislative body, State Department of Housing and Community Development
(HCD) and State Office of Planning and Research on the status of the plan and
progress in implementing the plan. HCD checks to see if the city is making
progress in meeting its fair share of regional housing needs and if the Land Use
Element Diagram reflects policies found in the Housing Element.
This section provides an implementation matrix for policies found in the Land Use
chapter. The matrix identifies the policy to be implemented, the implementation
measure to be used for that policy, the responsible agency or department that
will be implementing the measure, the funding source and the estimated
timeframe to complete the implementation.
Responsible Agency:
        All = All Departments                            AS = Administrative Services
        CD = Community Development                       PS = Public Safety
        CM = City Manager                                P&R = Parks and Recreation
Funding Source:
        GF = General Fund                                SF= State funds
        RA = Redevelopment Agency                        FF = Federal Funds
          G = Grants                                     OF = Other Funds
        DF = Development Fees
Implementation Timeframe (or as resources provide):
        ST = Short-term by 2009                          LT = Long Term by 2020
        MT = Mid-term by 2015                            On = Ongoing
Land Use Element, August 2007                    27               Duarte General Plan 2005-2020
  CHAPTER 5
  LAND USE
                                            Table LU - 5
                            Land Use Implementation Measures
                                                               Responsible    Funding       Time
Policy #    Implementation Measure                             Agency         Source        frame
LU 1.1.1    Prepare market studies to see if Duarte can        CD             GF, OF        On
            attract and sustain national or regional quality
            restaurants and stores.
LU 1.1.2    Zone sufficient land for a balanced mix of         CD             GF            ST
            residential uses.
LU 1.1.3    Re-designate appropriate areas for high            CD             GF            ST
LU 1.1.4    density residential during the General Plan
LU 1.1.5    update process of 2005-06
LU 1.1.6
LU 1.17     Keep      abreast      of   current    economic    CM             RA, GF        On
            development opportunities and pursue those
            which will implement this policy.
LU 1.1.8    This project will not provide for low and          CD             GF            ST
            moderate housing but in-lieu fees will be
            collected and other properties will be
            designated for low and moderate income
            housing
LU 2.1.1    Review the zoning ordinance and design             CD             GF            On
            guidelines to insure adequate development
            and aesthetic standards. Require all infill
            development projects to undergo review by
            the Architectural Design Review Board and be
            consistent with design guidelines. Work to
            prevent light spillage from one land use to
            another.
LU 2.1.2    Conduct an annual review of activity on            CD             GF, RA        On
            Huntington Drive to determine applicability of
            General Plan policies.              Utilize the
            Redevelopment Agency’s authority to acquire
            incompatible activities.
LU 2.1.3    New       commercial      development       along  CD             GF, RA        On
            Huntington Drive should be concentrated in
            nodes at key intersections.         Continue to
            support the Architectural Review Board and
            its review of all commercial projects in the city.
            Utilize the community design manual to insure
            neighborhood         commercial     uses       are
            aesthetically      compatible    with     existing
            neighborhoods.
LU 2.1.4    Revise the zoning ordinance to encourage           CD             GF            ST
            research and development-oriented uses
            associated with City of Hope and/or other high
            quality businesses.
LU 2.1.5    Comply with implementation measures of the         CD             GF            On
            Safety Element.
  Land Use Element, August 2007                   28               Duarte General Plan 2005-2020

  CHAPTER 5
  LAND USE
LU 2.1.6    Use the city’s development review process to     CD             GF            On
            regulate hillside development.
LU 2.1.7    Designate these uses as nonconforming land       CD             GF            MT
            uses and initiate abatement procedures which
            will allow for their removal.
LU 3.1.1    Designate specific plan areas on the Land        CD             GF            MT
            Use Diagram
LU 3.1.2    Provide for vertical and/or horizontal mixed     CD             GF            MT
LU 3.1.6    use with unique parking and design
            standards. Encourage land use intensification
            of the proposed City Center area for mixed-
            use development with an emphasis on retail
            development on the ground floor and higher
            density residential on upper floors. Work to
            improve parking issues relative to overall
            numbers and proximity to businesses.
LU 3.1.3    Continue to perform studies relative to land,    CD             RA, GF        On
            relocation, demolition, remediation and
            construction cost.            Identify potential
            businesses to locate in the City Center area.
LU 3.1.4     Work with existing property owners to           CM, CD         RA, GF        ST
LU 3.1.6    develop a Specific and Strategic Plan for the
            area immediately after the General Plan is
            adopted.
LU 3.1.5    Monitor the progress of the Duarte Gold Line     CM, CD         GF            On
            station on a monthly basis.
  Land Use Element, August 2007                   29             Duarte General Plan 2005-2020

CHAPTER 6
HOUSING
Table of Contents
Section                                                                    Page
1.     INTRODUCTION
       A.      Purpose of the Housing Element                              1-1
       B.      State Policy and Authorization                              1-3
       C.      Relationship to Other General Plan Elements                 1-3
       D.      Data Sources                                                1-3
       E.      Public Participation                                        1-7
2.     HOUSING NEEDS ASSESMENT
       A.      Population Characteristics                                  2-1
       B.      Household Characteristics                                   2-3
       C.      Housing Stock Characteristics                               2-8
       D.      Regional Housing Needs                                      2-17
3.     HOUSING CONSTRAINTS
       A.      Physical And Environmental Constraints                      3-1
       B.      Market Constraints                                          3-4
       C.      Governmental Constraints                                    3-5
4.     HOUSING OPPORTUNITIES AND RESOURCES
       A.      Availability of Sites for Housing                           4-1
       B.      Financial Resources                                         4-3
       C.      Local Non-Profit Resources                                  4-5
       D.      Energy Conservation Opportunities                           4-6
5.     EVALUATION OF PREVIOUS HOUSING ELEMENT
       A.      Progress in Implementing Programs                           5-1
       B.      Progress in Meeting Housing Goals                           5-17
6.     HOUSING PLAN
       A.      Goals and Policies                                          6-1
       B.      Housing Programs                                            6-3
       C.      Quantified Objectives                                       6-11
7.     APPENDIX
       Table 3-11                                                          7-1
       Table 3-12                                                          7-2
       Table 3-16                                                          7-2
Duarte General Plan 2005-2020               i              Adopted August 24, 2004
Housing Element                                            Data updated May, 2007
CHAPTER 6
HOUSING
List of Diagrams and Tables
                                                                                Page
                                       Diagrams
Diagram H 1-1          Regional Location                                       1-2
Diagram H 1-2          Housing Opportunity Areas                               6-13
                                         Tables
Table H 1-1            State Housing Element Requirements                      1-5
Table H 2-1            Population Growth Trends                                2-1
Table H 2-2            Racial and Ethnic Characteristics                       2-2
Table H 2-3            Duarte Age Trends and Characteristics                   2-3
Table H 2-4            Average Population Per Household                        2-4
Table H 2-5            Special Needs Groups                                    2-5
Table H 2-6            Homeless Shelters and Services Provided
                       In The San Gabriel Valley                               2-8
Table H 2-7            Age of Housing Stock And Housing Growth                 2-9
Table H 2-8            Comparative Housing Unit Growth                         2-10
Table H 2-9            Tenure By Units In Structure                            2-11
Table H -10            Comparison Of Unit Values And Rents                     2-12
Table H 2-11           Value Of Owner Occupied Units                           2-13
Table H 2-12           Housing Affordability For Owner-Occupied Units          2-13
Table H 2-13           Rent Of Renter-Occupied Units And Housing
                       Affordability For Renter-Occupied Units                 2-14
Table H 2-14           Los Angeles County Median Income Guidelines For
                       Fiscal Year 2003 80% County Median Income               2-15
Table H 2-15           Affordability By Type Of Worker                         2-16
Table H 2-16           Existing Housing Needs                                  2-18
Table H 2-17           Share Of Regional Housing Needs – 1998 To 2005          2-19
Table H 2-18           Housing Production from 1998 to May 2004                2-19
Table H 3-1            LOS For Intersections Along Huntington Drive            3-2
Table H 3-2            Fees Charged For Residential Development                3-8
Table H 4-1            Residential Development Potential, Vacant Parcels       4-2
Table H 4-2            Residential Development Potential, Previously
                       Developed Parcels                                       4-3
Table H 5-1            1993 Quantified Objectives                              5-17
Table H 6-1            Maximum Number of Units that can be Constructed,
                       Rehabilitated and Conserved From 1998 to 2005           6-12
Duarte General Plan 2005-2020              ii                  Adopted August 24, 2004
Housing Element                                                Data updated May, 2007

CHAPTER 6
HOUSING                                                                  Introduction
1.      INTRODUCTION
California law requires that a city’s Housing Element be revised every five years. As a
result, the Duarte City Council adopted this revised Housing Element on August 24,
2004 as the first General Plan Element of the 2005 – 2020 update. The California
Department of Housing and Community Development certified this Housing Element in
November 2004 as complying with state law. Data in this element was updated in
September 2006 to be consistent with other elements of the updated General Plan.
The City of Duarte, shown on Diagram H 1-1, is located at the foot of the San Gabriel
Mountains about twenty miles northeast of the City of Los Angeles. It borders the
cities of Monrovia to the west, the City of Bradbury to the north, the City of Azusa to
the east, and the City of Irwindale to the south. The San Gabriel River and Santa Fe
Flood Control Basin abuts Duarte to the east and south. Major transportation corridors
serve Duarte including Interstate 210, Interstate 605, and Huntington Drive (Route 66).
Duarte is also served by a Metropolitan Transit Authority Rail (MTA) line, which could
provide rail passenger service in the future.
Duarte has seen modest population changes over the past twenty years. However,
the City has undergone significant demographic shifts over that same time period.
Most notably among the shifts is the continued growth of the Hispanic population. The
housing stock has remained relatively unchanged over the past decade, as the City
has been near buildout. Housing in the City consists primarily of single-family homes,
which account for 76 percent of all units. Relatively modest housing growth has
occurred over the past ten years because of the lack of vacant land. New
development that has occurred has primarily been in the recycling of previously
developed parcels and the conversion of non-residential uses to residential uses.
As a mature community, the 2000-2005 Housing Element continues the City’s focus of
the 1993 Housing Element on preserving the condition of the existing housing stock,
attempting to provide affordable housing opportunities for all economic groups, and
improving the quality of life in Duarte’s various neighborhoods for all City residents.
        A.     PURPOSE OF THE HOUSING ELEMENT
Many economic and demographic changes occurred throughout the 1990s, creating
significant challenges to the ability of local governments to provide adequate housing
for residents in the San Gabriel Valley. Continued population growth, the economic
recession during the first half of the 1990s, and the diminishing availability of easily
buildable land have contributed to the growing scarcity of affordable housing.
Providing adequate housing, especially that which is affordable to low- and moderate-
income households, has become a significant challenge.
Duarte General Plan 2005 - 2020           1 -1                Adopted August 24, 2004
Housing Element                                               Data Updated May, 2007

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Diagram H 1-1
                                                                                                                 ANGELES
                                                                                                                 NATIONAL
                                                                                                                  FOREST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       LEGEND
                                                                                                      BRADBURY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             City Limits
                                                                                                                                                      LAS LOMAS RD
                                                                                                                                                                                               ROYAL OAKS DR
                                                 MONROVIA
                                                                                                                     ROYAL OAKS DR
                                                               MOUNTAIN AV
                                                                                                                                                                                                               AZUSA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Source: City of Duarte - June 2006
                                                                                              HUNTINGTON DR
                                                                                                                                                                     HU
                                                                                                                                                                        N   TI
                                                                                                                                                                               N   GT
                                                      CENTRAL AV                                                                                                                     ON
                                                                                                  (
                                                                                                  g
                                                                                                  &
                                                                                                  %                                  (
                                                                                                                                     o
                                                                                                                                     &
                                                                                                                                     %   CENTRAL AV                                       DR
                                                  DUARTE RD
M:mdata/10104371/basemap_24X36_regional.mxd ko
                                                                             BUENA VISTA ST                                  IRWINDALE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Feet
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          0   700 1,400     2,800   4,200
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  July 10, 2006
CHAPTER 6
HOUSING                                                                Introduction
The Housing Element serves as a policy document for addressing issues that may
arise in meeting the housing needs of current and future residents. The purpose of the
Housing Element is two-fold: 1) to determine the existing and projected housing needs
of residents of the City of Duarte, and 2) to take appropriate actions that encourage
the private sector to build housing while making sure that government is not a
constraint to housing production. This Housing Element establishes goals and policies
to guide City Officials in making decisions to address housing needs.
        B.         STATE POLICY AND AUTHORIZATION
The California State Legislature has identified the attainment of a decent home and
suitable living environment for every Californian as the State's major housing goal.
Recognizing the important role of local planning programs in the pursuit of this goal,
the Legislature has mandated that all cities and counties prepare a housing element
as part of their Comprehensive General Plans. Section 65302 (c) of the Government
Code provides the authority for a Housing Element and Section 65580 of the
Government Code sets forth the specific components to be contained in a community's
housing element. Table H 1-1 summarizes these State requirements and identifies the
applicable sections in the Duarte Housing Element where these requirements are
addressed.
        C.         RELATIONSHIP TO OTHER GENERAL PLAN ELEMENTS
The City of Duarte’s General Plan is comprised of the following six elements: 1) Land
Use; 2) Housing; 3) Transportation; 4) Open Space and Conservation; 5) Noise; and
6) Public Safety. State law requires that the General Plan be internally consistent.
The Housing Element is consistent with Goals and Policies of the other elements of
the General Plan. As other elements of the General Plan are amended in the future,
the Plan (including the Housing Element) will be reviewed to ensure internal
consistency is maintained.
        D.         DATA SOURCES
Various sources of information, listed below, are used to prepare this Housing
Element. The analysis of population characteristics and existing housing stock is
based primarily on the 2000 Census:
            1. City of Duarte General Plan, including Housing Element, March 23, 1993
            2. U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of the Census, 1990 and 2000
            3. California State Department of Finance, 2002 Population and Housing
               Report.
            4. Southern California Association of Governments (SCAG) Regional
               Housing Needs Assessment, 1999
            5. Construction Industry Research Board 2002 Sales Data.
            6. Los Angeles Times and Pasadena Star News rental listings
Duarte General Plan 2005 - 2020          1 -3                Adopted August 24, 2004
Housing Element                                              Data Updated May, 2007

CHAPTER 6
HOUSING                                                                Introduction
           7. Public and private nonprofit housing agencies were consulted for data on
               special needs groups and projects.
           8. Employment data was updated by the State Employment Development
               Department.
           9. Los Angeles County Community Development Commission
Residential site information was collected through the review of the Los Angeles
Assessor parcel data and field surveys to identify vacant and potential sites.
Duarte General Plan 2005 - 2020        1 -4                  Adopted August 24, 2004
Housing Element                                              Data Updated May, 2007
CHAPTER 6
HOUSING                                                           Introduction
                                        TABLE H 1-1
                      STATE HOUSING ELEMENT REQUIREMENTS
    Required Housing Element Components                Reference Section
   A. Housing Needs Assessment
     1. Population trends in Duarte in relation to
         regional trends.                                Section 2.A
     2. Employment trends in Duarte in relation to
         regional trends.                                Section 2.C
     3. Quantification and projection of Duarte’s
         existing and projected housing needs for all
         income groups.                                  Section 2.B
     4. Analysis of Duarte’s housing characteristics
         including the following:
          a. level of housing cost compared to ability
             to pay;                                     Section 2.C
          b. overcrowding;                               Section 2.B
          c. condition of housing stock.                 Section 2.C
     5. Inventory of land suitable for residential
         development, including vacant sites, land
         having potential for redevelopment or
         recycling, land that can be rezoned, analysis
         of relationship of sites to zoning, public
         facilities and services.                         Section 4.A
     6. Analysis of existing and potential government
        constraints on the development of housing
        for all income groups, improvement or
        maintenance of housing units.                     Section 3.C
     7. Analysis of existing and potential non-
        governmental and market constraints on the
        maintenance and development of housing for
        all income groups.                                 Section 3.B
     8. Analysis of special needs groups including:
        the elderly, female-headed households, the
        disabled, large families, the homeless, and
        farmworkers.                                       Section 2.B
     9. Analysis of opportunities for energy
        conservation in residential development.           Section 4.D
Duarte General Plan 2005 - 2020            1 -5         Adopted August 24, 2004
Housing Element                                         Data Updated May, 2007

CHAPTER 6
HOUSING                                                          Introduction
                                      TABLE H 1-1
                     STATE HOUSING ELEMENT REQUIREMENTS
                                        (continued)
    Required Housing Element Components                 Reference Section
   B. Goals and Policies
     Identification of Duarte’s goals and policies
     relative to development, improvement and
     maintenance of housing.                             Section 6.A
   C. Implementation Program
      The implementation program should do the
      following:
     1. Identify adequate sites which will be made
        available through appropriate actions for a
        variety of housing types for all income groups   Section 6.A
     2. Programs to assist in the development of
        adequate housing to meet the needs of low
        and moderate income households.                  Section 6.A
     3. Identify and, when appropriate and possible
        remove government constraints to the
        development, improvement, and
        maintenance of housing in Duarte                  Section 6.A
     4. Conserve and improve the condition of the
        existing and affordable housing stock             Section 6.A
     5. Promote housing opportunities for all
        persons.                                          Section 6.A
     6. Preserve lower income assisted
        housing developments.                             Section 6.A
Duarte General Plan 2005 - 2020            1 -6        Adopted August 24, 2004
Housing Element                                        Data Updated May, 2007

CHAPTER 6
HOUSING                                                                  Introduction
       E.         PUBLIC PARTICIPATION
Section 65583 (c) (6) (B) of the Government Code states that, “The local government
shall make a diligent effort to achieve public participation of all economic segments of
the community in the development of the housing element, and the program shall
describe this effort.”
The City of Duarte conducted the following meetings:
         2     Community Workshops
         1     Joint Meeting with Planning Commission and Economic Development
               Commission
         1     Planning Commission hearing
         1     City Council hearing
Press releases were distributed to following local media before each of these meetings
encouraging members of the public to attend and participate in these meetings and
hearings. Meeting notices were posted at various locations throughout the community
where special needs groups are likely to congregate. Notices were given or posted at
the following locations: Duarte Star, Duarte City Hall, Duarte Library, Duarte Public
Safety Department, Santa Teresa Hospital, Buena Vista Manor, Highland Manor,
Westminster Gardens, and Monrovia Convalescent Home.
Duarte General Plan 2005 - 2020          1 -7                  Adopted August 24, 2004
Housing Element                                                Data Updated May, 2007

CHAPTER 6
HOUSING                                                           Housing Needs
2.      HOUSING NEEDS ASSESSMENT
The characteristics of a given population (age, household income, household size and
specials needs) and the type of housing stock, will be the biggest factors for
determining housing needs. In addition, because these characteristics change over
time within a community, housing needs will also change. Duarte’s needs in the 1980s
were different than those today. This section explores the characteristics of the
existing and projected population and housing stock in order to define the changing
housing needs in Duarte.
        A.     POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
               1. Population Grown Trends
According to the 2000 U.S. Census, Duarte’s population was 21,486 as of April 1,
2000. The 1990 Census reported a population of 20,688, which represents only 798
additional people, or a 4 % increase from the 1990 population. Duarte’s population
increased 23.4% (16,766) between 1980 and 1990. The population increase from
1970 to 1980 was 12%. The significant slowdown in population growth in Duarte and
its immediate neighbors, as shown in Table H 2-1, is partially due to the lack of
available land within these communities.
                                     TABLE H 2-1
                             POPULATION GROWTH TRENDS
Jurisdiction           1990               2000                Change
                                                              1990-2000
Duarte                 20,688             21,486              4%
Monrovia               35,761             36,929              3%
Bradbury               832                855                 3%
Temple City            31,100             33,377              7%
Azusa                  41,333             44,712              8%
Los        Angeles 8,863,164              9,519,338           7%
County
Source: 1990 and 2000 U.S. Census
Duarte General Plan 2005 - 2020         2 -1                Adopted August 24, 2004
Housing Element                                             Data Updated May, 2007

CHAPTER 6
HOUSING                                                              Housing Needs
               2. Race and Ethnicity
Like many communities in Southern California, Duarte’s population has become much
more diverse over the past twenty years. These changes may have implications for
housing needs, because different ethnic groups sometimes have household
characteristics that affect their preferences and housing needs. Understanding
changes in race/ethnicity, especially among first generation ethnic groups, provides a
basis for addressing housing needs. The racial and ethnic composition of Duarte
residents has changed over the past two decades. As an example, in 1980, the
Hispanic population was 29%, in 2000, the Hispanic population was 43.4%. In 1980
the Asian population was 8.6% and increased to 13.9% in 2000. The Black population
has stayed about the same with Blacks making up 8.5% of the Duarte population in
1980 and increased to 10% in 2000. The White population in 1980 was 53.5% of the
total population. The non Hispanic White population in 2000 was 32.1% of the Duarte
population.
                                         TABLE H 2-2
                       RACIAL AND ETHNIC CHARACTERISTICS
                       1980                  1990                2000
Race/Ethnicity         Persons Percent       Persons Percent     Persons Percent
White                     9,286      53.5     9,380     45.3      6,895        32.1
Hispanic                  5,042     29.0      7,160     34.6      9,326        43.4
Asian                     1,491       8.6     2,268     11.0      2,986        13.9
Black                     1,484       8.5     1,766      8.5      2,138        10.0
Other                        58         .4      114       .6         141          .6
Total                   17,361     100%      20,688    100%      21,486       100%
Source: 1980, 1990 and 2000 U.S. Census
               3. Age Characteristics
Table H 2-3 shows that Duarte’s age characteristics have not changed much over the
past twenty years. Except for the median age increasing from 29.1 in 1980 to 34.5 in
the year 2002, not much else has changed from an age distribution standpoint. The
majority of Duarte’s housing stock is single family residential. For that reason, it
should not be surprising that the biggest age range is 25-54 (the child bearing years)
at 43% of the total. The next biggest age range is from 0-17 at 28.2% of the total.
Families continue to want to live in single-family residential units. The senior
population 55> comprised 19.5% of the population in 1980, then dropped to 18.6% in
1990, then went up to 20.3 in the year 2000. If senior population continues to show
this type of growth, it could signal the need for more senior housing in the community.
Duarte General Plan 2005 - 2020            2 -2                Adopted August 24, 2004
Housing Element                                                Data Updated May, 2007

CHAPTER 6
HOUSING                                                             Housing Needs
                                        TABLE H 2-3
                   DUARTE AGE TRENDS AND CHARACTERISTICS
                              1980                 1990                2000
    Age Range          Persons Percent      Persons Percent     Persons Percent
       0-4              1,553       9.3      1,873       9.0     1,613       7.5
       5-17             3,587      21.4      4,032      19.5     4,444 20.7
      18-24             1,941      11.5      1,937        9.4    1,825       8.5
      25-54             6,430      38.3      8,997      43.5     9,249 43.0
      55-64             1,461       8.7      1,490       7.2     1,799       8.4
      65-74                916      5.5      1,229        5.9    1,227       5.7
         75+               896      5.3      1,130        5.5    1,329       6.2
      Total            16,766       100     20,688       100    21,486     100
Median Age                    29.1               32.1                 34.5
Source: 1980, 1990 and 2000 U.S. Census
        B.      HOUSING CHARACTERISTIC
The 2000 U.S. Census defines a household as follows: “A household includes all of
the people who occupy a housing unit. A housing unit is a house, an apartment, a
mobile home, a group of rooms, or a single room occupied (or if vacant, intended for
occupancy) as separate living quarters. Separate living quarters are those in which the
occupants live separately from any other people in the building and that have direct
access from the outside of the building or through a common hall. The occupants may
be a single family, one person living alone, two or more families living together, or any
other group of related or unrelated people who share living quarters.” Within Duarte
there are 6,635 households with a population of 20,996. Of the 6,635 households,
4,711 were owner occupied and 1,924 were renter occupied. The remaining 490
persons that make up Duarte’s total population live within group quarters. This type of
separate living quarter would be found at The City of Hope, Westminster Gardens, at
the Santa Terasita Medical Center, and Avila Gardens.
Household type, size, income level, and special housing needs determine the type of
housing needed within a community. Housing affordability is best measured at the
household level. Special housing needs such as female-headed households or large
families, is also best measured at the household level. If these types of special
housing needs exist within a community, making it difficult for them to purchase
housing, that community may want to initiate a homebuyers assistance program or
other programs, that allow these households to obtain adequate and safe housing.
The following section discusses the various household characteristics in Duarte
including various special needs groups.
Duarte General Plan 2005 - 2020           2 -3                Adopted August 24, 2004
Housing Element                                               Data Updated May, 2007

CHAPTER 6
HOUSING                                                           Housing Needs
               1. Household Type
According to the 2000 U.S. Census, of the 6,635 households within Duarte, families
made up 4,892 or 74%. Of the 4,892 families, 3,638, or 55% of the total households
were married couples. This is not surprising as Duarte has been known as a family
community for decades. Male householder (no wife present) represented only 354
households, or 5% of Duarte’s total households while female householder (no
husband present) represented 900 households, or 13.6% of total households. Of the
900 female-headed households, 47% have children under the age of 18.
While married couples occupy 55% of Duarte’s households, 1,643 or 45% of these
married couple households do not have children under the age of 18. There were only
316, or 5%, non-family households in Duarte.
One third (2,218) of the total households in Duarte are occupied with one or more
people that is age 60 or older. This large percentage, along with the fact that 53% of
female headed households have no children under age 18, and tend to be older,
seems to indicate a need for more senior housing in the future as these heads of
household grow older and become empty nesters.
Household size is an important indicator that can tell us where the City’s population
growth is going. A city’s average household size will increase if there is a trend
towards larger families. In cities where a large percentage of the population is aging,
the average household size will often decline. In 2000, the average household size in
Duarte was 3.16 persons as compared with 3.06 in 1990. Following, in Table H 2-4, is
the average population per household for Duarte and surrounding cities in the year
2000.
                                     TABLE H 2-4
                      AVERAGE POPULATION PER HOUSEHOLD
                   City                         Persons Per Household
               Duarte                                     3.16
               Azusa                                      3.41
               Bradbury                                   3.01
               Monrovia                                   2.71
               Temple City                                2.90
               Los Angeles County                         2.98
Source: 2000 U.S. Census
Of the 490 people in group quarters, 446 were in nursing homes and the other 44 were
considered a noninstitutionalized population. Most of these people reside at the City
of Hope, Westminster Gardens, Santa Terasita Medical Center and Avila Gardens.
Duarte General Plan 2005 - 2020         2 -4                Adopted August 24, 2004
Housing Element                                             Data Updated May, 2007

CHAPTER 6
HOUSING                                                              Housing Needs
                2. Special Needs Groups
California law identifies “Special Needs Groups” as the elderly, persons with
disabilities, families with female heads of households, large families, farmworkers, and
homeless persons and families. The size of special needs groups in Duarte are
shown on Table H 2-5.
                                        TABLE H 2-5
                                SPECIAL NEEDS GROUPS
 Special Needs Group                 Number of               Percent of Total
                                Persons/Households
Elderly (Age 65+)                                         19.7 % of all households
    Owner Occupied                         419*
    Renter Occupied                        891*
Large Households (5 or                                    20.8 % of all households
more members)
    Owner Occupied                         368*
    Renter Occupied                      1,009*
Female-Headed                              480 *            7.2 % of all households
Households w/Children
Disabled Persons                         7,116                     33.1
Farmworkers                                  5                        .05
Homeless Persons                             0                       0
Source 2000 U.S. Census
        Households *
                                    Elderly Households
Historical data show a trend towards the elderly population growing in Duarte. As of
the year 2000, 25% of the households in Duarte were occupied by persons age 65 and
over. The elderly frequently overpay for housing because of their fixed income and, in
today’s medical care environment, overpay for medical expenses.                     This is
compounded by the fact that fifty eight percent of the elderly in Duarte suffer with a
disability. The median household income in Duarte was $50,744 in 1999 dollars. The
median household income for households age 65 to 74 was $26,941 and $18,533 for
households 75 years of age and over. This is a dramatic difference from the median
income for households age 45 to 54 (the high income years when children have left
home) of $65,542. The elderly make up 10.6% of all Duarte residents living in poverty.
The City provides assistance to seniors by promoting the City’s density bonuses for
senior housing and the development of second units on single-family lots, in order to
provide necessary housing for senior citizens. The City also encourages seniors to
participate in its housing rehabilitation programs. With respect to housing
Duarte General Plan 2005 - 2020            2 -5                Adopted August 24, 2004
Housing Element                                                Data Updated May, 2007

CHAPTER 6
HOUSING                                                              Housing Needs
opportunities for seniors, Duarte has four senior housing projects in place providing
336 senior units. The City has another project in process in coordination with the
Southern California Presbyterian Homes (SCPH) called the Andres Duarte Terrace
project, which will be 80 units and will utilize a 202 HUD Grant. The Duarte
Redevelopment Agency wrote down the cost of the property to make the project
affordable. SCPH is an experienced non-profit housing developer that has developed
many affordable housing projects throughout Southern California including two in
Duarte. The housing activities of SCPH are funded through HUD Sections 202 and
221, City of Industry funds and local redevelopment housing set-aside funds.
                          Large Households and Overcrowding
Large households are defined as households with five or more members. Large
households tend to live in smaller units if they are in the lower income groups. This
often results in overcrowding. The increased strain which overcrowding places on
housing units serve to accelerate the pace of deterioration of the housing unit. Almost
21% of Duarte households are comprised of five or more members.
Overcrowding is defined by the U.S. Census as a household with greater than 1.01
persons per room, excluding bathrooms, kitchens, hallways, and porches. Severe
overcrowding is defined as households with greater than 1.51 persons per room.
According to the 2000 Census, 780 owner units, 16.6% of all Duarte owner occupied
units, and 369 rental units, 19.2% of all renter occupied units, were overcrowded. This
seems to imply that about 83% of the large households are overcrowded.
In order to address overcrowding conditions, the City can provide assistance, through
participation in Los Angeles County programs, that will result in room additions which
will benefit both owner and renter occupied units. Development of second units will
also help the overcrowding issue.
                       Female-headed Households with Children
Single-parent households, usually headed by women, often require special assistance
because of the greater need for affordable child care, health care, and other services.
Female-headed households with children tend to have lower-incomes than other
groups. This limits their access to decent affordable housing.
The 2000 Census identified 480 female-headed households with children under age
18. This represents 7.2% of all households in the City. Of the female-headed
households with children under age, 18% have income under the poverty level. The
Duarte Parks and Recreation Department provides the “Club Kids Program”, which is
an after school day care program for children K-6. The Maryvale daycare is a religious
non-profit organization which provides full time daycare, which the Redevelopment
Agency will participate in by providing them a site for an expanded facility. The San
Duarte General Plan 2005 - 2020          2 -6                 Adopted August 24, 2004
Housing Element                                                Data Updated May, 2007

CHAPTER 6
HOUSING                                                              Housing Needs
Gabriel YWCA, which has a church facility in Duarte provides a fulltime daycare
program targeted to low and moderate income families.
                                   Disabled Persons
Physical disabilities can hinder access to traditionally designed housing units. The
disabled encompasses several groups such as the physically disabled;
developmentally disabled, and severely mentally ill. Housing challenges for these
groups include architectural constraints, which do not facilitate mobility and
independence; affordable housing cost; and independent living.
The Census reported a total of 7,116 persons with disabilities in Duarte. Of those,
3,237 (15.0% of the total population) were not institutionalized and 3,879 (18.0% of the
total population) were. Of the 3,879 that were noninstitutionalized, 2,557 were
between the age of 21 to 64. Of those 2,557 persons, 56% were employed. These
people reside in one of the following facilities: City of Hope, Santa Teresa Hospital,
Buena Vista Manor, Highland Manor, Westminster Gardens, and Monrovia
Convalescent Home.
                                     Farmworkers
Of the 9,487 employed people living in Duarte, the Census reported 5 were
farmworkers which is .05% of the workforce. The Census did not identify any farm
housing in the City. Because of the urban nature of the employment base of Duarte,
there are no programs for farmworkers.
                                  Homeless Persons
The homeless population in Southern California is one of the largest in the country.
Estimates of the number of homeless in Los Angeles County range between 30,000 to
50,000 persons. There are no emergency shelters or transitional housing facilities in
Duarte and the closest are in the City of Pasadena, which is eleven miles away.
However, resources in Duarte for the homeless include the Foothill Units Center and
the Duarte Senior Center. Table H 2-6 list the shelters and services provided by these
organizations for the homeless in the San Gabriel Valley.
The Census did not report any homeless persons or families living in Duarte. The
Duarte Public Safety Department and Code Enforcement were contacted. They
indicated that the homeless persons sometimes seen in Duarte live in the San Gabriel
Reservoir area, outside of the Duarte City limits.
The City has not historically provided funding for homeless facilities. The fact that
there are no homeless in Duarte may be partly attributed to the number of homeless
shelters in the Duarte vicinity. These shelters are listed in Table H2-6 compiled in
2003.
Duarte General Plan 2005 - 2020        2 -7                    Adopted August 24, 2004
Housing Element                                                Data Updated May, 2007
CHAPTER 6
HOUSING                                                             Housing Needs
                                       TABLE H 2-6
                   HOMELESS SHELTERS AND SERVICES PROVIDED
                               IN THE SAN GABRIEL VALLEY
              Organization                           Services Provided
Union Station/The Depot                    Provides room and board for up to 36
412 So. Raymond Ave.                       individuals. Stays are up to two weeks.
Pasadena, Ca. 91105                        Medical, group and psychological
(626) 449-4596                             consulting, and substance abuse
                                           programs are available.
Haven House                                Provides 45 day stays and group
P.O. Box 50007                             counseling to battered women and
Pasadena, Ca. 91105-007                    children.
Rosemary Cottage                           Contracted by L.A. County Department
3244 East Green St.                        of Social Services to provide shelter to
Pasadena, Ca. 91105                        minor girls
(626) 795-7218
Door of Hope                               Provides temporary housing for four
669 Los Robles                             homeless families for up to two-
Pasadena, Ca. 91104                        months. Provides job referral services.
(626) 304-9130
Source: City of Pasadena, 2003
        C.       HOUSING STOCK CHARACTERISTICS
A city’s existing housing stock is important in identifying the community’s needs.
Housing tenure, cost, condition of structures and vacancy are important to understand.
This section identifies the housing stock characteristics in Duarte to identify how well
the existing housing stock meets the needs of the current and projected future
residents in the community.
                 1. Housing Age and Growth
Use of more modern building materials have provided safer and more maintenance
free housing. As an example, the use of asbestos was outlawed in 1978. About the
same time copper pipe began to replace the use of galvanized pipe, which would
corrode, causing water pressure problems and breaks in the water system. If housing
is not maintained, it can deteriorate and depress values within the neighborhood,
discourage reinvestment and eventually adversely impact the quality of life in the
community.
Duarte General Plan 2005 - 2020          2 -8                Adopted August 24, 2004
Housing Element                                               Data Updated May, 2007

CHAPTER 6
HOUSING                                                           Housing Needs
As with asbestos, lead based paint is also a health consideration. It is estimated that
75% of all housing units built before 1978 may have lead-based paint. In recognition
of an aging housing stock, the City of Duarte has implemented home improvement
programs to help maintain its housing stock. Table H 2-7 describes the age of
Duarte’s housing stock. Of concern is that almost 74% of the Duarte housing stock
was built before 1979. The Center for Disease Control mandates lead screening for all
children who participate in Federally-funded health programs. Screening typically
occurs when a child is between 12 and 72 months old. An elevated blood level (EBL)
is recorded when the blood level is 10 ug/dL. A “case” is defined as a child having a
blood lead level equal to or greater than 20 ug/dL once, or blood lead levels between
15-19 ug/dL for at least two tests. The latest report shows that Duarte had 192
children screened, 17 of which had EBL and there were ten cases. The City of Duarte
has designated lead based paint removal as a high priority.
Table H 2-7 also shows a significant slowdown in new housing production with only
5.8% of the housing stock being built in the 1990’s. The California Department of
Finance has estimated Duarte’s population as of January 1, 2003 as 22,377 with a
housing unit total of 6,842 (4,316 detached and 876 attached) with 3.281 persons per
household. This means only 37 dwelling units have been added between March 2000
and January 2003. This slowdown is primarily because of the lack of available land
within the community.
                                     TABLE H 2-7
                                AGE OF HOUSING STOCK
                                AND HOUSING GROWTH
      Year Built                 Number of Units         Percentage of Total
   1999 - March 2000                      28                        .4
   1995 - 1998                           153                      2.2
   1990 - 1994                           216                      3.2
   1980 - 1989                         1,389                     20.4
   1970 - 1979                         1,253                     18.4
   1960 - 1969                           981                     14.4
   1950 - 1959                         1,639                     24.1
   1940 - 1949                           956                     14.1
   1939 and earlier                      190                      2.8
       Total                           6,805                   100.0
Source U.S. 2000 Census
Cities surrounding Duarte have very similar housing traits. Their housing stock is
aging and there has been very little new housing production within the last twenty
years. Table H 2-8 shows these factors.
Duarte General Plan 2005 - 2020         2 -9                Adopted August 24, 2004
Housing Element                                             Data Updated May, 2007

CHAPTER 6
HOUSING                                                                        Housing Needs
                                               TABLE H 2-8
                               COMPARATIVE HOUSING UNIT GROWTH
                           Azusa      Bradbury          Duarte      Monrovia        Temple       City
                           California California        California  California      California
Total:                     12,919     311               6,805       13,929          11,706
  Built 1999 to March 2000 135        4                 28          75              85
  Built 1995 to 1998       450        9                 153         351             140
  Built 1990 to 1994       518        13                216         701             356
  Built 1980 to 1989       2,215      52                1,389       1,644           611
  Built 1970 to 1979       2,771      44                1,253       1,659           992
  Built 1960 to 1969       2,466      49                981         1,618           2,039
  Built 1950 to 1959       2,618      101               1,639       3,054           3,732
  Built 1940 to 1949       1,076      32                956         1,968           2,361
  Built 1939 or earlier    670        7                 190         2,859           1,390
Source: U.S. Census 2000
                      2. Units Needing Rehabilitation
City staff conducted a housing condition survey in June 1992. The survey used a
three-class system recommended by the Federal government to rate housing
structures without entering the buildings.                   This system included the following
classification description:
1.        Adequate conditions: No defects, or slight defects correctable with normal
          maintenance.
2.        Deteriorating: Intermediate defects requiring repair if unit is to provide safe
          and adequate shelters; more serious defects than those correctable by routine
          maintenance.
3.        Dilapidated: Serious defects making the building a safety hazard or creating
          an unhealthy environment.
Of the existing 6,847 housing units in the City at the time, only four units were
identified as deteriorated (Classification 2) and only two were classified as dilapidated
(Classification 3). Within the past five years, only three houses classified as
deteriorated and one classified as dilapidated have been demolished.
Duarte’s code enforcement staff divides the city into 3 areas with one code
enforcement officer responsible for each area. Each code enforcement officer drives
his or her entire area at least once per week. Windshield surveys by these code
enforcement officers reveal two deteriorating structures within the city, using the above
criteria. One of these units is in process of being rehabilitated, using CDBG funds for
part of the rehabilitation. City staff has approached the owner of the other unit to try to
convene him to participate in the City’s rehab program but the owner has refused. The
Duarte General Plan 2005 - 2020                  2 - 10                  Adopted August 24, 2004
Housing Element                                                          Data Updated May, 2007

CHAPTER 6
HOUSING                                                                 Housing Needs
City will continue to emphasize its code enforcement, early warning program for
possible rehabilitation properties, South of Huntington Drive.
Another factor in determining the living condition of a dwelling unit is whether or not
there is plumbing.
               3. Tenure by Units in Structure
There were 6,805 housing units in Duarte in 2000. On Census day 6,635 of these
units were occupied. Of these 4,710, or 71% were owner occupied and 1,925, or 29%
were renter occupied. The owner occupied units is up from 69.3% in 1990. Table H
2-9 shows that Duarte continues to be an owner occupied, single family community.
Over 86.6% of the single family detached units in the city were owner occupied as
compared with 13.4% of detached single family units which were renter occupied. As
in most communities, a large number of multiple family units are renter occupied. For
multiple family complexes of five or more, 13.8% were owner occupied and 82.2%
were renter occupied. For those who know the
community, the table illustrates that many of the         TABLE H 2-9           Duarte occupied
                                                           TENURE BY UNITS      units on    2000
condominiums units are also renter occupied.                 IN STRUCTURE       census day
Duarte has only 2% of it’s occupied housing stock in Total:                           6,635
mobile homes. Nine units, all of which were owner Owner occupied:                     4,710
                                                            1, detached               3,663
occupied, were reported as other, which may be              1, attached                 622
boats, RVs, van, etc.                                       2                            25
                                                            3 or 4                      115
AB 1866 was passage signed by Governor Davis on             5 to 9                       42
                                                            10 to 19                     34
September 29, 2002. AB 1866 (Section 65583.1,               20 to 49                     40
Gov. Code) provides the following for all California        50 or more                   47
cities:                                                     Mobile home                 113
                                                            Boat, RV, van, etc.           9
“AB 1866, Wright. Housing: density bonuses.               Renter occupied:            1,925
  (1) The Planning and Zoning Law requires the              1, detached                 569
housing element of the general plan of a city or            1, attached                 235
county, among other things, to identify adequate            2                            24
                                                            3 or 4                       55
sites for housing, including rental housing, factory-       5 to 9                      121
built housing, and mobilehomes, and to make                 10 to 19                    267
adequate provision for the existing and projected           20 to 49                     90
                                                            50 or more                  541
needs of all economic segments of the community.            Mobile home                  23
That law permits the Department of Housing and              Boat, RV, van, etc.           0
Community Development to allow a city or county to
identify adequate sites by a variety of methods. This bill would authorize the
department to also allow a city or county to identify sites for 2nd units based upon
relevant factors, including the number of 2nd units developed in the prior housing
element planning period.
Duarte General Plan 2005 - 2020          2 - 11                 Adopted August 24, 2004
Housing Element                                                 Data Updated May, 2007

CHAPTER 6
HOUSING                                                               Housing Needs
   (2) The Planning and Zoning Law authorizes a local agency to provide by ordinance
for the creation of 2nd units on parcels zoned for a primary single-family and
multifamily residence, as prescribed.”
The City of Duarte adopted a second unit ordinance on February 10, 2004, which will
encourage more housing units, some of which will be for low and moderate income
persons.
It is anticipated that the second unit provisions within the City’s adopted ordinance will
provide low and moderate income housing in a way that is acceptable to the needs of
the community. Many other California cities are using this provision to establish much
need affordable housing within their communities.
                3. Housing Cost
The U.S. 2000 Census reported a median owner-occupied unit value of $173,500 in
Duarte. Table H 2-10 provides a comparison of value of owner-occupied units and
gross rent for renter-occupied units for Duarte and its neighboring cities.
                                        TABLE H 2-10
                     COMPARISON OF UNIT VALUES AND RENTS
             City               Median Value, Owner- Median Rents, Renter-
                                Occupied Units             Occupied Units
Duarte                               $173,500                       $ 791
Azusa                                $149,300                       $ 743
Bradbury                             $644,900                       $1,469
Monrovia                             $229,600                       $ 746
Temple City                          $234,800                       $ 800
Source U.S. 2000 Census
                                    Owner-Occupied Units
Table H 2-11 shows home values for owner-occupied units in Duarte. This table
shows that Duarte’s home values are well dispersed within the housing cost range.
This should provide an opportunity for many economic segments of the community to
obtain affordable housing within Duarte, although table H 2-12 will show lower income
segments are less able to afford any kind of owner-occupied housing.
Duarte General Plan 2005 - 2020           2 - 12               Adopted August 24, 2004
Housing Element                                                 Data Updated May, 2007

CHAPTER 6
HOUSING                                                                    Housing Needs
                                             TABLE H 2-11
                                 VALUE OF OWNER-OCCUPIED UNITS
          Specified owner-occupied units                       4,123 Total           100.0 %
VALUE
Less than $50,000                                              25                    0.6
$50,000 to $99,999                                             107                   2.6
$100,000 to $149,999                                           1,207                 29.3
$150,000 to $199,999                                           1,399                 33.9
$200,000 to $299,999                                           1,072                 26.0
$300,000 to $499,999                                           291                   7.1
$500,000 to $999,999                                           13                    0.3
$1,000,000 or more                                             9                     0.2
Median (dollars)                                               173,500               (X)
Source: U.S. 2000 Census
Table H 2-12 is an affordability table showing monthly owner cost as a percentage of
household income. A widely held rule of thumb is that housing cost should not exceed
30% of gross income. This table shows that 31.1% of Duarte homeowners are paying
more than one third of their household income for housing. Of the 2,205 low-income
owner households, 65% experience overpayment.
The information on selected monthly owner costs as a percentage of household
income in 1999, in this table, is the computed ratio of selected monthly owner costs to
monthly household income in 1999. Separate distributions are often shown for units
"with a mortgage" and for units "not mortgaged." Units occupied by households
reporting no income or a net loss in 1999, are included in the "not computed" category.
                                             TABLE H 2-12
                   HOUSING AFFORDABILITY FOR OWNER-OCCUPIED UNITS
SELECTED MONTHLY OWNER COSTS AS A PERCENTAGE
                                                                         4,123 Total       100 %
  OF HOUSEHOLD INCOME IN 1999
Less than 15 percent                                                         1,019          24.7
15 to 19 percent                                                               724          17.6
20 to 24 percent                                                               680          16.5
25 to 29 percent                                                               413          10.0
30 to 34 percent                                                               241           5.8
35 percent or more                                                           1,003          24.3
Not computed                                                                    43           1.1
Source: U.S. 2000 Census
                                         Renter-Occupied Units
The same general information as that provided for home ownership is provided in
Table H 2-13 for renter-occupied units. As with the owner-occupied units, Table
Duarte General Plan 2005 - 2020               2 - 13              Adopted August 24, 2004
Housing Element                                                   Data Updated May, 2007
CHAPTER 6
HOUSING                                                                Housing Needs
H 2-13 shows that Duarte’s home rents are well dispersed within the housing rents
range. This should provide an opportunity for many economic segments of the
community to obtain affordable housing within Duarte, although the bottom portion of
this table shows that lower income segments are less able to afford any kind of renter-
occupied housing.
Gross rent, in this table, is the contract rent plus the estimated average monthly cost of
utilities (electricity, gas, water and sewer) and fuels (oil, coal, kerosene, wood, etc.) if
these are paid by the renter (or paid for the renter by someone else). Renter units
occupied without payment of cash rent are shown separately as "No cash rent" in the
tabulations.
Table H 2-13 shows that over 47.3% of Duarte’s renters are paying more than one
third of their household income for housing. This illustrates the need to provide more
rental housing. Again, the newly adopted second unit housing code could provide
some of this housing. Of the 1,023 low-income renter household, 65% paid more than
30% of their income on housing.
Gross rent as a percentage of household income in 1999, in this table, is a computed
ratio of monthly gross rent to monthly household income (total household income in
1999 divided by 12). Units for which no cash rent is paid and units occupied by
households that reported no income or a net loss in 1999 comprise the category "Not
computed."
                                          TABLE H 2-13
                             RENT OF RENTER-OCCUPIED UNITS AND
                 HOUSING AFFORDABILITY FOR RENTER-OCCUPIED UNITS
          Specified renter-occupied units                                     1,909  100.0
GROSS RENT
Less than $200                                                                122    6.4
$200 to $299                                                                  164    8.6
$300 to $499                                                                  107    5.6
$500 to $749                                                                  439    23.0
$750 to $999                                                                  560    29.3
$1,000 to $1,499                                                              395    20.7
$1,500 or more                                                                46     2.4
No cash rent                                                                  76     4.0
Median (dollars)                                                              791    (X)
GROSS RENT AS A PERCENTAGE OF HOUSEHOLD INCOME IN 1999
Less than 15 percent                                                          272    14.2
15 to 19 percent                                                              240    12.6
20 to 24 percent                                                              257    13.5
25 to 29 percent                                                              237    12.4
30 to 34 percent                                                              185    9.7
35 percent or more                                                            614    32.2
Not computed                                                                  104    5.4
Source: U.S. 2000 Census
Duarte General Plan 2005 - 2020            2 - 14               Adopted August 24, 2004
Housing Element                                                  Data Updated May, 2007

CHAPTER 6
HOUSING                                                               Housing Needs
More recent data, taken from DataQuick, shows that for June 2006, the median price
of the 30 single family residences sold in Duarte was $485,000, up 8.5% from the prior
year. The median price of the 9 condominiums, sold in June 2006, was $390,000, up
14.7% from the prior year. The median price for single family houses sold in all of L.A.
County during June 2006 was $549,000, up 9.8% from the prior year. The median
price for all condominiums sold in L.A County in June 2006, was $417,000, up 6.4%
from the prior year. The continuing rise in property values throughout Los Angeles
County make housing affordability more difficult, especially for lower income families.
The Los Angeles County Community Development Commission, which administers
the non-entitlement Community Development Block Grant funds for Los Angeles
County Cities with populations under 50,000, of which Duarte is one, reported the
following table on its web site. This table H 2-14, includes income limits for different
family sizes. A household of four is considered the standard when median income is
given.
HUD provides the City with periodic updates of median incomes for the Los
Angeles/Long Beach SMSA. Based on this information, the annual median income for
a family of four in Los Angeles County as of March 2006 was $56,200. Therefore, a
family of four is considered upper income if it makes over 120% of the median income
or over $67,740. A family of four is considered moderate income if it makes 81% to
120% of the median income or between $67,740 and $44,961. A family of four is
considered low income if it makes 80% to 51% of the median income or between
$44,960 and $28,101. A family of four is considered very low income if it makes 0 to
50% of the median income or $0 to $28,100 per year.
                                      TABLE H 2-14
                       LOS ANGELES COUNTY MEDIAN INCOME
                          GUIDELINES FOR FISCAL YEAR 2006
                              80% COUNTY MEDIAN INCOME
       No. of Persons in Household                Income Limits
                   1                                 $38,800
                   2                                 $44,350
                   3                                 $49,900
                   4                                 $55,450
                   5                                 $59,900
                   6                                 $64,300
                   7                                 $68,750
                   8                                 $73,200
Source: Los Angeles County Community Development Commission, 2006
Duarte General Plan 2005 - 2020           2 - 15                Adopted August 24, 2004
Housing Element                                                 Data Updated May, 2007
CHAPTER 6
HOUSING                                                                         Housing Needs
Comparing the income limits to typical workers found in Duarte, Table H 2-15 shows
that in 2003 a starting school teacher, with a family of four, was considered low
income. A beginning police officer with a family of four was considered moderate
income, a beginning hospital worker with a family of four was considered low income,
and the starting retail grocery worker with a family of four was considered very low
income.
                                             TABLE H 2-15
                            AFFORDABILITY BY TYPE OF WORKER
                        Starting              Median            Affordable        Affordable
   Job Type              Salary               Salary               Rent *            Home
                                                                                  Purchase *
Teacher                 $34,100              $45,000           $1,125 month        $185,000
Police Officer          $56,800              $63,100           $1,478 month        $250,000
Hospital
    Worker **           $32,200              $50,000          $1,250 month         $210,000
Retail Grocery
    Worker ***          $20,300              $36,050            $901 month         $150,000
* Affordability is based on 30% of median salary and 20% purchase down payment with a 30 year fixed
loan @ 6%
** Hospital work salaries is for City of Hope non executive, non contract workers
*** Retail Grocery Worker includes management
Source: Duarte Unified School District, City of Duarte, Rancho Los Amigos, Ralph’s Grocery stores,
2003
The costs of homeownership and rent can be compared to a household’s ability to pay
for housing. The gap between a household’s income and cost of housing continues to
widen in California.
                  4. Assisted Housing at Risk of Conversion
As part of the Housing Element, every city must include an analysis of existing
assisted rental units that are at risk of converting to market rate housing. A search of
the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) web sites found the
following four subsidized apartments complexes in Duarte.
    •   Duarte Park Apartments - There are 101, one bedroom units in this complex
        located at 1901 Buena Vista Street. This project was built using Section 236
        HUD funds. The project is 100% seniors and affordable for all units using
        Section 8 funds. Project affordability expires in 2012.
    •   Royal Vista Terrace - This 75 unit seniors complex, one bedroom per unit
        development at 1310 Royal Oaks Drive. It is owned and managed by Southern
Duarte General Plan 2005 - 2020                  2 - 16                   Adopted August 24, 2004
Housing Element                                                           Data Updated May, 2007

CHAPTER 6
HOUSING                                                               Housing Needs
       California Presbyterian Homes. This project was built using Section 202.
       Project affordability expires in 2007.
     •  Heritage Park Apartments – This 120 unit complex located at 915 Highland
        Ave. was built using tax credits issued in 1997. All of the units are affordable
        and seventeen units use section 8 vouchers. All units are one bedroom and
        all are senior housing. The affordability does not expire for at least another
        twenty years. In January, 2004, the Duarte Redevelopment Agency approved
        $125,000 for Heritage Park Apartment to maintain its affordability.
     •  Duarte Manor – This is a 42 unit two and three bedroom family apartment
        complex. All of the units are affordable using Section 8 vouchers. Twenty six
        of the units are two bedrooms and sixteen are three bedrooms. The
        management company has indicated the project is year to year with HUD for
        section 8 but if they were to ever loose their Section 8 status, which seems
        unlikely, it would be replaced with Section 236 vouchers and the project would
        stay affordable.
None of these projects are at risk of converting to market rate rentals before the year
2005.
       D.      REGIONAL HOUSING NEEDS
The State of California Department of Housing and Community Development (HCD) is
mandated to determine the state-wide housing need for the current planning period,
January 1998 through June 30, 2005. In cooperation with HCD, local governments
and Councils of Government (COG’s) are charged with making a determination of their
city and region’s existing and projected housing need as a share of the statewide
housing need.
Some of the information already addressed in this chapter is summarized in Table H 2-
16, “Existing Housing Needs”. Table H 2-17 provides Duarte’s share of the regional
housing need. This need will be explained in that section.
               1. Existing Housing Needs
Earlier sections of this Chapter, (Housing Needs Assessment) identified detailed
background information pertaining to the existing socioeconomic, demographic, and
housing characteristics of Duarte. Special needs groups were identified and qualified.
Housing Element law requires that housing needs not only be identified but the City
make attempts in providing adequate housing to meet these needs. Table H 2-16
summarizes four housing needs issues. They are overcrowding, housing affordability,
adequacy of existing housing, and special needs populations.                    Regarding
overcrowding, the City can and has provided programs to alleviate this situation.
Housing affordability relates to the ability of persons and families to own or rent
Duarte General Plan 2005 - 2020            2 - 17              Adopted August 24, 2004
Housing Element                                                Data Updated May, 2007

CHAPTER 6
HOUSING                                                                    Housing Needs
housing within the community. The City has provided programs to assist households
in making housing more affordable. Housing adequacy relates to the condition of
Duarte’s housing stock. Programs have and will continue to be provided to improving
the existing housing stock. As discussed before, special needs groups typically need
assistance in finding and obtaining adequate housing. Programs to accomplish this
will continue to be provided. All of these proposed programs are outlined in Chapter 6
(Housing Plan).
                                             TABLE H 2-16
                                    EXISTING HOUSING NEEDS
 Overcrowding           Number                    Housing          Number
                        Of            %         Affordability      Of Units          %
                      Units
Overcrowded                                      Overpaying
 Households           1149                      Households             2190
    Owner              780           16.6 *         Owner              1287         31.1 *
    Renter             369           19.2 **        Renter               903        47.3 **
  Housing               Number                    Special Needs    Number
  Adequacy              Of             %                           DUs/Persons       %
                      Units                     Population
Housing                                         Elderly Households    1660 dus      25
Conditions                                      Large Households      1377 dus      20.8
  Du’s built before   2785           41.0       Female                 480 dus        7.2
     1960                                       Households            7116 persons  33.1
                                                Disabled
                                                  Disabled Persons
                                                    In Poverty           5 persons     .0
                                                Farmworkers              0 persons   0
                                                Homeless Persons
      * percentage of all owner occupied units
      ** percentage of all renter occupied units
Source: 2000 Census, City of Duarte
                 2. Future Housing Needs
The Southern California Association of Governments (SCAG), is required by State law
to allocate the existing and projected housing needs for each city and county in its
region. SCAG, in cooperation with the San Gabriel Valley Council of Governments
(SGVCOG), the COG in which Duarte is located, prepared the “Regional Housing
Needs” in a process called the “Regional Housing Needs Assessment” (RHNA). The
RHNA numbers were developed in 1999 based on forecasts of population,
employment, and households from 1998 to 2005. Based on that forecast, SCAG has
determined that the construction need for Duarte is 354 units over the 1998 to 2005
Duarte General Plan 2005 - 2020                  2 - 18             Adopted August 24, 2004
Housing Element                                                      Data Updated May, 2007

CHAPTER 6
HOUSING                                                                     Housing Needs
period. The breakdown of construction need among the different income groups is
contained in Table H 2-17.
                                           TABLE H 2-17
                SHARE OF REGIONAL HOUSING NEEDS –1998 TO 2005
Income             % of         Income Threshold           Housing          % of Total
Group         County MFI              (March 2006)            Need        Housing Need
Very Low        0 to 50%           Up to $28,100                78              22%
Low            51 to 80%         $28,101 to $44,960             64              18%
Moderate 81 to 120%              $44,961 to $67,740             85              24%
Upper              >120%           Over $67,740               127               36%
Total                                                         354              100%
Source:          Southern California Association of Governments, 1999
                 HUD, March 2006 median income of $56,200
Table H 2-18 identified the housing production from 1998 to May 2004 by income
group. This table includes 80 very low income senior citizens housing units which are
currently in plan check and will have received building permits by the time the City
Council adopt this Housing Element in July of 2004. The low and moderate new
owner occupied units were based on sales prices within low and moderate income
neighborhoods
                                              TABLE H 2-18
                      HOUSING PRODUCTION FROM 1998 TO MAY 2006
Income Group              Owner Occupied             Renter Occupied              Total
Very Low                                                      78                      78
Low                                    7                        2                      9
Moderate                              10                                              10
Upper                               164                                             164
Total                               171                       78                    261
Source: City of Duarte
Duarte General Plan 2005 - 2020                2 - 19                 Adopted August 24, 2004
Housing Element                                                       Data Updated May, 2007

CHAPTER 6
HOUSING                                           Constraints to Housing Production
______________________________________________________________
3.      HOUSING CONSTRAINTS
_______________________________________________________________
State law requires all cities to review both governmental and non-governmental
constraints to the maintenance and production of housing for all income levels. Since
local governmental actions can restrict the development and increase the cost of
housing, State law requires the Housing Element to “address and, where appropriate
and legally possible, remove governmental constraints to the maintenance,
improvement, and development of housing” (Government code 65583 c (3)). The
following section analyzes the potential constraints on housing production in the City,
including physical constraints, governmental constraints, and market constraints
including land and financing cost.
        A.     PHYSICAL AND ENVIRONMENTAL CONSTRAINTS
               1. Residential Sites
The City of Duarte has been essentially built out for many years. The lack of available
undeveloped land is a major constraint to the production of housing. About the only
option available for housing production is some infill development or tear down and
rebuild. There are only a few vacant parcels remaining within the city for infill
development. The tear down and rebuild option becomes a market constraint because
land cost requires the need to build at a higher density. This will be discussed in more
detail in the next section. Another alternative to create housing is provided with the
adoption of the second unit ordinance. One last possibility is the recycling of
commercial uses to housing or mixed use residential.
               2. Circulation and Parking Constraints
Richard Garland, a traffic engineer conducted traffic counts in November 2005 on
Duarte streets. These traffic count calculations were used to determine level of
service on Duarte’s arterial and collector streets. A level of service (LOS) can best be
described as the capacity of a roadway to carry a certain amount of traffic. A LOS of A
is free flowing traffic and vehicles can travel unimpaired at the speed limit. A LOS of F
is essentially gridlock where traffic movements are very difficult and, because of the
heavy volume of traffic on the roadway, traffic moves very slowly. Table H 3-1 shows
the LOS for arterial and collector streets as designated intersections. The AM peak
hours for most of the intersections was 7:00 a.m. to 8:00 a.m. The PM peak hours for
most of the intersections was 5:00 p.m. to 6:00 p.m. As the table shows, future
development which generates much more traffic, using Huntington Drive and parts of
Mountain Avenue could further impact these already congested intersections.
However, mitigation measures could be imposed on future developments bringing the
LOS at these intersections to acceptable levels.
Duarte General Plan 2005 - 2020           3 -1                 Adopted August 24, 2004
Housing Element                                                 Data Updated May, 2007

CHAPTER 6
HOUSING                                                     Constraints to Housing Production
                                             TABLE H 3-1
                         LOS FOR INTERSECTIONS ALONG ARTERIAL
                                    AND COLLECTOR STREETS
                              Existing Traffic Conditions November 2005
                                              Daily Traffic        # of Lanes         V/C        Level of
Roadway/Location                                Volume            & Capacity         Ratio       Service
                                          ARTERIAL ROADWAYS
Huntington Drive
 Mountain Ave to Buena Vista St                  26,530            4 – 32,000         0.83         D
 Buena Vista St to Highland Ave                  23,810            4 – 32,000         0.74          C
 Highland Ave to Bradbourne Ave                  26,460            4 – 32,000         0.83         D
 Bradbourne Ave to Mt Olive Dr                   28,640            4 – 32,000         0.90          E
 Mt. Olive Dr to Las Lomas Rd                    26,750            4 – 32,000         0.84         D
 East of Las Lomas Rd                            26,170            4 – 32,000         0.82         D
Duarte Road
 Mountain Ave to Buena Vista St                  11,950            4 – 32,000         0.37         A
 Buena Vista St to Highland Ave                  12,740            4 – 32,000         0.40         A
Mountain Avenue
 Huntington Dr to I-210 Freeway                  24,500            4 – 32,000         0.77          C
 I-210 Freeway to Duarte Rd                      31,040            4 – 32,000         0.97          E
 South of Duarte Rd                               9,550            4 – 32,000         0.30         A
Buena Vista Street
 Royal Oaks Dr to Huntington Dr                  11,310            4 – 32,000         0.35         A
 Huntington Dr to I-210 Freeway                  18,860            4 – 32,000         0.59         A
 I-210 Freeway to Duarte Rd                      15,170            4 – 32,000         0.47         A
 South of Duarte Rd                               7,860            4 – 32,000         0.25         A
Highland Avenue
 Royal Oaks Dr to Huntington Dr                   3,750            4 – 32,000         0.12         A
 Huntington Dr to I-210 Freeway                  11,480            2 – 16,000         0.72          C
 I-210 Freeway to Duarte Rd                       9,650            2 – 16,000         0.60          B
Las Lomas Road
 Royal Oaks Dr to Huntington Dr                   9,440            4 – 32,000         0.30         A
Mount Olive Drive
 Royal Oaks Dr to Huntington Dr                  10,230            2 – 16,000         0.64          B
 South of Huntington Dr                          23,870            4 – 32,000         0.75          C
Royal Oaks Drive
 West of Buena Vista St                          10,650            2 – 16,000         0.67          B
 Buena Vista St to Highland Ave                   8,550            2 – 16,000         0.53         A
 Highland Ave to Bradbourne Ave                   7,610            2 – 16,000         0.48         A
 Bradbourne Ave to Mt Olive Dr                    7,870            2 – 16,000         0.49         A
 Mt. Olive Dr to Las Lomas Rd                    10,380            2 – 16,000         0.65          B
                                           COLLECTOR STREETS
Royal Oaks Drive
 East of Las Lomas Rd                             8,000            2 – 16,000         0.50         A
 West of Encanto Parkway                          1,400            2 – 16,000         0.09         A
Central Avenue
 West of Buena Vista St                           3,880            2 – 16,000         0.24         A
 East of Buena Vista St                          12,200            2 – 16,000         0.76          C
 West of Highland Ave                             3,550            2 – 16,000         0.22         A
 Highland Ave to Bradbourne Ave                   7,100            2 – 16,000         0.44         A
Bradbourne Avenue
 Royal Oaks Dr to Huntington Dr                   1,260            2 – 16,000         0.08         A
Las Lomas Road
 South of Huntington Dr                           4,080            2 – 16,000         0.26         A
Duarte General Plan 2005 - 2020                 3 -2                       Adopted August 24, 2004
Housing Element                                                            Data Updated May, 2007

CHAPTER 6
HOUSING                                             Constraints to Housing Production
The City of Duarte uses Los Angeles County Fire Department for its fire protection.
The County Fire Department requires minimum street widths and turnaround radius for
fire apparatus. Duarte has adopted these minimum standards and does not require
more than the minimum in residential areas. The minimum street width for residential
projects is 26 feet. Curb, gutter, sidewalk, water and sewer lines are also required at
minimum health and safety standards and will therefore have minimal impact on the
cost and supply of housing.
                3. Noise Constraints
Duarte is generally aligned along the San Gabriel Mountains foothills. The 210
Freeway also runs along the base of the San Gabriel Mountains and divides Duarte
into a north and south section. The 210 Freeway is a major noise source for the city
as is the MTA line, which runs parallel to the 210 Freeway. While some of the land
uses along both the 210 Freeway and the railroad line are commercial and light
manufacturing, a significant amount of the area along these sound sources is single
and multi family residential. The MTA is contemplating using the rail line as a
commuter rail line. If this happens, one freight user would not use the tracks. If MTA
uses this line, that decision will not occur until about 2008.
                4. Limited Water and Sewer Service
Existing sewers and water lines may prohibit intensification of existing land uses. The
Los Angeles County Sanitation District maintains two trunk sewer lines in Duarte. One
is a 12” line located in Highland Avenue and was noted as near capacity in 2001. The
other sewer trunk line serves the western portion of the city as well as portions of the
City of Monrovia and starts in Orange Avenue and Territo Drive, runs south into
Junipero, then south into Huntington Drive to Brycedale, then runs south across the
210 Freeway. This 10” and 12” trunk line functioned well below capacity in 1999.
Local sewer lines are maintained by Los Angeles Public Works. City staff has
indicated the Public Works Department does not track sewer capacity, however, the
sewer system can accommodate the required remaining regional housing needs
allocation of 130 units. Water is provided to the City of Duarte by California American
Water. California American Water has indicated that fire-flows are adequate to
accommodate more intense housing development.
                5. Environmental Constraints
The Angeles National Forest includes over 1,913 acres of land within the City of
Duarte jurisdiction. Residential and commercial development is prohibited within the
national forest. National forest land within the City of Duarte contains steep hillsides
where development would be severely restricted if it were permitted to occur.
The area north of the existing urban development contains rugged topography with
few areas suitable for development. Most of the slopes in this area are steeper than
Duarte General Plan 2005 - 2020           3 -3                   Adopted August 24, 2004
Housing Element                                                   Data Updated May, 2007

CHAPTER 6
HOUSING                                           Constraints to Housing Production
50 percent, which generally prohibit any kind of development. The flatter areas of the
city are almost completely urbanized with only 31.7 acres of vacant/undeveloped land
available for development.
Duarte is within Flood Zone D, which is an area of possible but undetermined flood
damage. Property owners within Duarte are not required to purchase flood insurance.
In the event of a dam failure, either from Sawpit Dam or San Gabriel Reservoir, major
portions of the city will be affected by floodwaters. Previous studies have indicated
that areas in the direct path of a flood should be restricted to land uses capable of
being inundated with floodwaters.
Duarte is within the Sierra Madre, Duarte, and Lower Duarte faults. A recent
environmental impact report mapped a fault zone within the Attalla Ranch project.
Previous studies have recommended that development should be prohibited directly
atop or outside these faults.
The northeast portion of Duarte, east of Las Lomas and north of Huntington Drive, is
within a liquefaction area. Only infill residential development would be possible within
this area.
Properties shown on Table H 4-1 (Residential Development Potential Vacant Parcels)
and Table H 4-2 (Residential Development Potential Previously Developed Parcels) do
not have environmentally constraint and are adequate in size, shape and topography.
These properties do not have known environmental contamination and can
accommodate development.
        B.     MARKET CONSTRAINTS
               1. Land Costs
The unavailability of land in the San Gabriel Valley, including Duarte, results in land
cost being very expensive. The price of raw land, environmental requirements and the
necessary public improvements are key components of the total cost of housing.
Information gathered from a local realtor for sales from March 2003 to October 2003
reveals that only two vacant properties sold during that time period. One vacant
parcel, sold for $400,000 and the other sold for $82,500. A house was subsequently
built on this parcel and the property sold for over $300,000. The fact that only two
vacant parcels sold within that six month period illustrates that not many vacant
parcels are available, and those that are available are expensive.
               2. Construction Cost
The cost of building materials and labor cost have the most impact on housing
construction cost. It has been estimated that these costs account for approximately 40
to 50 percent of the sales price of a new home. This percentage has increased in
Duarte General Plan 2005 - 2020           3 -4                 Adopted August 24, 2004
Housing Element                                                 Data Updated May, 2007
CHAPTER 6
HOUSING                                             Constraints to Housing Production
some cases, which will be discussed under Governmental Constraints. A law that was
passed by the California Legislature in 2001 which requires that prevailing wage be
paid for any project in which a governmental agency, including a city or redevelopment
agency, participates. This new State law increased construction cost by about 20% for
such projects.
One factor related to construction costs is the number of units built at one time. As
that number increases, overall costs generally decrease as builders are able to take
advantage of economies of scale. Also, a reduction in amenities and quality of
materials could result in lower sales prices. It should be noted that the uniform
building code protects the property owner and community by requiring certain baseline
standards to be met regardless of the quality of building materials. Pre-fabricated
factory built housing may provide for lower priced housing by reducing construction
and labor costs. As pre-fabricated factory built housing is becoming more aesthetically
pleasing, more communities are accepting them.
               3. Financing
One of the bright spots in making housing affordable at this time is financing for the
end user. Interest rates, which are determined by national policies and economic
conditions are at an all time low. When interest rates are high, there is little local
governments can do to affect these rates. Duarte has and will continue to participate
in “First-Time Homebuyers Programs” which provide lower interest rates to low income
first-time homebuyers. These programs include the Mortgage Credit Certificate (MCC)
and the Home Ownership Program (HOP). These programs are administered by the
Los Angeles County Community Development Commission.
The Community Reinvestment Act (CRA), enacted by Congress in 1977 is intended to
encourage depository institutions to help meet the credit needs of the communities in
which they operate including low- and moderate-income neighborhoods, consistent
with safe and sound banking operations. The CRA requires that each insured
depository institution's record in helping meet the credit needs of its entire community
be evaluated periodically. That record is taken into account in considering an
institution's application for deposit facilities, including mergers and acquisitions. CRA
examinations are conducted by the federal agencies that are responsible for
supervising depository institutions. The result of this act has been that there has been
a greater willingness on the part of lending institutions to participate with cities and
counties in housing programs which assist low and moderate income persons. These
programs include first-time homebuyers and housing rehabilitation loan programs.
Duarte General Plan 2005 - 2020            3 -5                  Adopted August 24, 2004
Housing Element                                                   Data Updated May, 2007

CHAPTER 6
HOUSING                                          Constraints to Housing Production
        C.     GOVERNMENTAL CONSTRAINTS
               1. Prevailing Wage
California Redevelopment law requires that twenty percent of the tax increment
generated by redevelopment activity be set aside for low and moderate income
housing. These redevelopment funds have been instrumental in providing seed
money to low and moderate income projects. However, in 2001 SB 975 was written
into law by the State of California. This bill has the net effect of requiring prevailing
wages for any project assisted in any way by a redevelopment agency or city.
SB 975 provides that a project paid for in whole or in part out of public funds, including
the payment of money or the equivalent of money by a public agency directly to or on
behalf of the public works contractor or developer, performance of work in execution of
the project, transfer of an asset of value for less than fair market price, or payment or
waiver of fees, costs, rents or other obligations that would normally be required in the
execution of the contract, will trigger the payment of prevailing wages.
The California Redevelopment Association, in its unsuccessful attempt to fight this
legislation stated the following “The requirement to pay prevailing wages for both the
public and private components of projects will increase from 10% to 30% the
construction costs for many affordable housing and commercial projects. The agency
typically bears this increased cost, which can make it even more difficult for the project
to succeed. Specifically, when a construction contract is paid for by a public agency,
we agree that prevailing wages should be paid. However, the sale of land to a
developer has nothing to do with the actual construction contract and should not
trigger the prevailing wage mandate, as SB 975 requires”.
As a result of passage of this legislation, numerous housing projects throughout the
state have not gone forward. The irony of this is that while the State compels local
jurisdictions to provide adequate housing for all income groups, it continues to adopt
legislation making housing production even more difficult.
               2. Land Use Controls
A city’s Comprehensive General Plan is the constitution for development within the
community. The Land Use Element, one of the seven State mandated elements of the
General Plan sets forth the city’s goals, policies and programs for guiding physical
development within the city. The Circulation, Open Space, Conservation, Noise, and
Safety Elements help determine land use areas within the community. The Housing
Element has become a significant component in shaping the land use makeup within
the community. State law also requires that the General Plan be internally consistent
and that zoning and development standards be consistent with the General Plan.
While the General Plan is general in nature, its implementation, through zoning,
subdivision, and other development codes are more specific.
Duarte General Plan 2005 - 2020            3 -6                 Adopted August 24, 2004
Housing Element                                                 Data Updated May, 2007

CHAPTER 6
HOUSING                                           Constraints to Housing Production
The City of Duarte’s 1989 Land Use Element and current Zoning Code provide for the
following range of intensities for residential development:
  •   Very Low Density Residential (R-1B and R-1D) – 0 to 4 dwelling units per acre
  •   Low Density Residential (R-1 and R-1A) – 5 to 8 dwelling units per acre
  •   Medium Density Residential (R-2, R-3 and R-MH) – 9 to 21 dwelling units per
      acre
  •   High Density Residential (R-4) – 22 to 28 dwelling units per acre
  •   Planned Unit Development (an overlay zone) – residential density is determined
      by the underlying zone
  •   Hospital (H) – any residential use requiring a license from the state of California
      or Los Angeles County; residential facilities for employees; temporary housing for
      persons on hospital-related business, caretaker or operator with a conditional use
      permit
In addition to these designations, all R-2 zoned properties are eligible        for “senior
housing” with the approval of a conditional use permit. The conditional         use permit
provides for density bonuses above those given by State Law. Also, the          conditional
use permit process can reduce parking requirements for senior housing           as well as
from other zoning regulations.
The City has revised it’s second unit ordinance to comply with AB 1866 (Chapter 1062,
Statues of 2002) signed by the governor in 2002. Second units are now allowed in all
R-1 zones by right. Second units cannot be greater than 700 square feet in size and
must be attached to the principal house. Given the fact that the majority of the city is
zoned R-1, over time this provision should generate a significant amount of new
housing. In adopting it’s second unit ordinance, the City of Duarte took a significant
step in eliminating local government constraints and providing affordable units by
including an incentive that would allow larger sized second units provided they are
deed restricted to be affordable to low income households. The incentive would allow
second units to reach up to a maximum of 1,200 sq. ft. provided the affordability
covenant is recorded with the County.
               3. Fees and Required Improvements
As in every municipality, the City of Duarte imposes development fees and
assessments to cover part of the cost incurred in processing plans and providing
infrastructure and services to the respective development. Fees for residential
development are particularly important given that such development almost always
cost a city more to provide services than it can generate from the development and
ongoing habitation of the residential units.
Duarte General Plan 2005 - 2020           3 -7                 Adopted August 24, 2004
Housing Element                                                 Data Updated May, 2007

CHAPTER 6
HOUSING                                                  Constraints to Housing Production
Table H 3-2 provides a list of fees charged by the City of Duarte and non-city public
entities. While the City of Duarte has some control over fees and assessments it
imposes on residential development, it has no control over non-city fees such as the
School Impact Fees imposed by the Duarte Unified School District (DUSD). The
School Impact Fee provision was signed into State law based on the concept that new
development generates school-aged children. The DUSD did reduce the School
Impact fee a Southern California Presbyterian Homes senior project. The Water and
sewer hook-up fees tend to be expensive partially because environmental regulations
continue to be more stringent.
                                            TABLE H 3-2
                  FEES CHARGED FOR RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT
             City of Duarte                                                   Fee
General Plan Amendment                                                     $1,500
Zone Change                                                                $1,000
Conditional Use Permit                                                       $700
Unclassified Use                                                             $700
Variance                                                                     $700
Tentative Tract Map                                                     $500 + $10 per lot
Parcel Map                                                                   $200
Administrative Variance                                                      $100
Parking Investigation Permit (overnight parking)                             $6.00*
Permanent Parking Permit                                                  $40 per year*
Temporary Parking Permit                                                 $5 for 10 days*
Building Permit Fees (typical 2000 sq. ft. house)                           $5,700
             Non City Public Entities                                          Fee
School Impact Fee                                                 Residential $2.14 sq. ft.
                                                                  Commercial $0.34 sq. ft.
Water Connection Fee                                              Zone 15 $1,250 per unit
                                                                  Zone 22 $1,350 per unit
Sewer Connection Fee                                              SFR         $1,350
                                                                  Duplex      $1,620
                                                                  Triplex      $2,430
                                                                  Fourplex $3,240
                                                                  Condo       $1,013 per unit
                                                                  Apartment $ 810 per unit
Source: City of Duarte Community Development Department, Duarte Unified School District, Cal
American Water, Los Angeles County Sanitation District, California American Water, Sept. 2006
* these parking fees are imposed by the City as a safety enforcement measure.
Duarte General Plan 2005 - 2020                3 -8                    Adopted August 24, 2004
Housing Element                                                         Data Updated May, 2007
CHAPTER 6
HOUSING                                            Constraints to Housing Production
                4. Processing Time
Holding cost for developers tend to be expensive. Therefore, processing time to
obtain entitlements is often cited as a prime cause of high development cost. As a
result, the “Permit Streamlining Act” became law in California in 1978. Because the
environmental process in California is also time consuming, it also has time limits for
processing environmental clearance.
The City requires design review for all projects. Design review is conducted by City
Staff which meets weekly so as not to delay projects. The purpose of the design
review process is to make sure projects comply with the City’s building and other
codes. The City uses the Los Angeles County Building and Fire Departments for plan
check. Typical processing time for single family housing projects which are allowed by
right is four to six weeks from the time plans are submitted. Multiple family
developments, which meet zoning standards are allowed by right and typically take
two to three months to obtain building permits.
                5. Building Codes and Enforcement
The City of Duarte, like most cities in California has adopted the Uniform Building
Code (UBC). This code includes minimum standards for building materials, plumbing,
electrical, fire, energy and other minimum standards. It is also intended to protect the
public and provide a healthy and safe dwelling unit. These minimum standards cannot
be revised to be less stringent without sacrificing basic safety considerations. Building
plan check and inspection are outsourced to Los Angeles County Building and Safety.
The City maintains an active code enforcement program. The City is divided into 3
geographic areas with one code enforcement officer responsible for each area. Each
code enforcement officer drives his or her entire area at least once per week. While
the program is reactive to complaints by citizens within the community, if a code
enforcement officer sees a structure that is dilapidated, they will approach the owner
and direct them to the City’s various rehabilitation programs. Residents of these units
tend to be low and moderate income households and will therefore qualify for rehab
assistance. This approach of code enforcement has resulted in the rehabilitation and
preservation of many housing units in Duarte over the years.
The City of Duarte complies with all ADA requirements. It has also paid for ramps and
railing in housing units of persons with disabilities using some of its CDBG funds.
                6. Service and Facility Infrastructure
Before permits requiring discretionary action are granted, it must first be determined
that public facilities are adequate to accommodate any increased demand created by
the proposed project. As a matter of interest the State Legislature in 2001 passed two
laws requiring more of a connection between water agencies and cities and counties
Duarte General Plan 2005 - 2020          3 -9                   Adopted August 24, 2004
Housing Element                                                  Data Updated May, 2007

CHAPTER 6
HOUSING                                           Constraints to Housing Production
that plan land use. These laws required that it be shown that sufficient water will be
available before development can occur. Because Duarte has been essentially built
out for many years, there are relatively few such constraints. Constraints that do exist
tend to be older water and sewer systems, which have neared their carrying capacity.
Notwithstanding these minor constraints, infrastructure within the City of Duarte is
capable of accommodating the remaining 125 remaining units required under the
RHNA.
Duarte is an urbanized community. All vacant and previously developed land shown
on Diagram H 1-2 “Housing Opportunities Areas”, including the 141 acres of vacant
parcels in the hillsides has adequate infrastructure. While the hillside vacant parcels
will no doubt be developed with market rate housing, the multiple family vacant parcels
and second units could be developed with low and moderate income units. Properties
shown on Table H 4-1 and Table H 4-2 do not have environmentally constraint and are
adequate in size, shape and topography. These properties do not have environmental
contamination and can accommodate development.
                 7. Analysis of Possible Constraints for Persons with Disabilities
SB 520, signed into law in 2001 requires that Housing Elements analyze the potential
and actual governmental constraints on the development of housing for persons with
disabilities and demonstrate the City’s efforts to remove such constraints such as
accommodating procedure for the approval of group homes, ADA retrofit efforts, and
evaluation of the zoning code of ADA compliance or other measures that provide
flexibility in the development of housing for persons with disabilities. The following
questions provide a guide to an analysis of constraints:
      •   Does the locality have any processes for individuals with disabilities to make
          request for reasonable accommodation with respect to zoning, permit
          processing, or building laws?    No, however the City will add a program in
          this chapter to adopt a Reasonable Accommodations Ordinance.
      •   Describe the process for requesting a reasonable accommodation. None at
          this time, see first bullet.
      •   Has the locality made any efforts to remove constraints on housing for persons
          with disabilities, such as accommodating procedures for the approval of group
          homes, ADA retrofit efforts, an evaluation of the zoning code for ADA
          compliance or other measures that provide flexibility? No, however the City
          will add a program in this chapter to adopt a Reasonable Accommodations
          Ordinance.
      •   Does the locality make information available about requesting a reasonable
          accommodation with respect to zoning, permit processing, or building laws?
          No, however the City will add a program in this chapter to adopt a Reasonable
          Accommodations Ordinance and make this ordinance available to special
          needs groups.
Duarte General Plan 2005 - 2020           3 - 10               Adopted August 24, 2004
Housing Element                                                 Data Updated May, 2007

CHAPTER 6
HOUSING                                             Constraints to Housing Production
     •  Has the locality reviewed all of its zoning laws, policies and practices for
        compliance with fair housing laws?          No, however the City will add a
        program in this chapter to adopt a Reasonable Accommodations Ordinance.
     •  Are residential parking standards for persons with disabilities different from
        other parking standards? No, however the City will add a program in this
        chapter to adopt a Reasonable Accommodations Ordinance.
     •  Does the locality have a policy or program for the reduction of parking
        requirements for special needs housing if a project proponent can demonstrate
        a reduced need for parking?          Yes, through a variance or Specific Plan
        process and the adoption of a Reasonable Accommodations Ordinance will
        provide for this.
     •  Does the locality restrict the sitting of group homes? Group homes of six or
        less are allowed in all residential zones by right. Residential group homes of
        seven or more are not addressed in the City’s zoning code. The City will add a
        program to address this through a code amendment.
     •  Does the locality have occupancy standards in the zoning code that apply
        specifically to unrelated adults and not to families? No
     •  Does the land-use element regulate the sitting of special needs housing in
        relationship to one another?         No. Specifically, is there a minimum distance
        required between two (or more) special needs housing?            No.
     •  How does the locality process a request to retrofit homes for accessibility (i.e.
        ramp request)?        These are allowed by right.
     •  Does the locality allow group homes with fewer than six persons by right in
        single family zones?         Yes.
     •  Does the locality have a set of particular conditions or use restrictions for
        group homes with greater than 6 persons? What are they? How do they effect
        the development of housing for persons with disabilities? No, The City will add
        a program to address this through a code amendment.
     •  What kind of community input does the locality allow for the approval of group
        homes?         None.
     •  Does the locality have particular conditions for group homes that will be
        providing services on-site?          No. How may of these conditions affect the
        development or conversion of residences to meet the needs of persons with
        disabilities?
     •  Has the locality adopted the Uniform Building Code? Yes.           What year2003.
        Has the locality made amendments that might diminish the ability to
        accommodate persons with disabilities?            No.
     •  Has the locality adopted any universal design elements in the building code?
        No.
     •  Does the locality provide reasonable accommodation for persons with
        disability in the enforcement of building codes and the issuance of building
        permits?       No, however the City will add a program in this chapter to adopt a
        Reasonable Accommodations Ordinance.
Duarte General Plan 2005 - 2020            3 - 11                Adopted August 24, 2004
Housing Element                                                   Data Updated May, 2007

CHAPTER 6
HOUSING                                       Housing Opportunities and Resources
_______________________________________________________________
4.     HOUSING OPPORTUNITIES AND RESOURCES
_______________________________________________________________
Housing resources include vacant and possible recycled sites for the production of
new housing, financing for the creation or rehabilitation of existing housing, and
preservation of existing housing within the community. This section includes an
analysis of the availability of land, financial resources available, the City’s ability to
satisfy its share of the regional housing need, and the administrative resources,
including energy conservation available to assist in implementing the housing
programs.
       A.      AVAILABILITY OF SITES FOR HOUSING
As mentioned previously in this document, the City of Duarte is essentially built-out.
Available vacant housing sites tend to be individual parcels, located in established
neighborhoods or in the commercially zoned, high traffic corridors along Huntington
Drive. Many of the vacant parcels have been previously developed making them more
expensive to purchase because demolition cost is usually factored into the cost. Other
opportunities could be in already developed, underutilized parcels within the
community. If these developed properties are to be redeveloped, they must be
developed with higher density or high intensity because of the economics of tear down
and rebuild. Table H 4-1 identifies vacant parcels which may be available for
development as of September 2006. The 1.7 acres of vacant R-3 zoned parcels is
made up of one 1.7 acres parcel. The 5.47 acres of R-4 zoned property is made up of
a 1.77 parcel, and a 3.7 acre parcel. The 2.15 acres of C-2 property is made up of a
1.45 acre parcel and a .7 acre parcel.
Table H 4-2 identifies possible parcels available for already developed sites. The 5
acres of R-2 & RMH property is made up of a 5 acre properties improved with older
single family homes. This property will probably be developed by the City of Hope as
dormitories for families of patents but not during the life of this housing element. The
.5 acre parcel is improved with older single family homes. The 5 acres of C-1 zoned
property is one parcel improved with an old retail center. The 8.25 acres of C-2 zoned
property is comprised of a 5.75 acre parcel improved with an old retail center
developed in the 1950’s, and a 2.5 acre parcel which is improved with an old motel
and other obsolete commercial uses. This project will become a 29 unit market rate
housing Planned Unit Development and will pay an in-lieu low and moderate income
housing fee.
Duarte’s development standards provide for adequate structural placement while
maintaining the single family character found throughout the community.               As an
example, height limits in the R-1 zone are thirty five feet or two and one half stories.
Lot coverage is up to thirty-five percent of the total parcel. Front yard setbacks are the
Duarte General Plan 2005 - 2020          4 -1                   Adopted August 24, 2004
Housing Element                                                 Data Updated May, 2007

CHAPTER 6
HOUSING                                            Housing Opportunities and Resources
typical twenty feet, side yard setbacks are five feet, and rear yard setbacks are five
feet, less than in many cities. Lot coverage in single family zones is 35% and there are
no lot coverage requirements in multiple family zones. There are no open space
requirements in either single or multiple family zones. These minimal requirements
demonstrate these issues are clearly not constraints. The zoning code requires all
single family units to provide two garage spaces per unit. Multiple family units require
two garage spaces per unit and one uncovered guest parking space for every three
dwelling units. Senior citizens housing parking requirements can be granted a
reduction from the one parking space per unit with Planning Commission approval.
Other discretionary actions can also provide deviations from these standards. All
properties in the multiple family zones allow a height limit of up to thirty five feet,
except that height can be increased with a conditional use permit or a specific plan, as
was the case with the 80 unit, four story, very low income senior citizens project
referenced in this report. Front yards are limited to twenty feet setbacks and side and
rear yards are limited to five feet, except that the approval of a conditional use permit
or specific plan can deviate from these requirements. The City is willing to consider
providing similar deviations for other affordable housing projects through the Specific
Plan process.
                                             TABLE H 4-1
                           RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT POTENTIAL
                                         VACANT PARCELS
              Land Use District                      Maximum Vacant                 Unit
                                                     (DUs/ac) Acreage               Potential
Very Low Density Hillside (R-1B & D)                 4 DU/ac           141               70
Very Low Density Non-Hillside(R-1B & D)              4 DU/ac              0               0
Low Density Residential (R-1 & R-1A)                 8 DU/ac              0               0
Medium Density Res. (R-2& RMH)                       14.5                 0               0
                                                     DU/ac
 Medium Density Res. (R-3)                            21 DU/ac            1.7            20
High Density Res. (R-3 & R-4)                        28 DU/ac             5.47         120
Commercial Professional (CP)                                                .33           0*
General Commercial (C-2)                             Specific             2.15           30**
                                                     Plan
Total                                                                  150.65           240
Source: City of Duarte, 2004
*This property will probably be developed by the City of Hope as dormitories for families of patents but
not during the life of this housing element.
** This property is within the Duarte downtown area and could be developed with mixed use multi-family
residential and commercial development under a Specific Plan.
Duarte General Plan 2005 - 2020                4 -2                    Adopted August 24, 2004
Housing Element                                                        Data Updated May, 2007
CHAPTER 6
HOUSING                                            Housing Opportunities and Resources
                                            TABLE H 4-2
                          RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT POTENTIAL
                              PREVIOUSLY DEVELOPED PARCELS
             Land Use District                     Maximum         Acreage          Unit
      (Requires Land Use Change)                   (Dus/ac)                         Potential
Very Low Density Hillside (R-1B & D)               4 DU/ac                0              0
Very Low Density Non-hillside (R-B & D)            4 DU/ac                0              0
Low Density Residential (R-1 & R-1A)               8 DU/ac                0              0
Medium Density Res. (R-2 & RMH)                    14.5 DU/ac             5              0*
Medium Density Res. (R-3)                          21.DU/ac                 .5          10
High Density Res. (R-3 & R-4)                      28 DU/ac               0              0
Neighborhood Commercial (C-1)                      Specific               5             40**
                                                   Plan
General Commercial (C-2)                           Specific               8.25          60***
                                                   Plan
Total                                                                   18.75         110
Source: City of Duarte, 2006
*This property will most likely be developed by City of Hope as hospital related uses with part of the
property becoming temporary housing for hospital staff and/or patent families, but not within the life of
this housing element.
** This property is within the Duarte Downtown area in which mixed multi-family use could be developed
along with commercial uses using a specific plan.
*** This property is within the Duarte Downtown area in which mixed multi-family use could be
developed along with commercial uses using a specific plan.
         B.      FINANCIAL RESOURCES
Duarte has access to a variety of existing funding sources available for affordable
housing production and retention. These funding sources include Federal, State, local
and private sources. The most significant funding sources used by the City are
described below.
                 1. Community Development Block Grant (CBDG) Funds
Duarte participates in the Los Angeles County Community Development Block Grant
(CBDG) program. Eligible activities include, but are not limited to: acquisition and /or
disposition of real property, public facilities and improvements, relocation, rehabilitation
and construction (under certain limitations) of housing, homeowner assistance, and
clearance activities. The City was allocated $256,542 in CDBG funds for the
2003/2004 fiscal year. About $160,000 will be used to rehab 30 housing units. About
$55,000 will be used to conduct code enforcement inspections to attempt to find code
deficiencies and violations, which should lead towards alleviating housing
Duarte General Plan 2005 - 2020                4 -3                    Adopted August 24, 2004
Housing Element                                                        Data Updated May, 2007
CHAPTER 6
HOUSING                                      Housing Opportunities and Resources
deterioration. The remainder of the funds will be used to help fund park facilities within
a low and moderate income area, identification and abatement of lead based paint and
asbestos, youth sports activities, and general program administration.
               2. Redevelopment Housing Set-Aside Funds
Redevelopment Law requires Redevelopment Agencies to set-aside 20 percent of all
tax increment revenue, which is generated within a redevelopment area, for affordable
housing. This money must be used to increase, preserve, or improve the supply of
affordable housing within the community. As of June 2003, the City of Duarte had
$240,000 in 20% set-aside money, and had acquired about $4million in property.
Over the years, the Agency has used its set-aside money to purchase property for low
and moderate housing production. The Agency expects to receive about $1.2 million
in set-aside funds during fiscal year 2003-2004. This money can be used for the
acquisition of dilapidated apartment houses which can be rehabilitated and used for
low and moderate income households.
               3. California Housing Funds
State housing funds change over time. Following are some of the programs which are
offered at this time. The CalHome Program has $25 million to allocate statewide. The
purpose of this program is to enable low and very-low income households to become
or remain homeowners. The Code Enforcement Grant Program (CEGP) fund capital
expenditure and costs of existing or proposed local building code enforcement
programs. Maximum grant amount to a single recipient was $300,000. Minimum
grant was $30,000. The Emergency Housing and Assistance Program Operations
Grant (EHAP) has allocated $5.3 million statewide. The purpose of this program is to
provide facility operating grants for emergency shelters, transitional housing projects,
and supportive services for homeless individuals and families. Up to $4.75 million is
available statewide for Exterior Accessibility Grants for Renters. The Multiple Housing
Program (MHP) has been allocated $70 million statewide. The purpose of this
program is to assist the new construction, rehabilitation and preservation of permanent
and transitional rental housing for lower income households. The City of Duarte will
attempt to take advantage of some of these programs in partnership with the San
Gabriel Valley Council of Governments or with non-profit home production
organizations.
               4. City of Industry Funds
City of Industry Funds can only be used by local governments within a 15-mile radius
of the City of Industry. Industry funds consist of 20 percent set-aside funds collected
by the City of Industry and transferred to the Los Angeles County Housing Authority.
The purpose of this money is to develop low-and moderate-income housing for
families, seniors and persons with special needs, including domestic violence victims,
emancipated foster children, and persons afflicted with AIDS/HIV. To be eligible for
Duarte General Plan 2005 - 2020         4 -4                  Adopted August 24, 2004
Housing Element                                               Data Updated May, 2007
CHAPTER 6
HOUSING                                      Housing Opportunities and Resources
City of Industry funds, a proposed affordable rental housing development is required to
set aside a minimum of 20 percent of the units for very low households. A proposed
for-sale development must set aside a minimum of 20 percent of the units for very low-
and/or low-income households. Funds are awarded annually on a competitive basis.
        C.     LOCAL NON-PROFIT RESOURCES
Following are a list of local non-profit organization active in the San Gabriel Valley in
assisting cities in housing production, conservation, and rehabilitation. These
organizations play important roles in helping local governments meet housing needs.
               1. Southern California Presbyterian Homes (SCPH)
The City of Duarte currently has an 80 unit project in process in coordination with
SCPH called the Andres Duarte Terrace project. This project will have 79 one
bedroom, very low income senior households and one managers unit. SCPH is an
experienced non-profit housing developer that has developed many affordable housing
projects throughout Southern California including 3 in Duarte. SCPH manages Royal
Vista Terrace in Duarte. This project is a 75 unit seniors complex, one bedroom per
unit development at 1310 Royal Oaks Drive. This project was built using Section 202.
The housing activities of SCPH are funded through CDBG, HUD Sections 202 and
221, and local redevelopment housing set-aside funds.
               2. Habitat for Humanity – San Gabriel Valley
Habitat for Humanity is a Christian non-profit organization which builds affordable
housing in all 50 states and in many countries throughout the world. Habitat for
Humanity primarily builds single family homes for low income families. Recipient
families are asked to provide sweat equity while volunteers consisting of church
members, business persons and local organizations provide labor and materials. The
homes are sold with no interest loans with no profit to Habitat for Humanity.
               3. SoCal Housing
SoCal Housing is a regional non-profit corporation which provides affordable housing
in Southern California. It develops, finances and manages affordable housing
projects.
               4. The East Los Angeles Community Union (TELACU)
TELACU, a long time community development corporation provides affordable home-
ownership housing for families. It also provides apartment rentals for low-income
seniors and disabled individuals.
Duarte General Plan 2005 - 2020          4 -5                  Adopted August 24, 2004
Housing Element                                                Data Updated May, 2007

CHAPTER 6
HOUSING                                      Housing Opportunities and Resources
                5. Rebuilding Together
Rebuilding Together is a national organization which helps preserve owner occupied
houses and neighborhoods and assure a warm, safe and dry home for people in need.
Rebuilding Together works with the low income persons and concentrates on the
elderly, the disabled and families with children. A new affiliate, based in the City of
Duarte is awaiting an official designation from the national organization for “affiliate”
status. The organization will be called Rebuilding Together Duarte/Monrovia and
already has a 501 c. 3 status. The goal of the new organization will be to repair and
rehabilitate at least two owner occupied low-income homes per year until a sponsor
and volunteer based organization is developed, at which time more home will be
rehabilitated. The ultimate goal will be rehabilitate ten to twelve homes per year.
                6. Pasadena Neighborhood Housing Services (PNHS)
PNHS provides affordable rental and homeownership housing to low and moderate-
income families. PNHS leverages CDBG funds through the sale of CDBG-funded
rehabilitation loans on the secondary market through Neighborhood Housing Services
of America. PNHS also receives funds under the California Housing Rehabilitation
Program.
        D.      ENERGY CONSERVATION OPPORTUNITIES
The recent energy crisis in California has resulted in most Californians paying more in
electric bills. Impending water shortages in California will also increase utility cost for
homeowners. Increasing utility cost add to reducing affordability of housing. Title 24
of the California Administrative Code, adopted by most cities in California as part of
their Building Codes, includes the City of Duarte, sets forth mandatory energy
requirements. The following are among the alternative ways to meet the energy
standards:
 Alternative 1 is a passive solar approach, which requires proper solar orientation,
 appropriate levels of thermal mass, south facing windows, and moderate insulation
 levels. A second alternative generally requires higher levels of insulation than
 Alternative 1, but has no thermal mass or window orientation requirements.
 Alternative 3 is also without passive solar design but requires active solar water
 heating in exchange for less stringent insulation and/or glazing requirements.
 In turn, the home building industry must comply with these standards while localities
 are responsible for enforcing the energy conservation regulations. Some additional
 opportunities for energy conservation include various passive design techniques.
 Among the range of techniques that could be used for purposes of reducing energy
 consumption are the following:
 •   Locating the structure at the northern portion of the sunniest portion of the site;
Duarte General Plan 2005 - 2020          4 -6                   Adopted August 24, 2004
Housing Element                                                 Data Updated May, 2007

CHAPTER 6
HOUSING                                      Housing Opportunities and Resources
 •   Designing the structure to admit the maximum amount of sunlight into the building
     and to reduce exposure to extreme weather conditions;
 •   Locating indoor areas of maximum usage along the south face of the building and
     placing corridors, closets, laundry rooms, power core, and garages along the
     north face;
 •   Making the main entrance a small enclosed space that creates an air lock
     between the building and its exterior; orienting the entrance away from prevailing
     winds, or using a windbreak to reduce the wind velocity against the entrance.
 Utility companies serving Duarte offer various programs to promote the efficient use
 of energy and assist lower income customers. The programs are discussed below.
 Southern California Edison (SCE). SCE offers its Low Income Energy Efficiency
 programs (LIEE), which help qualified homeowners and renters conserve energy and
 control electricity costs. Eligible customers receive services from local community
 agencies and licensed contractors working with SCE. Services include
 weatherization, efficient lighting and cooling, refrigerator replacement, and energy
 education. SCE also participates in the California Alternate Rates for Energy (CARE)
 program which provides a 20 percent discount on electric bills for low-income
 customers.
 Southern California Gas Programs. The Gas Company offers two direct assistance
 programs to limited income customers: 1) a no cost weatherization (such as attic
 insulation and water heater blankets), and 2) a no cost furnace repair and
 replacement service. The Gas Company also participates in the State CARE
 program, providing low-income customers with a discount on their gas bills.
 The Duarte Architectural Review Board understands the benefits of solar panels and
is therefore less stringent in restricting their use. The Las Brisas project won a
Building Industry Association award for energy conservation and for one of the best
design for small homes for moderate income.
Duarte General Plan 2005 - 2020           4 -7                Adopted August 24, 2004
Housing Element                                                Data Updated May, 2007

CHAPTER 6
HOUSING                                                  Previous Housing Element
______________________________________________________________
5.     EVALUATION OF PREVIOUS HOUSING ELEMENT
_______________________________________________________________
State Housing Element law requires local governments to assess the achievements
under the existing Housing Element Programs as part of the five year update. These
results should be quantified if possible (e.g. the number of housing units that were built
or rehabilitated. The accomplishments may be qualitative where necessary (e.g.
removal of lead based paint). The exact goals and policies from the prior Housing
Element are itemized in this section as they appeared in that prior Housing Element.
Where significant shortfalls exist between what was planned and what was
accomplished, the reasons for those shortfalls are given.
       A.      PROGRESS IN IMPLEMENTING PROGRAMS
The following section reviews the progress in implementing programs from the prior
Housing Element programs. Where these programs were effective in achieving the
goals as stated in the prior element, they may be recommended for inclusion this the
Housing Element.
Goal 1:        Provide housing opportunities for all economic segments of the
community while protecting the existing housing stock.
Policies:
1.1    The City will revise the General Plan Land Use Policy Diagram as
       necessary to provide for a wide range of housing types and densities.
Program 1: The City will conduct an annual review of the City’s land use makeup to
               ensure a proper mix of housing is available. The review will identify
               residential and non-residential sites and make appropriate changes as
               necessary to meet the housing needs of all household income groups.
Objectives:    To accommodate existing and projected housing needs including the
               City’s regional housing needs allocation.
Responsible
Agency:        Planning Commission/City Council
Funding
Source:        General Fund
Duarte General Plan 2005 - 2020           5 -1                Adopted August 24, 2004
Housing Element                                               Data Updated May, 2007

CHAPTER 6
HOUSING                                                    Previous Housing Element
Schedule:      1.      Prepare ordinance, 1991
               2.       Adopt ordinance, 1992
Program Status: A comprehensive ordinance was never adopted. However, individual
                    rezoning to balance the mix of residential and other uses was
                    performed over the years. Staff time was devoted to redevelopment
                    projects within the city, which included the production and
                    rehabilitation of housing units.
1.1    High quality design shall be adhered to in the construction of multiple-
       family housing to ensure compatibility with existing development.
Program 2: The City will prepare and adopt new residential development standards
               for multiple family residential zones. In doing this, the City will allow the
               development of specific plans on specific parcels, should it be
               determined that application of the new development standards
               constrains the development of affordable housing.
Objectives:    Allow multiple-family development to occur without impacting adjoining
               land uses. The Specific Plan process will allow the removal of land use
               constraints in case the new standards impact affordable housing.
Responsible
Agency:        Planning Commission/City Council
Funding
Source:        General Fund
Schedule:      1.      Prepare ordinance, 1991
               2.      Adopt ordinance, 1992
Program Status:        Completed; The City has adopted several specific plans which
                       provided for multiple family units.
1.3    High quality design shall be adhered to in the construction of multiple-
       family housing to ensure compatibility with existing development.
Program 3: Prepare and adopt urban design guidelines that will guide architects and
               developers in the design of multiple-family projects. The guidelines will
               be designed to provide guidance and flexibility in choosing materials and
               design themes so that affordable housing projects are attractive, while
               still meeting established density levels.
Duarte General Plan 2005 - 2020             5 -2                Adopted August 24, 2004
Housing Element                                                 Data Updated May, 2007
CHAPTER 6
HOUSING                                                   Previous Housing Element
Objectives:    Encourage the development of attractive multiple-family developments.
Responsible
Agency:        Planning Commission/City Council
Funding
Source:        General Fund
Schedule:      1.      Prepare guidelines, 1991
               2.      Adopt guidelines, 1992
Program Status:        Both items 1 and 2 in the schedule were completed in 1992
Goal 2:        To upgrade deteriorating and substandard housing units in the City.
Policies:
2.1    Expand the current home rebate program to provide increased levels of
financial assistance throughout areas targeted for assistance.
Program 4: The Home Improvement Grant program will be expanded from $35,000 a
               year to $46,000 per year.
Objectives:    To fund an additional ten household rehabilitation projects per calendar
               year.
Responsible
Agency:        Community Development Department
Funding
Source:        Community Development Block Grant Funds
Schedule:      Annually
Program Status:        The Home Improvement Grant program and Home Improvement
                       Rebate program were combined and approximately $140,000 is
                       spent annually to assist 40 units per year.
Program 5: The Home Improvement Rebate Program is a new program that will
               provide $56,000 for housing rehabilitation projects
Objectives:    To fund 28 household rehabilitation projects per calendar year.
Responsible
Duarte General Plan 2005 - 2020           5 -3                  Adopted August 24, 2004
Housing Element                                                 Data Updated May, 2007
CHAPTER 6
HOUSING                                                   Previous Housing Element
Agency:        Community Development Department
Funding
Source:        Community Development Block Grant Funds
Schedule:      Annually
Program Status:        The Home Improvement Grant program and Home Improvement
                       Rebate program were combined and approximately $140,000 is
                       spent annually to assist 40 units per year.
Program 6: The Home Improvement Loans is a new program that will provide
               $60,000 for housing rehabilitation projects.
Objectives:    To fund 12 household rehabilitation projects per calendar year.
Responsible
Agency:        Community Development Department
Funding
Source:        Community Development Block Grant Funds
Schedule:      Annually
Program Status:        This program was started and operated in 1992 and 1993 but was
                       not continued because programs 4 and 5 above were more
                       effective. Monies from this program were incorporated with
                       programs 4 and 5.
2.2 Encourage homeowners associations to take an active role in enforcing
               property development and maintenance standards.
Program 7: Cooperate with existing Homeowners Associations by requiring
               Homeowner Association approval of building projects prior to obtaining
               City approval.
Objectives:    Ensure that existing households are maintained to their current levels.
Responsible
Agency:        Community Development Department
Funding
Source:        General Fund.
Duarte General Plan 2005 - 2020           5 -4                  Adopted August 24, 2004
Housing Element                                                 Data Updated May, 2007
CHAPTER 6
HOUSING                                                   Previous Housing Element
Schedule:      Annually.
Program Status:        This is an ongoing program. Most of these developments include
                       a landscaping districts. The City contracts for the maintaining of
                       these areas. This allows the City to monitor the overall
                       maintenance of the project. Also, many of the homeowners
                       groups have architectural review authority.
2.3    Encourage the maintenance of safe, sound, and decent housing through
       the strict enforcement of zoning and building codes.
Program 8: Concentrate code enforcement activities in target areas where housing
has deteriorated.
Objectives:    Abatement of building and zoning code violations. (200 cases).
Responsible
Agency:        Public Safety Department.
Funding
Source:        General Fund/CDBG Funds
Schedule:      Annually
Program Status:        This is an ongoing program which has been very effective in
                       identifying substandard properties which can take advantage of
                       City sponsored home rehabilitation programs. The City had 1,822
                       code enforcement activities during Fiscal year 2002-2003.
Goal 3:        To promote the development of housing for senior citizens in the
City, and to determine if existing support services should be expanded.
Policies:
3.1    Identify existing developments, which provide affordable housing for
       senior citizens. Develop a program that will allow these units to remain
       affordable.
Program 9: This program will identify all senior citizen development projects in the
City. The identification process will also identify those units that are at risk of losing
any rent restrictions. The City will prepare a resources list and make it available to
property owners and tenants. The resource list will provide potential assistance
programs (i.e. Section 8, etc.).
Duarte General Plan 2005 - 2020           5 -5                 Adopted August 24, 2004
Housing Element                                                Data Updated May, 2007
CHAPTER 6
HOUSING                                                     Previous Housing Element
Objectives:    Preservation of existing senior citizen housing units.
Responsible
Agency:        Community Development Department.
Funding
Source:        General Fund.
Schedule:      1.      Identify senior citizen units, 1993.
               2.      Prepare resource list, 1993.
               3.      Disseminate information, 1993.
Program Status:        Item1, 2, and 3 of the schedule have been completed.
                       Handouts are provided to seniors when loans or senior
                       programs are available. Notification is given through public
                       notices and community news letters.
3.2    Promote the City’s density bonuses for senior housing and the
development of second units on single-family lots in order to provide necessary
housing for senior citizens.
Program 10: The City provides information to developers, residents and non-profit
agencies informing them of the City’s senior citizen density bonus and second unit
ordinances. This information is distributed at the public counter and periodically in the
community newsletter.
Objectives: Increase the supply of senior citizen housing by spreading information
about density bonuses and permitted second units in single-family zones.
Responsible
Agency:        Community Development Department.
Funding
Source:        General Fund.
Schedule:      On-going.
Program Status:        The City continues to provide information to the community
                       regarding preservation and production of senior housing.
                       The City is working with Southern California Presbyterian
                       Homes to develop an 80 unit senior project east of City Hall.
                       This will be a Section 202 Grant. The City has adopted a
                       second unit ordinance to comply with AB 1866 (Chapter
                       1062, Statues of 2002).
Duarte General Plan 2005 - 2020             5 -6                 Adopted August 24, 2004
Housing Element                                                  Data Updated May, 2007

CHAPTER 6
HOUSING                                                   Previous Housing Element
3.3     Promote a well-balanced senior housing market within the City of Duarte
(i.e., owner/occupied, rental, congregate care, etc).
Program 11: Require market studies that will address the housing balance prior to
               approving a senior citizen housing project.
Objectives:    Ensure there is an even balance of rental, owner, and congregate care
               units throughout the City.
Responsible
Agency:        Architectural Review Board
Funding
Source:        General Fund
Schedule:      Ongoing
Program Status:        The Architectural Review Board practice is to require a
                       market analysis prior to approving a senior project.
Goal 4:        To support Federal and State laws which prohibit discrimination in
housing on the basis of age, sex, race, and disabilities.
Policies:
4.1     Cooperate with the Los Angeles County Fair Housing Council about any
        known violations of applicable Federal and State laws.
Program 12: The City participates in a joint powers authority which contracts with the
               San Gabriel Valley Fair Housing Council to ensure housing
               discrimination does not take place in Duarte. The City distributes
               housing information from the public counter and the community
               newsletter. In addition, the City refers all housing discrimination
               complaints to the Council. If the Housing Council receives a complaint
               they will investigate the incident and the property owner will be
               contacted.
Objectives:    Ensure the enforcement of equitable housing laws.
Responsible
Agency:        Community Development Department/San Gabriel Valley Fair Housing
               Council.
Funding
Source:        General Fund/San Gabriel Valley Fair Housing Council.
Duarte General Plan 2005 - 2020           5 -7                 Adopted August 24, 2004
Housing Element                                                Data Updated May, 2007
CHAPTER 6
HOUSING                                                    Previous Housing Element
Schedule:      Ongoing
Program Status:        The City continues to be a member of the San Gabriel Valley
                       Fair Housing Council and continues to participate in
                       enforcement of equitable housing laws by reporting all
                       housing discrimination complaints to the Council.
4.2    Provide housing opportunities for the elderly, disabled, homeless, large
families, single heads of household, and other special needs groups.
Program 13: The City will establish a first-time homebuyers program to help make
               homeownership a possibility for current households who are renting.
               Mortgage Credit Certificates will be issued that will increase ownership
               opportunities.
Objectives:    Provide homeownership opportunities to low and moderate income
               renters (10 units).
Responsible
Agency:        Community Development Department.
Funding
Source:        Mortgage and real estate funding sources/Affordable Housing
               Fund.
Schedule:      1.      Initiate Contract with Community Development Commission
                       to secure program, 1992.
               2.      Start program, 1992.
Program Status:        Duarte was one of the five original cities to become a
                       member of the Mortgage Credit Certificate (MCC) program in Los
                       Angeles County. The MCC program is intended to assist first time
                       homebuyers in purchasing a single family home. This
                       program is ongoing, however it is being phased out because
                       some homeowners are refinancing. While this refinancing is
                       occurring, the program accomplished its purpose which is to
                       provide homeownership to low and moderate income persons so
                       that they can build enough equity to get into the mainstream of
                       homeownership. The City will require fees from developers so
                       that it can purchase rental units. The City’s silent second program
                       was established in 1995 and was in effect through 1997. Two
                       housing projects generated forty-seven covenant restricted units.
Duarte General Plan 2005 - 2020             5 -8                 Adopted August 24, 2004
Housing Element                                                  Data Updated May, 2007

CHAPTER 6
HOUSING                                                    Previous Housing Element
Program 14: Enforce the provisions of the American Disability Act by ensuring new
               and/or rehabilitated units meet ADA requirements.
Objectives:    Provide proper access and living arrangements to persons with
               disabilities.
Responsible
Agency:        Community Development Department
Funding
Source:        General Fund
Schedule:      Ongoing
Program Status:        The City continues to enforce ADA requirements through it’s
                       building permit process.
Program 15: The City provides housing assistance referrals to the San Gabriel Valley
               Fair Housing Council and the Foothill Unity Center (a private social
               service organization located in the City of Monrovia). Although there are
               no identified homeless persons in Duarte, the City will study the
               feasibility of allowing homeless/transitional-housing facilities in multiple
               family zones.
Objectives:    Assistance to homeless persons.
Responsible
Agency:        Community Development Department.
Funding
Source:        General Fund
Schedule:      1.      Feasibility study, 1993.
               2.      Public hearings, 1993.
               3.      Enactment of Ordinance, 1994.
Program Status:        Because the City has not identified any homeless persons within
                       Duarte, it has not acted on this program.
Program 16: The City will design a program to accommodate special needs groups.
               The program will target large families and female head of households.
               The program will consist of Section 8 rental assistance, first and last
               months rents program, and rehabilitation loans.
Duarte General Plan 2005 - 2020            5 -9                 Adopted August 24, 2004
Housing Element                                                 Data Updated May, 2007

CHAPTER 6
HOUSING                                                     Previous Housing Element
Objectives:    Provide rental opportunities for special needs groups.
Responsible
Agency:        Community Development Department.
Funding
Source:        CDBG/HUD funds.
Schedule:      1.      Develop program parameters, 1993.
               2.      Provide program funding, 1994.
               3.      Begin housing assistance, 1994.
Program Status:        The City established an exterior rehabilitation program in
                       1992-93 for homeowners.
Goal 5:        Ensure that housing is made available to all persons regardless of
income, age, sex, race, ethnic background, physical status, or family status.
Policies:
5.1    The Redevelopment Agency will establish an affordable housing fund to
       create housing opportunities for low and moderate-income households.
Program 17: Establish a Low and Moderate-income fund that will provide affordable
               housing opportunities. The fund may be used, but is not limited to, the
               following:
               1.      Mortgage subsidies for new construction and/or rehabilitation of
                       eligible multiple family units.
               2.      Construction financing for new units.
               3.      Acquisition of at risk housing units to ensure their
                       preservation.
               4.      Condemnation and acquisition of properties;
               5.      Installing public improvements.
               6.      Incurring the costs of building, engineering, and zoning fees.
               7.      Technical assistance, designs and finance services, consultation
                       and administrative costs for eligible non-profits.
Duarte General Plan 2005 - 2020             5 - 10               Adopted August 24, 2004
Housing Element                                                  Data Updated May, 2007
CHAPTER 6
HOUSING                                                     Previous Housing Element
               8.      Administrative costs for housing assistance groups and/or
                       organizations when such a loan or grant will substantially increase
                       the recipient’s ability to secure additional housing funds.
Objectives:    Increase the supply of low and moderate income housing units through
               unit creation and rehabilitation.
Responsible
Agency:        Redevelopment Agency/Redevelopment Agency Staff.
Funding
Source:                Affordable Housing Fund.
Schedule:              Establish Fund, 1991
Program Status:        In November of 1990 the Duarte Redevelopment Agency adopted
                       resolution RA-274 which provided 20% set aside monies for
                       funding very low, low, and moderate income housing
                       In June of 1999, the Duarte Redevelopment Agency, adopted
                       Resolution RA 310 which established low and moderate income
                       housing outside the boundaries of the Redevelopment Areas.
                       Also, the Agency, in March 2001 adopted Resolution RA-317
                       approving a replacement housing program for projects which
                       displace low and moderate housing units or families. In addition,
                       in many cases, City fees have not been charged for
                       Redevelopment projects which result in low and moderate income
                       housing.
Program 18: The Redevelopment Agency will seek to develop an agency owned 2.6
               acre site on Huntington Drive with low and moderate-income housing
               units. The following incentives will be offered to make the project
               feasible:
               1.      The Agency will put up the land at no initial cost to the
                       developer.
               2.      The Agency will incur the Cost for all building, zoning and
                       engineering fees.
Objectives:    Provide low and moderate income housing units (72 units).
Responsible
Agency:        Redevelopment Agency/Redevelopment Agency Staff
Funding
Duarte General Plan 2005 - 2020              5 - 11               Adopted August 24, 2004
Housing Element                                                   Data Updated May, 2007

CHAPTER 6
HOUSING                                                   Previous Housing Element
Source:        Affordable Housing Fund.
Schedule:      1.      Identify potential developers, March, 1993.
               2.      Prepare RFP’s, April, 1993.
               3.      Select Developer, July, 1993.
               4.      Begin Construction, January, 1994.
Program Status:        Between 1996 and 1997 two projects were developed totaling 87
                       units. Of the 87 units 47 (54%) were moderate income and had
                       silent seconds.
Program 19: The Agency will continue to provide its credit support for the issuance of
               revenue bonds for the purpose of developing affordable housing. Even
               though additional requirements and restrictions have been instituted at
               the State and Federal level, the MRB can still encourage affordable
               rental housing.
Objectives:    Construction of affordable rentals for low-income households.
Responsible
Agency:        Redevelopment Agency/Redevelopment Agency Staff.
Funding
Source:        Affordable Housing Fund.
Schedule:      Ongoing
Program Status:        Nothing has been done on this program because funding has
been difficult to obtain.
Program 20: The Redevelopment Agency will seek to recycle the high density sites
               identified in Table H 3-11 (see appendix) for affordable housing
               purposes. Incentives like no interest loads, technical assistance and fee
               waivers will be offered to the current landowners to assist them in the
               development of their property.
Objectives:    The development of the identified sites will lead to the creation of low
               and moderate housing units and allow the Agency to meet the
               inclusionary housing goals identified in Table H 3-16 (30 units) (see
               appendix).
Responsible
Agency:        Redevelopment Agency/Redevelopment Agency Staff.
Duarte General Plan 2005 - 2020            5 - 12              Adopted August 24, 2004
Housing Element                                                Data Updated May, 2007

CHAPTER 6
HOUSING                                                    Previous Housing Element
Funding
Source:                Affordable Housing Fund.
Schedule:      1.      Contact owners, 1993.
               2.      Identify potential developers, 1993.
               3.      Prepare plans, 1994.
               4.      Enter into development agreements, 1994.
               5.      Begin construction, 1994.
Program Status:        The Redevelopment Agency intends to purchase apartment
                       buildings so that they can be rehabbed and provide housing
                       for low and moderate households. The Agency has not yet been
                       able to leverage its money to accomplish apartment rehabs.
5.2    Increase the supply of low and moderate-income housing units
throughout the city.
Program 21: Prepare and adopt an inclusionary zoning ordinance that will require
               provisions for affordable housing as part of any residential development
               that reaches defined thresholds. This ordinance will include provisions
               for percentage set-asides, in-lieu fees, thresholds, and targeted clientele.
Objectives:    Increase the supply of low and moderate-income housing units.
 Responsible
Agency:        Planning Commission/City Council.
Funding
Source:        General Fund
Schedule:      1.      Data collection, 1993.
               2.      Prepare draft ordinance, 1993.
               3.      Adoption of ordinance, 1994.
               4.      Construction of “inclusionary units” beginning in 1994.
Program Status:        An inclusionary ordinance has not yet been adopted.
Program 22: The city will provide a bonus in the form of a density increase of 25%
               above the land use designation plus additional financial incentives, or
               waivers of equal value if the proposed project provides units for
               affordable housing. This program will respond to the requirements of
               State Law (AB 2511).
Duarte General Plan 2005 - 2020            5 - 13               Adopted August 24, 2004
Housing Element                                                 Data Updated May, 2007

CHAPTER 6
HOUSING                                                    Previous Housing Element
Objective:     Additional housing opportunities for low and moderate income
               households.
Responsible
Agency:        Community Development Department.
Funding
Source:        General Fund.
Schedule:      1.      Ordinance preparation, 1993.
               2.      Ordinance review and adoption, 1993.
               3.      Density bonus/incentives offered, 1993.
Program Status:        Density bonues are given for senior housing overlay zones.
Program 23: Establish a rezoning program, which will rezone non-residential
               properties, identified in Table H 3-12 (see appendix) into high-density
               residential sites. This will allow the sites to be developed with affordable
               housing.
Objective:     Provide additional sites for affordable housing units (634 units).
Responsible
Agency:        Community Development Department.
Funding
Source:        General Fund.
Schedule:      1.      Identify work program, 1993.
               2.      Conduct public workshops, 1994.
               3.      Initiate rezoning, 1994.
               4.      Sites available for development, 1994.
Program Status:        36 units were developed by Santa Teresita Medical Center and 46
                       units were built at Las Brisas
5.3    Continue to pursue Federal and State funding sources to assist in the
       construction of new housing for low and moderate-income families.
Program 24: The City will monitor local, state, and federal funding sources and make
               appropriate applications to get additional funding for affordable housing
               projects. These funding sources include the Home program, excess
               CDBG Funds, etc.
Objectives:    Increase the supply of low and moderate-income housing units.
Duarte General Plan 2005 - 2020             5 - 14               Adopted August 24, 2004
Housing Element                                                  Data Updated May, 2007
CHAPTER 6
HOUSING                                                 Previous Housing Element
Responsible
Agency:        Community Development Department
Funding
Source:        General Fund
Schedule:      1.      Identify programs, 1993
               2.      Submit applications, 1993
Program Status:        This is an ongoing program. The City and Redevelopment Agency
                       have assisted housing developers with applications for tax credits
                       for the 915 Highland Ave. development and HUD Section 202 for
                       a SCPH project resulting in 120 affordable units that have long
                       term affordability covenants.
Goal 6:        Ensure all existing and future residents of the community have
adequate access to housing information.
Policies:
6.1    Provide basic information on available housing by location, price, type,
       and age.
Program 25: This program will establish procedures for disseminating information
                  regarding housing to persons and organizations who express an
                  interest.
Objective:     Increases awareness of housing opportunities.
Responsible
Agency:        Community Development Department
Funding
Source:        General Fund
Schedule:      1.      Gather information, 1993
               2.      Prepare information package, 1993
Program Status:        This is an ongoing program
Goal 7:        To balance housing development with environmental protection
Policies:
Duarte General Plan 2005 - 2020            5 - 15            Adopted August 24, 2004
Housing Element                                               Data Updated May, 2007
CHAPTER 6
HOUSING                                                    Previous Housing Element
7.1    Implement the environmental review procedures established by CEQA in
       reviewing future residential development.
Program 26: Adopt guidelines that will implement the provisions of the California
               Environmental Quality Act.
Objective:     Ensure impacts to the environment will be mitigated.
Responsible
Agency:        Community Development Department.
Funding
Source:        General Fund.
Schedule:      1.      Prepare Guidelines, 1993.
               2.      Adopt guidelines, 1993.
Program Status:        In 1993 the City adopted CEQA Guidelines to be consistent
                       with State law.
7.2    Encourage energy and water conservation measures in the design of
       future residential development.
Program 27: Prepare and adopt energy conservation ordinances.
Objective:     Conservation of natural resources.
Responsible
Agency:        Community Development Department
Funding
Source:        General Fund
Schedule:      1.      Prepare Ordinance, 1993.
               2.      Adopt Ordinance and implement its provisions, 1994.
Program Status:        The City uses the Uniform Building Code, which includes
                       Title 24. Title 24 requires energy conservation measures for
                       all residential projects. The Las Brisas project won a Building
                       Industry Association aware for energy efficiency and for best
                       design for small homes for moderate income.
Duarte General Plan 2005 - 2020             5 - 16              Adopted August 24, 2004
Housing Element                                                 Data Updated May, 2007
CHAPTER 6
HOUSING                                                   Previous Housing Element
7.3     Encourage higher density housing developments near current and/or
        proposed transit corridors.
Program 28: The City will prepare a Municipal Code Amendment which will allow a
               higher density residential development (40 units to the acre) to occur on
               any multiple family, commercial or industrial zoned property located
               within ½ mile of the proposed light/commuter rail system. The light rail
               system is being proposed on the A.T. & S.F. Railroad.
Objective:     Increased opportunities for affordable housing
Responsible
Agency:        Community Development Department
Funding
Source:        General Fund
Schedule:      1.      Prepare Ordinance, 1993.
               2.      Adopt Ordinance and implement its provisions, 1994.
Program Status:        The proposed Mountain Avenue commercial development may
                       include housing within one half mile of a transit station.
        B.     PROGRESS IN MEETING HOUSING GOALS
Progress in meeting the City’s 1993 Housing Element goals can be determined by
measuring the progress in housing production, preservation, and rehabilitation, since
the Element was adopted. Table H 5-1 summarizes the City’s progress in achieving
the goals.
According to City records, 272 net new units were built from 1993 through 2000. Of
that total, 92 were multi-family units. There were 180 single family units. The
affordability of new housing units is based on data in Section 2 of this document.
During the planning period 1990 – 1997, only 47 units of the RHNA goals were
produced. The shortfall was due to restructuring of the economy, the prolonged
recession, and the lack of available land that hampered new housing production. Also,
the 1989-1994 RHNA allocations were too optimistic given economic conditions. As a
result, actual production could not keep pace with the RHNA goals.
The City’s rehabilitation programs have done much better with 382 units having been
rehabilitated using CBDG funds during the planning period. All of these units were
single family units.
Duarte General Plan 2005 - 2020           5 - 17                Adopted August 24, 2004
Housing Element                                                 Data Updated May, 2007

CHAPTER 6
HOUSING                                           Previous Housing Element
                                     TABLE H 5-1
                             1993 QUANTIFIED OBJECTIVES
Housing Goal
and Affordability                  1993 Goals             Progress
Production
  Very Low Income                     190                      0
  Low Income                          269                      0
  Moderate Income                     264                     47
  Upper Income                        530                    225
Rehabilitation
  Lower Income                                                173
  Moderate Income                                              62
Source: City of Duarte, 2004
Duarte General Plan 2005 - 2020        5 - 18          Adopted August 24, 2004
Housing Element                                        Data Updated May, 2007
CHAPTER 6
HOUSING                                                                 Housing Plan
_______________________________________________________________
6.      HOUSING PLAN
_______________________________________________________________
Sections 2, 3 and 4 of this Housing Element establish the housing needs, constraints
and opportunities in the City of Duarte. The Housing Plan presented in this section
sets forth the City's goals, policies, and programs to address Duarte’s identified
housing needs.
      A.     GOALS AND POLICIES
This section of the City of Duarte Housing Element contains the goals and policies the
City intends to implement to address a number of housing-related issues. The
following four major issue areas are addressed by the goals and policies of this
Element: 1) ensure that a broad range of housing types are provided to meet the
needs of the existing and future residents; 2) conserve the existing affordable housing
stock; 3) promote affordable housing, and 4) promote equal housing opportunity.
Each of these issues and supporting goals and policies are identified and discussed in
the following.
             1. Provide for a Range of Different Housing Types to Meet Identified
             Need
Section 2 of this Housing Element identified household types in Duarte that need
housing to fit their particular needs. For example, the elderly population is increasing
in Duarte. In addition, the elderly in Duarte make up 10.6% of all Duarte residents now
living in poverty. This seems to indicate a need for addition senior housing. Elderly
people living alone, may need smaller studio units in a complex that provides
additional services, such as close proximity to medical facilities and transportation, and
some meals.
GOAL 1: Increase the supply of housing
Objective 1.1: Help facilitate the construction of 354 new housing units during the
January 1998 through June 30, 2005 planning period in order to meet the goals of the
Regional Housing Needs Assessment (RHNA).
Policy 1.1.1: Promote and encourage development of housing, which varies by size,
type, design, and type of ownership.
Policy 1.1.2: Facilitate construction of low- and moderate-income housing.
Duarte General Plan 2005 - 2020           6 -1                 Adopted August 24, 2004
Housing Element                                                 Data Updated May, 2007

CHAPTER 6
HOUSING                                                              Housing Plan
Policy 1.1.3: Actively encourage development of second units by publicizing the
existence of the revised ordinance, and by providing incentives for development of
such units.
Policy 1.1.4: Promote the use of mixed land use techniques and construction methods
to provide more housing and minimize housing costs without compromising basic
health, safety and aesthetic qualities.
Policy 1.1.5: Encourage use of innovative construction techniques, design standards,
and energy conservation methods in new housing development, through revised
zoning and subdivision and ordinances.
Policy 1.1.6: Reexamine City zoning and building codes for possible amendments to
reduce construction costs without sacrificing basic health and safety.
             2. Conserve Existing Affordable Housing Units
The City of Duarte has been active in housing rehabilitation programs which are
designed to preserve the City’s aging housing stock. According to the 2000 Census,
55.4% of the units in Duarte are more than 30 years old, the age at which a housing
unit will typically begin to require major repairs. The need for such programs is
underscored by the increasing disparity between incomes and housing costs in the
City, the growing evidence of overcrowding, and the large proportion of senior citizens
on fixed incomes.
GOAL 2: Continue to promote the rehabilitation of deteriorated dwelling units
and the preservation of sound housing units.
Objective 2.1: Conserve the City's existing housing stock
Policy 2.1.1: Continue to cooperate with the Los Angeles County Community
Development Commission to provide below-market rate rehabilitation loans for both
owner-occupied and rental housing.
Policy 2.1.2: Continue to investigate and pursue housing rehabilitation programs and
funding sources offered by the State and Federal governments.
Policy 2.1.3: Continue to encourage the rehabilitation of owner-occupied and rental
housing units.
Policy 2.1.4: Promote the use of rehabilitation assistance programs to alleviate
deteriorated or deteriorating housing conditions.
Policy 2.1.5: Promote the removal and replacement of substandard units which
cannot be rehabilitated.
Duarte General Plan 2005 - 2020         6 -2                 Adopted August 24, 2004
Housing Element                                              Data Updated May, 2007

CHAPTER 6
HOUSING                                                               Housing Plan
Policy 2.1.6:    Continue to support volunteer efforts thru Rebuilding Together
Objective 2.2: Continue to promote the maintenance of currently sound housing.
Policy 2.2.1: Continue to encourage the maintenance of sound owner-occupied and
renter occupied housing.
             3. Provide Housing Opportunities for all
GOAL 3: Provide housing opportunities for all regardless of age, sex, race,
ethnicity, marital status, religion or household composition.
Objective 3.1: Promote housing opportunities for all.
Policy 3.1.2: Accommodate the City's fair share of the regional housing needs.
Policy 3.1.3: Develop programs to serve persons with special needs including: the
elderly, handicapped, single parents, and large family, homeless populations.
    B.     HOUSING PROGRAMS
The Goals and Policies of the Housing Plan provide a framework for the following
implementation programs. This portion of Section 6 (Housing Plan) briefly describes
the programs that Duarte will implement to address the housing needs identified in this
document.
Goal # 1: Increase the supply of housing
Program 1: The city will continue to provide a bonus in the form of a density increase
               of 25% above the land use designation plus additional financial
               incentives, or waivers of equal value if the proposed project provides
               units for affordable housing.       This program will respond to the
               requirements of State Law (AB 2511).
Objective:     Additional housing opportunities for low and moderate income
               households.
Responsible
Agency:        Community Development Department.
Funding
Source:        General Fund and Redevelopment Funds
Schedule:      Ongoing
Duarte General Plan 2005 - 2020         6 -3                  Adopted August 24, 2004
Housing Element                                               Data Updated May, 2007
CHAPTER 6
HOUSING                                                                   Housing Plan
Program 2: Re-designate ineffective non-residential properties, during the General
               Plan Update program, which will result in the rezoning into high-density
               residential sites. This will allow the sites to be developed with affordable
               housing. This program is probably going to occur during the next
               Housing Element planning period.
Objective:     Provide additional sites for affordable housing units.
Responsible
Agency:        Community Development Department.
Funding
Source:        General Fund.
Schedule:      1.      Begin General Plan Update program November 2004
               2.      Complete General Plan Update program November 2005
               3.      Initiate rezoning of sites March 2006.
Program 3: The city will continue to monitor local, state, and federal funding sources
               and make appropriate applications to get additional funding for affordable
               housing projects specifically through CDBG and Home funds.
Objectives:    Increase the supply of low and moderate-income housing units.
Responsible
Agency:        Community Development Department
Funding
Source:        General Fund
Schedule:       These programs will be monitored semi-annually
Program 4:          The Redevelopment Agency will be able to acquire 8 affordable
                    units, as a result of a market rate project at 2355-2435 Huntington
                    Drive, by requiring the developer of this project to pay $23,000 per
                    unit.
Objective:          To acquire funds for affordable housing
Responsible
Agency:             Redevelopment Agency
Funding
Source:             In lieu low and moderate funding
Duarte General Plan 2005 - 2020             6 -4                 Adopted August 24, 2004
Housing Element                                                   Data Updated May, 2007
CHAPTER 6
HOUSING                                                                 Housing Plan
Schedule:           The Redevelopment Agency is in process of establishing an in lieu
                    low and moderate income fund which should be adopted by spring
                    2005.
Program 5:          The Redevelopment Agency will assist in the building of an 80 unit
                    senior very low income units using $9 million of HUD funds with a 40
                    year affordability covenants with the Agency extending the
                    affordability an additional 15 years, and City of Industry Funds. The
                    project will be developed by Southern California Presbyterian Homes
                    at 1700-1722 Huntington Drive.
Objective:          To provide very low income senior units to meet senior housing
                    needs within the City of Duarte.
Responsible
Agency:             Redevelopment Agency
Funding
Source:             HUD funds, Redevelopment Agency funds and City of Industry funds
Schedule:           Construction to begin early fall 2004
Program 6:          The Redevelopment Agency owns 2400-2404 Huntington Drive,
                    adjacent to Las Brisas Homes, a first time home buyers project. The
                    Agency intends to provide these parcels for development of low and
                    moderate income housing and will acquire parcels east to provide an
                    adequate development site.
Objective:          Provide new low and moderate income housing units
Responsible
Agency:             Redevelopment Agency
Funding Source: Redevelopment Agency set-aside funds
Schedule:           Spring 2005
Program 7: The Agency will consider establishing single family target areas adjacent
               to project areas, and initiate a comprehensive rehabilitation program
               featuring grants, rebates, and loans. Housing Funds will be used in
               conjunction with CDBG funds to preserve the existing housing stock.
               Funds will be offered in exchange for deed restrictions for occupancy by
               very low, low, and moderate income households.
Objective:     To provide new very low, low and moderate income housing units
Duarte General Plan 2005 - 2020            6 -5                Adopted August 24, 2004
Housing Element                                                 Data Updated May, 2007
CHAPTER 6
HOUSING                                                                  Housing Plan
Responsible
Agency:        Redevelopment Agency and CDBG funds
Funding
Source:        Redevelopment Agency funds
Schedule:      March 2005
Program 8: The Agency will identify sites in project areas where there is a possibility
               of new construction. Negotiations will most likely center on the offsetting
               of developer costs and providing acquisition of adequate land.
Objective:     To provide new very low, low and moderate income housing units
Responsible
Agency:        Redevelopment Agency
Funding
Source:        Redevelopment Agency funds
Schedule:      March 2005
Goal # 2: Continue to promote the rehabilitation of deteriorated dwelling units
and the preservation of the sound housing units.
Program 9:          The Residential Housing Rehabilitation Program will continue to be
                    funded at $140,000 per year.
Objective:          To fund up to 28 low and moderate income households per year in
                    the rehabilitation of their single family homes.
Responsible
Agency:             Community Development Department
Funding
Source:             Community Development Block Grant Funds
Schedule:           Annually
Program 10:         The Residential Housing Rehabilitation/Rebuilding Together
                    Program will be funded at $20,000 per year and target seniors and
                    the disabled.
Objective:          To fund a minimum 2 very low and low income households per year
                    by rehabilitation their housing units.
Duarte General Plan 2005 - 2020             6 -6                 Adopted August 24, 2004
Housing Element                                                  Data Updated May, 2007
CHAPTER 6
HOUSING                                                                 Housing Plan
Responsible
Agency:             Community Development Department
Funding
Source:             Community Development Block Grant Funds
Schedule:           Annually
Program 11:         The Lead Based Paint/Hazard Test/Abatement Program will be
                    continued and funded at $20,000 per year.
Objective:          This is a continuing program to help identify and satisfy federal Lead
                    Based Paint Requirements to serve about 20 homes.
Responsible
Agency:             Community Development Department
Funding
Source:             Community Development Block Grant Funds
Schedule:           Annually
Program 12 :           Continue to concentrate code enforcement activities in target
                       areas, South of Huntington Drive, where housing has deteriorated.
Objectives:            Abatement of building and zoning code violations. (240 cases per
                       year).
Responsible
Agency:                Public Safety Department.
Funding
Source:                General Fund/CDBG Funds
Schedule:              Annually; This is an ongoing program to identify and abate code
                       violations throughout the City
Program 13:            The Agency may assist in the rehabilitation of multiple family
                       housing units in exchange for deed restrictions for very low and
                       low income households.
Objective:             To preserve the community’s existing housing stock and provide
                       affordable dwelling units for low and moderate households.
Responsible
Agency:                Redevelopment Agency
Duarte General Plan 2005 - 2020           6 -7                 Adopted August 24, 2004
Housing Element                                                 Data Updated May, 2007

CHAPTER 6
HOUSING                                                                Housing Plan
Funding Source:        Redevelopment Agency funds
Schedule:              March 2005
Goal # 3 Provide housing opportunities for all regardless of age, sex, race,
ethnicity, marital status, religion or household composition.
Program 14: Require market studies that will address the housing balance prior to
               approving a senior citizen housing project.
Objectives:    Ensure there is an even balance of rental, owner, and congregate care
               units throughout the City.
Responsible
Agency:        Architectural Review Board
Funding
Source:        General Fund
Schedule:      Ongoing
Program 15: The City participates in a joint powers authority which contracts with the
               San Gabriel Valley Fair Housing Council to ensure housing
               discrimination does not take place in Duarte. The City distributes
               housing information from the public counter and the community
               newsletter. In addition, the City refers all housing discrimination
               complaints to the Housing Council. If the Housing Council receives a
               complaint they will investigate the incident and the property owner will be
               contacted.
Objectives:    Ensure the enforcement of equitable housing laws.
Responsible
Agency:        Community Development Department/San Gabriel Valley Fair Housing
               Council.
Funding
Source:        General Fund/San Gabriel Fair Housing Council.
Schedule:      Ongoing
Program 16: The City will continue disseminating information regarding housing to
                persons and organizations who express an interest.
Objective:     Increases awareness of housing opportunities.
Duarte General Plan 2005 - 2020           6 -8                 Adopted August 24, 2004
Housing Element                                                Data Updated May, 2007
CHAPTER 6
HOUSING                                                                 Housing Plan
Responsible
Agency:        Community Development Department
Funding
Source:        General Fund
Schedule: Ongoing
Program 17: As part of the City’s General Plan update, it will consider 1515 – 1621
               Huntington Drive, east of Cotter as a site for affordable housing, because
               it is across the street from Las Posadas Homes, another affordable
               project. The General Plan designation for these properties is General
               Commercial and High Density Residential. Some of the current land
               uses are incompatible with nearby uses. This program is probably going
               to occur during the next Housing Element planning period.
Objective:     Provide future sites for new low and moderate income housing
               production
Responsible
Agency:        Community Development Department
Funding
Source:        General Fund
Schedule:      1.      Begin General Plan Update program November 2004
               2.      Complete General Plan Update program November 2005
               3.      Initiate rezoning of sites March 2006.
Program 18: As part of the City’s General Plan update, it will consider 1701 - 1723
               Huntington Drive as a potential site for affordable housing, as the
               adjacent use is senior apartments. This project would also address the
               issue of incompatibility with nearby uses. This program is probably going
               to occur during the next Housing Element planning period.
Objective:     Provide future sites for new low and moderate income housing
               production
Responsible
Agency:        Community Development Department
Funding
Source:        General Fund
Schedule:      1.      Begin General Plan Update program November 2004
Duarte General Plan 2005 - 2020             6 -9                Adopted August 24, 2004
Housing Element                                                 Data Updated May, 2007

CHAPTER 6
HOUSING                                                                 Housing Plan
               2.      Complete General Plan Update program November 2005
               3.      Initiate rezoning of sites March 2006.
Program 19: The City will monitor at risk projects within Duarte and act to try to assist
               in the preservation of these units affordable through early warning
               systems, work with non profits and continued funding.
Objective:     To preserve existing low and moderate income housing units
Responsible
Agency:        Community Development Department
Funding
Source:        General Fund
Schedule:      ongoing with reviews performed semi-annually
Program 20:The City is willing to consider deviations from development standards for
               affordable housing projects through the Density Bonus and Specific Plan
               process.
Objective:     Provide affordable housing
Responsible
Agency:        Community Development Department
Funding
Source:        General Fund, CDBG, Redevelopment Agency
Schedule:      ongoing with reviews performed semi-annually
Program 21: The City will adopt a reasonable accommodations ordinance.
Objective:     To provide reasonable accommodations for persons with disabilities
Responsible
Agency:        Community Development Department
Funding
Source:        General Fund
Schedule:      Adopt Reasonable Accommodations Ordinance by January 2006
Program 22: The City will adopt a code amendment to provide for group homes of
seven or greater with a CUP in all R-1 zones.
Duarte General Plan 2005 - 2020             6 - 10              Adopted August 24, 2004
Housing Element                                                 Data Updated May, 2007
CHAPTER 6
HOUSING                                                               Housing Plan
Objective:     To provide group homes of seven or more for persons with disabilities
Responsible
Agency:        Community Development Department
Funding
Source:        General Fund
Schedule:      Adopt code amendment by January 2006
Program 23: The City will adopt a code amendment to provide emergency shelters in
               the industrial zones with a CUP.
Objective:     To provide temporary shelters for the homeless
Responsible
Agency:        Community Development Department
Funding
Source:        General Fund
Schedule:      Adopt code amendment by January 2006
     C.     QUANTIFIED OBJECTIVES
Housing Element law requires that the jurisdiction establish quantified objectives of the
maximum number of housing units, by income category that can be constructed,
rehabilitated, and conserved over the five year time period. Table H 6-1 established
this quantified objective.
Duarte is an urbanized community. All vacant and previously developed land shown
on Diagram H 1-2 “Housing Opportunities Areas”, including the 141 acres of vacant
parcels in the hillsides has adequate infrastructure. While the hillside vacant parcels
will no doubt be developed with market rate housing, the multiple family vacant parcels
and second units could be developed with low and moderate income units. None of
the properties shown on Diagram H 1-2 are known to have any environmental
constraints which would hinder development.
The City has initiated a low and moderate income housing in lieu fee, which will be
applied to future market rate projects. This money will be used to generate new low
and moderate income units.
Properties shown on Table H 4-1 and Table H 4-2 do not have known environmental
constraints and are adequate in size, shape and topography. These properties do not
have environmental contamination and can accommodate development.
Duarte General Plan 2005 - 2020           6 - 11             Adopted August 24, 2004
Housing Element                                              Data Updated May, 2007

CHAPTER 6
HOUSING                                                                Housing Plan
The areas in yellow on Diagram H 1-2 are the single family residential areas in Duarte
which make up about a majority of the community. The City adopted a second unit
ordinance in February 2004, which allows second units in all single family residential
zones. This was a significant elimination of a possible governmental constraint, which
should conservatively generate approximately 5 moderate income units within the next
two years.
To illustrate that the City of Duarte is making even more special provisions to provide
affordable housing, it has approved a Specific Plan which allows 80 very low income
senior units on only 1.77 acres. While zoning on the subject property allowed 28 units
per acre, a Specific Plan was approved by the City which allowed 45 units per acre
including an extra density bonus. Also, parking for the project was approved at 61
open spaces (.71 spaces per unit) instead of the normal 200 parking spaces, of which
160 would have be inside garages. Front yard setbacks were also relaxed to help
accommodate the project.
                                       TABLE H 6-1
                           MAXIMUM # OF UNITS THAT CAN BE
                 CONSTRUCTED, REHABILITATED, AND CONSERVED
                                    FROM 1998 TO 2005
Income Group                    New              Rehabilitation        Conservation/
                            Construction                               Preservation
Very Low-Income                   78                  46
Low Income                         9                 142                     161
Moderate Income                   15                  93
Above Moderate                   210                    0                       0
       Total                     312                 281                     161
Source: City of Duarte
Duarte General Plan 2005 - 2020           6 - 12               Adopted August 24, 2004
Housing Element                                                Data Updated May, 2007
July 14,200
CHAPTER 6
HOUSING                                                                               Appendix
                                               APPENDIX
                                                 Appendix
                                               Table H 3-11
                                          CITY OF DUARTE
                       INVENTORY OF SUITABLE RESIDENTIAL SITES
                         PHASE II SITES – UNDER UTILIZED PARCELS
       LOCATION                    ACRES                GENERAL PLAN                   CAPACITY
2400 Livermont                             2.97            Low Density                    19 SF
1932 – 66 Cinco Robles                     3.22           Medium Density                  90 MF
Three Ranch/Buena Vista                    3.00           Medium Density                  63 MF
1648 Huntington                              .61          Medium Density                  12 MF
1700 – 22 Huntington                       1.25           Medium Density                  26 MF
2102 – 22 Huntington                       1.10           Medium Density                  22 MF
2351 – 435 Huntington                      3.70            High Density                  103 MF
2460 – 524 Huntington                      1.60            High Density                   43 MF
Total                                     17.45                                           19 SF
                                                                                         359 MF
Note:       All sites are adjacent to City facility and services (1993 Housing Element)
Duarte General Plan 2005 - 2020                  7 -1                    Adopted August 24, 2004
Housing Element                                                          Data Updated May, 2007

CHAPTER 6
HOUSING                                                                               Appendix
                                                 Appendix
                                              Table H 3-12
                                           CITY OF DUARTE
                           INVENTORY OF NON-RESIDENTIAL SITES
                                            PHASE III SITES
       LOCATION                    ACRES                GENERAL PLAN                   CAPACITY
Encanto Parkway                        3.0                   Industrial                   61 MF
1902 – 32 Buena Vista                  4.0                  Open Space                   112 MF
2140 Buena Vista                       6.9                   Industrial                  193 MF
1423 – 37 Huntington                  1.7                   Commercial                    47 MF
1515 – 25 Huntington                  1.4                   Commercial                    39 MF
1821 Huntington                       1.6                   Commercial                    43 MF
2159 Huntington                       2.6                   Commercial                    72 MF
2308 – 54 Huntington                  2.4                   Commercial                    67 MF
Total                                 23.6                                               634 MF
Note:       All sites are adjacent to City facility and services (1993 Housing Element)
                                                 Appendix
                                              Table H 3-16
                                             City of Duarte
                                    Redevelopment Housing Goals
                                               1993 – 1998
                                                           Income Group
                                                     Very
                                 Unit Type           Low       Low      Moderate
                                    New               10        10        20
                               Construction
                               Rehabilitation         10        10        30
                                Source: City of Duarte (1993 Housing Element)
Duarte General Plan 2005 - 2020                  7 -2                    Adopted August 24, 2004
Housing Element                                                          Data Updated May, 2007

CHAPTER 7
HISTORIC PRESERVATION
Table of Contents
INTRODUCTION
Historic Preservation Element Statutory Requirements                           1
Relationship to other General Plan Elements and Program EIR                    1
GOALS, OBJECTIVES AND POLICIES
Make citizens and decision-makers aware of Duarte’s history and
         historic built environment                                            2
Maintain and update the City’s inventory of historical resources               3
Promote the preservation of local historical resources                         3
RELATED AGENCIES, LAWS AND PLANS
National/Federal: National Historic Preservation Act of 1966                   4
State: California Environmental Quality Act
         (Public Resources Code 21000- 21178)                                  4
Historic Preservation Ordinance                                                5
Certified Local Government (CLG)                                               5
Historic Preservation Incentives                                               6
Mills Act                                                                      6
California Historical Building Code                                            7
Proposition 40                                                                 7
OVERVIEW OF DUARTE’S HISTORICAL RESOURCES AND PAST
RESEARCH EFFORTS
Previously Identified Preservation Issues                                      7
Survey of Historic Resources                                                   8
IMPLEMENTATION MEASURES                                                        9
List of Tables
Table HP- 1 (Historic Preservation Implementation Measures)                   10
Historic Preservation Element             i              Duarte General Plan 2005-2020
Table of Contents

CHAPTER 7
HISTORIC PRESERVATION
INTRODUCTION
The City of Duarte is a city with a rich history. Although, not incorporated until
1957, the City’s identity can be connected to its past through its physical
elements, such as buildings and structures.
As an integral part of a comprehensive General Plan, the Historic Preservation
Element is intended to help fuse the preservation and protection of historic
resources into long-term planning goals. Through the broad goals outlined in
this element, it provides continuity and guides the actions of City departments
and commissions in preserving and protecting Duarte’s resources that reflect the
City’s past.
Historic Preservation Element Statutory Requirements
Section 65303 of the California Government Code specifically includes historic
preservation as an optional element of the general plan. It authorizes the
preparation of an historic preservation element “…for the identification,
establishment and protection of sites and structures of architectural, historical,
and archaeological or cultural significance…” Although, the Historic Preservation
Element is not one of the mandatory elements of a general plan, its inclusion
implies the same level of importance as any other element of the City’s general
plan.
Relationship to other General Plan Elements and Program EIR
One of the primary goals of the Historic Preservation Element is to help fuse the
preservation goals of the City with other goals and policies of the General Plan.
Within the Land Use Element, the policies and patterns work in concert with the
preservation objectives. Fiscal and development economics as well as planning
principles often drive land use deliberations, and the land use decisions rendered
will affect the City’s built environment legacy just as much as they will affect new
projects – so the Economic Development Element is strongly related also. As a
resource, the Open Space Element bears on and/or mirrors the preservation
issue. Each of these elements contains certain discussions on preservation-
related matters. Timely identification of cultural and historic resources and the
open discussion of policy alternatives related to preservation is consequently
essential and is reflected in all elements of the General Plan.
Historic Preservation Element, August 2007 1             Duarte General Plan 2005-2020

CHAPTER 7
HISTORIC PRESERVATION
A Program Environmental Impact Report (EIR) will be part of the 2005-2020
Duarte General Plan. Policies within the Historic Preservation Element will also
become mitigation measures within the Program EIR.
GOALS, OBJECTIVES AND POLICIES
This section provides draft Goals, Objectives, and Policies for the Historic
Preservation Element of the Duarte General Plan. To preserve the historic built
environment of the City of Duarte for future generations requires putting
commitments into actions. These goals and objectives have been developed to
provide direction for the future development of Duarte’s historic preservation
program. By adopting these goals and objectives as part of the General Plan,
Duarte affirms its commitment to historic preservation.
Historic Preservation Goal 1:                  To make citizens and decision-makers
aware of Duarte’s history and historic built environment.
Objective 1.1            Create an educational program which focuses on providing
                         information to allow residents and decision-makers to make
                         informed decisions and supportable conclusions about the
                         protection of historic resources.
Policies
         HP 1.1.1        Establish and support all appropriate media for reaching all
                         segments of the community to educate residents and
                         decision-makers concerning the protection of historical
                         resources.
         HP 1.1.2        Encourage public outreach and access to historical
                         information.
Objective 1.2            Promote the development of a comprehensive preservation
                         program.
Policies
    HP 1.2.1             Utilize creative funding sources to promote the development
                         of a comprehensive historic preservation program for the
                         City.
Historic Preservation, August 2007             2             Duarte General Plan 2005-2020

CHAPTER 7
HISTORIC PRESERVATION
Objective 1.3            Integrate historic preservation into the operations of the
                         Community Development Department.
Policies
         HP1.3.1         Encourage training of City staff related to the development
                         and application of historic preservation.
         HP1.3.2         Develop a database and update maps which identify
                         potentially historical resources and designated resources.
Historic Preservation Goal 2: To maintain and update the City’s inventory of
historical resources.
Objective 2.1            Preserve Duarte’s historical resources by supporting
                         continued research related to the City’s historic resources
                         inventory.
Policies
         HP 2.1.1        Encourage on-going research regarding the City’s history
                         and built environment.
Historic Preservation Goal 3:           To promote the preservation of local historical
resources.
Objective 3.1            Preserve the City’s inventory of historical resources for
                         future generations to enjoy.
Policies
         HP 3.1.1        Encourage property owners to preserve the character
                         defining features of historical resources.
Policies
         HP 3.1.2        Promote the preservation of historic and cultural resources
                         by providing incentives and technical assistance.
Historic Preservation, August 2007             3             Duarte General Plan 2005-2020

CHAPTER 7
HISTORIC PRESERVATION
RELATED AGENCIES, LAWS AND PLANS
National/Federal: National Historic Preservation Act of 1966
Enacted in 1966, the National Historic Preservation Act (NHPA) established the
National Register of Historic Places program under the Secretary of the Interior,
authorized funding for state programs with provisions for pass-through funding
and participation by local governments, created the Advisory Council on Historic
Preservation, and established a review process for protecting cultural resources.
The NHPA provides the legal framework for most state and local preservation
laws.
The National Register of Historic Places program is maintained by the Keeper of
the National Register, within the National Park Service division. The National
Register program also includes National Historic Landmarks, which is limited only
to properties of significance to the nation.
State Historic Preservation Officers and programs in all states and U.S.
Territories received federal funding to carry out the provisions of the National
Historic Preservation Act. This funding comes from a yearly appropriation by the
legislative branch of the federal government. The NHPA requires that at least 10
percent of funds to the state be passed through the Certified Local Governments.
The NHPA established the Section 106 review procedure to protect historic and
archaeological resources listed in or eligible for listing in the National Register of
Historic Places from the impact of projects by a federal agency or project funded
or permitted by a federal agency. Federal Highway and HUD-funded Community
Development Block grants projects are examples of those subject to Section 106
review.
State: California Environmental Quality Act (Public Resources Code 21000-
21178)
The California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) is a state law enacted in 1971.
It requires state and local governmental agencies to consider the impact
proposed projects have on the environment, including historic resources. The
CEQA review identified potential significant impacts as well as alternatives or
mitigation measures to avoid or reduce the impacts. Properties listed in or
deemed eligible for listing for the California Register of Historical Resources are
subject to the CEQA review process. The California Register also includes
properties listed on the National Register of Historic Places.
Historic Preservation, August 2007         4               Duarte General Plan 2005-2020
CHAPTER 7
HISTORIC PRESERVATION
The State of California Office of Historic Preservation administers the California
Register program. As a recipient of federal funding, that office meets the
requirements of the National Historic Preservation Act with a State Historic
Preservation Officer which enforces a designation and protection process, has a
qualified historic preservation review commission, maintains a system for surveys
and inventories, and provides for adequate public participation in its activities.
Most nominations to the National Register of Historic Places are processed
through the California State Historical Resources Commission.
Historic Preservation Ordinance
A historic preservation ordinance is the primary tool used by municipalities to
protect historic resources in a community. Local governments in California have
the authority to adopt a historic preservation ordinance to provide regulations
regarding historic and cultural resources. Historic preservation ordinances are
structured to address the particular needs and resources within a community.
Though there is no standard historic preservation ordinance, a typical ordinance
usually includes provisions regarding the following: (1) establishment of a local
historic commission and the powers and responsibilities assigned to that
commission (2) establishment of a local historic property register (3)
establishment of criteria that can be used to designate historic resources and the
process of designation (4) definition of the types of physical alterations that
require design review and explanation of the design review process (5)
guidelines for maintenance and appropriate treatment of a historic resource.
Since historic preservation ordinances are designed to meet specific needs of a
community, the City’s ordinance may not include all the items described above.
Certified Local Government (CLG)
Local governments strengthen their local historic preservation efforts by
achieving Certified Local Government (CLG) status from the National Park
Service (NPS). NPS and state governments, through their State Historic
Preservation Offices (SHPOs), provide valuable technical assistance and small
matching grants to hundreds of diverse communities whose local governments
are endeavoring to keep for future generations what is significant from their
community's past. In turn, NPS and states gain the benefit of local government
partnership in the national historic preservation program. Another incentive for
participating in the CLG program is the pool of matching grant funds SHPOs set
aside to fund CLG historic preservation sub-grant projects--at least 10% of the
Historic Preservation, August 2007       5             Duarte General Plan 2005-2020

CHAPTER 7
HISTORIC PRESERVATION
State's annual Historic Preservation Fund (HPF) grant allocation. Grant funds are
distributed through the HPF grant program, administered by NPS and SHPOs.
The CLG Program integrates local governments with the national historic
preservation program through activities that strengthen decision-making
regarding historic places at the local level. Because local planning office staff
often play key roles in CLG projects, the thread of historic preservation becomes
woven into the fabric of local land-use policy. Local governments collect and
analyze information on the location and significance of archeological and historic
properties for use by preservation commissions and by local, county, and state
agencies. Using grants awarded by SHPOs, CLGs may produce historic theme
or context studies, cultural resource inventories, assessments of properties to
determine their eligibility for local and National Register of Historic Places
designation, building reuse and feasibility studies, design guidelines and
conservation ordinances, and publications to educate the public about the
benefits of historic preservation.
Historic Preservation Incentives
Incentives are important to the success of the City’s newly formed
comprehensive historic preservation program. In some cases they may help
offset costs related to maintaining historical structures.
Mills Act
The Mills Act of 1972 (Government Code Section 50280 et seq.; Revenue and
Taxation Code Section 739 et seq.) provides a reduction in the property taxes for
owners of qualified properties. The owner must enter into a ten-year contract
with the local government. In return, the owner agrees to rehabilitate and/or
maintain the historical and architectural character of the structure. To implement
the program, the local government is required to adopt enabling legislation.
Mills Act contracts offer several advantages to property owners. Participation by
the property is completely voluntary. In areas where land value represents a
large portion of the market value, such as high-density commercial and
residential districts, the Mills Act method of valuation adjusts the property tax to
reflect the actual use of the site. This results in a property tax reduction. In an
event the property is sold, the Mills Act contract continues and the reduced
property tax is passed on to a new owner.
Historic Preservation, August 2007         6               Duarte General Plan 2005-2020

CHAPTER 7
HISTORIC PRESERVATION
California Historical Building Code
The intent of the State Historical Building Code (SHBC) is to protect California’s
architectural heritage by recognizing the unique construction issues applicable to
historical buildings and by providing an alternative code to deal with these issues.
The SHBC is the prevailing code for application to qualified historical buildings in
that the City can recognize the use of these codes as they apply to qualified
historical buildings. In some cases, the owner may find that the alternative
regulations resolve conflicts between complying with the city’s building code and
retaining the historic fabric as required for historical sites, Mills Act contracts, or
historical resources under CEQA. In some circumstances, the SHBC serves as
an economic incentive to owners by reducing the amount of work required for
code compliance.
Proposition 40
On March 5, 2002, voters passed Proposition 40 by 56.8 percent, the 2.6 billion
dollar "California Clean Water, Clean Air, Safe Neighborhood Parks, and Coastal
Protection Act of 2002" (2002 Resources Bond). The passage of Proposition 40
provided funds for local assistance grants, as provided for in Sections 5096.600
through 5096.683 of the Public Resources Code. The California Cultural and
Historical Endowment was created to administer the Proposition 40 funds
dedicated to preserving historic and cultural resources. The California Cultural
and Historical Endowment (CCHE) is a new state agency that funds projects
through a competitive grant process to tell the stories of California as a unified
society and of the many groups of people that together comprise historic and
modern California. The Endowment is located in the California State Library
office. Approximately $128 million will be available to government entities and
non-profit organizations through a competitive grant application process.
OVERVIEW OF DUARTE’S HISTORICAL RESOURCES
AND PAST RESEARCH EFFORTS
Previously Identified Preservation Issues
In 1997, a community vision process was completed over a six-month period,
which resulted in the Duarte: Vision for the 21st Century Plan “Vision Plan”.
During this process, over 100 participants from throughout the Duarte
community, worked on identifying and analyzing issues, which are critical to
Duarte’s continued ability to prosper over the next century.
Historic Preservation, August 2007        7                Duarte General Plan 2005-2020

CHAPTER 7
HISTORIC PRESERVATION
During this visioning process, the community proposed various strategies, which
are consistent with the goals and purpose of a Historic Preservation Element:
        Enhance Duarte’s existing cultural assets and continue to develop cultural
         opportunities, including a cultural event to put Duarte on the map (Vision
         Plan, Page 9).
        Develop a series of community events and programs that will promote the
         City’s image and businesses outside the community (Vision Plan, Page
         28).
        Market the unique qualities and services offered in Duarte (Vision Plan,
         Page 32).
        Expand community events and enhance sense of community through
         increased publicity and information resources (Vision Plan, Page 35).
Between 2001 through present, the City Council expressed concern regarding
the preservation of remaining historical resources in the City of Duarte and the
possible need to adopt a historic preservation ordinance to protect these
resources. Staff was directed to research this matter further.
During the process, staff met with the Duarte Historical Society on several
occasions to develop a recommendation to Council. In 2003, staff presented
material related to adopting a historic preservation ordinance in Duarte. This
Element of the General Plan is an opportunity to create a historic preservation
program that is comprehensive, which also will address others tools essential for
the preservation of Duarte’s past.
Survey of Historic Resources
In October 2002, staff conducted a “windshield” survey. The project area for the
survey included all properties within the City of Duarte. The windshield survey
was completed by driving through all streets of the City. The survey focused on
identifying buildings and structures which displayed architectural elements and
structures that contribute to the historical fabric of Duarte. A couple of limitations
of using this survey method include the difficulty in identifying properties that may
have only historical significance or to date the structure. The results of the
survey were illustrated on a map and presentation binder with photos.
On December 2002, the City Council approved to have students from Cal Poly
Pomona complete an intensive research survey for each identified property in
order to catalog the historical and architectural significance of each identified
structure. Generally, intensive research is intended to confirm and record the
Historic Preservation, August 2007         8              Duarte General Plan 2005-2020

CHAPTER 7
HISTORIC PRESERVATION
historical/architectural significance of each structure. This research would also
aid future nominations of structures for historical designation under a local
historic preservation ordinance. There are various factors which affect the
amount of time to research a single property. These factors include the type of
structure, structure location, availability of research resources, and the
importance or prominence of the property being researched. The basic research
begins with an attempt to date the building and identify the architect/builder. If
original building permits are available this step can be a more streamlined
process. However, in other cases it may be necessary to research old property
tax assessment books, periodicals such as newspapers and the Southwest
Builder and Contractor, Sanborn Maps, and history books, which can be time
consuming.
                                                   There were various factors
                                                   which affected the quality and
                                                   completeness of the product
                                                   submitted by the Cal Poly
                                                   students.       These       factors
                                                   included time limitations and
                                                   availability and access to
                                                   archival resources.       In many
                                                   cases, the students were unable
                                                   to find family associations with
                                                   the properties. Therefore, the
                                                   forms submitted by Cal Poly still
                                                   require additional research to
                                                   complete the evaluation of
architectural and historical associations. The results of the Cal Poly research is
also available in a presentation binder.
IMPLEMENTATION MEASURES
Government Code 65400 requires the legislative body to consider and adopt
reasonable and practical means for implementing the general plan. This is
necessary so that the plan will serve as an effective guide for orderly growth and
development, preservation and conservation of open-space land and natural
resources, and the efficient expenditure of public funds relating to the subjects
addressed in the general plan. The State also requires an annual report to the
legislative body, State Department of Housing and Community Development
(HCD) and State Office of Planning and Research on the status of the plan and
Historic Preservation, August 2007        9              Duarte General Plan 2005-2020
  CHAPTER 7
  HISTORIC PRESERVATION
  progress in implementing the plan. HCD checks to see if the city is making
  progress in meeting its fair share of regional housing needs.
  This section provides an implementation matrix for policies found in the Historic
  Preservation chapter. The matrix identifies the policy to be implemented, the
  implementation measure to be used for that policy, the responsible agency or
  department that will be implementing the measure, the funding source and the
  estimated timeframe to complete the implementation.
  Responsible Agency:
           All = All Departments                             AS = Administrative Services
           CD = Community Development                        PS = Public Safety
           CM = City Manager                                 P&R = Parks and Recreation
  Funding Source:
           GF = General Fund                                 SF= State funds
           RA = Redevelopment Agency                         FF = Federal Funds
           G = Grants                                        OF = Other Funds
           DF = Development Fees
  Implementation Timeframe (or as resources provide):
           ST = Short-term by 2009                           LT = Long Term by 2020
           MT = Mid-term by 2015                             On = Ongoing
                                               Table HP- 1
                      Historic Preservation Implementation Measures
                                                                Responsible      Funding      Time-
 Policy #               Implementation Measure(s)
                                                                   Agency        Source      Frame
              Develop informational brochures which
              describe the history and architectural styles
              within the City.
              Develop the City’s website to include
              information regarding the City’s history and
              methods available for the protection of local
              historic resources including links to other
HP 1.1.1                                                       CD              GF            On
              websites.
              Publish press releases/articles/notices in local
              media, including DCTV, to inform citizens of
              opportunities for participating in decision-
              making and opportunities to volunteer in
              developing a local inventory of historic
              resources.
  Historic Preservation, August 2007                10              Duarte General Plan 2005-2020

  CHAPTER 7
  HISTORIC PRESERVATION
                                                               Responsible     Funding      Time-
 Policy #               Implementation Measure(s)
                                                                 Agency        Source      Frame
              Work with the local Duarte Museum to
              increase public access to historic preservation
              related documents and local history collection
              at the Duarte Museum.
HP 1.1.2                                                      CD             G, SF         On
              Maintain correspondence and encourage
              outreach with local property owners whose
              properties have been identified as potentially
              historical.
              Pursue grants for developing the City’s
              historic resources inventory and research
              documentation (through the State Office of
              Historic Preservation).
              Encourage staff to research benefits and
HP 1.2.1                                                      CD             G, SF         On
              actions necessary to meet the requirements
              for becoming a Certified Local Government
              which provides greater opportunity to receive
              grants for research and preservation program
              development.
              Provide training for City staff on the National
              Park Service, Secretary of Interior’s
              Standards, preservation ordinances, the State
              Historical Building Code, and other
              preservation matters.
HP 1.3.1                                                      CD             GF, SF        On
              Develop a database and update maps which
              identify potentially historical resources and
              designated resources.
              Develop historic context statements, which
              describe the development and growth of the
              City.
              Establish a database which identifies
              resources for obtaining information on
              Duarte’s historic resources.
HP 2.1.1                                                      CD             GF, SF        On
              Inventory existing publications such as books,
              relating to Duarte’s history.
              Update/reprint existing publications related to
              the history of Duarte, such as the book, “On
              the Duarte”.
  Historic Preservation, August 2007                 11           Duarte General Plan 2005-2020

  CHAPTER 7
  HISTORIC PRESERVATION
                                                                   Responsible     Funding      Time-
 Policy #               Implementation Measure(s)
                                                                     Agency        Source      Frame
              Review and identify properties in the 2003 Cal
              Poly survey for historic significance.
              Prepare and adopt a comprehensive historic
              preservation ordinance that includes criteria
              for the designation and regulation of historic
              resources and provides incentives for historic
              preservation.
              Seek designation of resources under an
HP 3.1.1      adopted local preservation ordinance.               CD             GF, G         On
              Analyze all proposed additions or alterations
              to potentially historical properties prior to
              permit approval.
              Encourage adaptive reuse of structures,
              where appropriate.
              Prepare and implement an incentives and
              technical assistance program for the City.
              Seek grant opportunities for the development
              of a preservation incentives program in the
              City.
              Develop and promote a Mills Act Program
              which provides a tax reduction for property
              owners in return for maintenance and
              rehabilitation of the property.
HP 3.1.2                                                          CD             GF, SF        On
              Establish a process with the Building and
              Safety Department which makes use of the
              State Historical Building Code.
              Develop literature that provides property
              owners with technical assistance for
              maintaining      historical    properties     (i.e.
              maintenance of wood siding, repairing broken
              windows, etc.).
  Historic Preservation, August 2007                  12              Duarte General Plan 2005-2020
CHAPTER 8
ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
Table of Contents
INTRODUCTION
Economic Element Statutory Requirements                                      1
Relationship to other General Plan Elements and Program EIR                  1
GOALS, OBJECTIVES & POLICIES
Improve City’s current revenue stream                                        2
Enhance I - 210 Freeway corridor as city’s primary economic engine           2
Maintain healthy neighborhood businesses                                     3
Enhance Duarte’s employment base with good paying, high quality jobs         4
Create efficient Mixed Use Transit Oriented Development in and
around the Duarte Gold Line Station                                          5
Establish a City/Town Center on Huntington Drive and Buena Vista             5
RELATED AGENCIES, LAWS AND PLANS
Duarte Redevelopment Agency                                                  6
Business Improvement Districts (BIDS)                                        7
Community Development Block Grants (CDBG)                                    7
CDC (Bank CDC)                                                               7
Local Universities, Colleges, and Trade Schools                              7
Industrial Development Bonds (IDBs)                                          8
Minority Businesses Development Agency (MBDA)                                8
Small Business Administration (SBA)                                          8
Workforce Investment Act                                                     8
OVERVIEW OF DUARTE’S ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
RESOURCES AND CONSTRAINTS
Market Area                                                                  9
Job Market                                                                   9
Redevelopment Efforts                                                       10
City Revenues                                                               11
General Fund Expenditures                                                   12
IMPLEMENTATION MEASURES                                                     13
Economic Development Element            i             Duarte General Plan 2005-2020
Table of Contents

CHAPTER 8
ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
List of Figures
Figure Econ - 1      General Fund Revenues FY 2005-06                     12
Figure Econ - 2      General Fund Expenditures FY 2005-06                 13
List of Tables
Econ -1              Economic Development Implementation Tools            14
Economic Development Element          ii            Duarte General Plan 2005-2020
Table of Contents
CHAPTER 8
ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
INTRODUCTION
The aim of the Economic Development Element is to enhance the economic
character of the City and community. The Economic Development Element is a
non-mandatory element. It has been incorporated into the Duarte 2020
Comprehensive General Plan to assure the city is able to continue to provide
high quality services. In addition, this element helps assure the community
provides a balanced economy by taking advantage of its economic assets.
Economic Development Element Statutory Requirements
The Economic Development Element is not a mandatory element of the General
Plan. The Government Code provides for cities to adopt optional elements if
they so desire. An effective Economic Development Element will establish a
consistent set of policies that provide general direction to local government on
how the community can focus resources to retain local business, expand existing
businesses, attract new value added businesses, support the tax base, and
sustain the ability to provide public services for current and future residents.
Economic Development Elements can function beyond mere statements of
policy. An effective element may be used as the basis for a more specific
economic development strategy.
Relationship to other General Plan Elements and Program EIR
The Economic Development is most closely related to the Land Use Element,
Circulation Element and Housing Element. Providing properly placed and ample
land use designations for retail, office and industrial is important in maintaining a
viable economy. The movement of people and goods in an efficient manner, as
reflected in the Circulation Element, is vital to where businesses want to locate.
Duarte’s location is well served by the 605 and 210 freeways, expanding the
market area and bringing regional populations through the community. Housing
is becoming a bigger issue in attracting jobs and retail. The Housing Element is
vital in providing workforce housing and the number of people and disposable
income retailers seek.
A Program Environmental Impact Report (EIR) will be part of the 2005-2020
Duarte General Plan. Policies within the Economic Development Element will
also become mitigation measures within the Program EIR.
Economic Development Element, August 2007 1                 Duarte General Plan 2005-2020

CHAPTER 8
ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
GOALS, OBJECTIVES AND POLICIES
This section provides draft Goals, Objectives and Policies for the Economic
Development Element of the Duarte General Plan.
Fiscal Stability Goals, Objectives and Policies
Econ. Goal 1         Improve the City’s current revenue stream.
Objective 1.1        Enhance city revenues so as to maintain city services.
Policies
       Econ. 1.1.1 Develop economic development strategies which assess the
                     appropriate mix of tax revenues, fees, city and
                     Redevelopment Agency fiscal responsibility, and private
                     sector job retention, expansion and attraction programs.
       Econ. 1.1.2 The City should identify key industry clusters to retain and/or
                     attract.
       Econ. 1.1.3 Market the City of Duarte through publications, trade shows
                     and brochures aimed at key targeted industries.
       Econ. 1.1.4 Revise development fee schedule.
       Econ. 1.1.5 Identify current and prospective sources of revenue to
                     establish funding programs in anticipation of future capital
                     outlays. Identify steps necessary to maintain a balanced
                     budget to ensure that future obligations can be met by
                     adding to reserves. Evaluate services to identify cost cutting
                     measures and efficient delivery systems.
210 Freeway Corridor Goals, Objectives, Policies and Implementation
Measures
Econ. Goal 2         Enhance the I - 210 Freeway corridor as the city’s primary
economic engine.
Economic Development Element, August 2007 2             Duarte General Plan 2005-2020

CHAPTER 8
ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
Objective 2.1        Increase the economic potential provided by the regional
                     traffic flow on the I - 210 freeway through Duarte.
Policies
       Econ. 2.1.1 Continue to improve landscaping and the visual character of
                     the I - 210 freeway corridor.
       Econ. 2.1.2 Develop and maintain a database of all existing 210 corridor
                     businesses with contact information.
       Econ 2.1.3    Expand regional economic development along the I – 210
                     corridor beyond current uses. In order to maximize revenue
                     and enhance image, the Redevelopment Agency/City should
                     investigate other major draws typical of an international trade
                     center magnitude, hotel/convention complex, etc.
Commercial Centers Goals, Objectives, Policies and Implementation
Measures
Econ. Goal 3         Maintain healthy businesses in commercial areas.
Objective 3.1        Promote an optimum mix of commercial uses in existing
                     neighborhood and general commercial areas to meet both
                     the shopping needs of residents and fiscal needs of the City.
Policies:
       Econ. 3.1.1 Develop creative marketing approaches with location criteria
                     to attract retailers not already existing in Duarte and to assist
                     existing retailers.
       Econ 3.1.2    Permitted uses along Huntington Drive should accurately
                     reflect economic market conditions and incompatible uses
                     and activities should be eliminated.
       Econ 3.1.3    Work to expand existing motels.
Economic Development Element, August 2007 3                Duarte General Plan 2005-2020

CHAPTER 8
ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
Employment Base Goals, Objectives, Policies and Implementation
Measures
Econ. Goal 4         Enhance Duarte’s employment base with good paying, high
quality jobs.
Objective 4.1        Retain, expand and attract value added jobs.
Policies
       Econ. 4.1.1 Collaborate with City of Hope to explore their workforce
                     related needs.
       Econ. 4.1.2 Develop and maintain a database of all existing industrial
                     businesses with contact information.
       Econ 4.1.3    Develop and maintain relationships with commercial, office
                     and industrial brokers to keep up to date with vacancy rates,
                     upcoming lease expirations, move-ins and move-outs.
       Econ. 4.1.4 Continue to partner with Duarte Unified School District to
                     prepare (K-12) for college and/or local workforce.
       Econ. 4.1.5 Collaborate with Citrus and other colleges, California State
                     University Los Angeles, California Polytechnic University,
                     Chamber of Commerce and other higher education providers
                     to encourage educational, and job reentry training
                     opportunities for Duarte residents.
       Econ. 4.1.6 Perform a jobs/housing balance study and set goals to
                     achieve and maintain a jobs/housing balance.
       Econ. 4.1.7 Collaborate with local employers on Succession Planning
                     and Workforce Development Efforts.
       Econ. 4.1.8 Establish a business appreciation breakfast or lunch for top
                     job and sales tax generators.
       Econ. 4.1.9 Help nurture business incubators.
Economic Development Element, August 2007 4              Duarte General Plan 2005-2020

CHAPTER 8
ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
Gold Line Station Area Goals, Objectives, Policies and Implementation
Measures
Econ. Goal 5          Create efficient Mixed Use Transit Oriented Development in
and around the Duarte Gold Line Station.
Objective 5.1         Reduce vehicle miles traveled, provide transportation
options for existing and future workforce and residents around the Gold Line
station, provide location efficiency, expanded mobility, and provide public/private
financial return and value recaptured.
Policies
       Econ. 5.1.1 Create a flexible mixed use Transit Oriented Development
                      Specific Plan for the non-residential area north of the Gold
                      Line Station.
       Econ. 5.1.2 Work with current employers to develop a Gold Line rider-
                      ship program to be implemented once the Gold Line opens
                      to Duarte.
Establish a City/Town Center on Huntington Drive and Buena Vista
Econ. Goal 6          Create a viable and sustainable mixed use area on Duarte’s
major thoroughfare.
Objective 6.1         Provide a city center along a portion of the Huntington Drive
                      and Buena Vista axis.
       Econ.6.1.1     Develop a flexible specific and strategic plan for the
                      commercial area along the Huntington Drive and Buena
                      Vista axis capturing traffic off the I - 210 freeway.
       Econ. 6.1.2 Assess the cost/benefits of providing City and/or
                      Redevelopment Agency public improvements and
                      assistance within a City Center area.
Economic Development Element, August 2007 5                  Duarte General Plan 2005-2020

CHAPTER 8
ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
RELATED AGENCIES, LAWS AND PLANS
Duarte Redevelopment Agency
The Duarte City Council also acts as the Board of Directors for the Duarte
Redevelopment Agency. The Redevelopment Agency is a separate legal entity
with its own budget.
The Redevelopment Agency budget is highly restricted to activities mandated by
California Redevelopment Law. Implementation of the redevelopment plan is
funded through the use of tax increment financing. When a redevelopment
project area is established, a base value of all properties within the project area
is established. When property within the project area is improved, sold or resold,
property tax revenue is generated from the incremental valuation. Base year
property taxes are distributed to other local taxing agencies and increases over
the base value are distributed to the redevelopment agency to help finance
redevelopment project cost.
California Redevelopment Law was enacted in 1948 to provide a means for cities
and counties to address physical and economic blight. The law provides that a
redevelopment agency may establish designated areas within the community
wherein the agency may assist private enterprise with property redevelopment
and rehabilitation. The law also allows the redevelopment agency to pay for
public improvements, specifically the value of land for and the cost of installation
and construction of improvements. In order to make improvements eligible under
the law, the Agency must make findings that (1) the improvements are of benefit
to the project area, (2) no other reasonable means of financing the improvements
are available, (3) the improvement will assist in the elimination of one or more
blighting conditions inside the project area or provide affordable housing, (4) and
the improvement is consistent with the Implementation Plan. The law also
requires the redevelopment agency to increase and improve the supply of
affordable housing to very low, low, and moderate income households.
Duarte’s redevelopment efforts have eliminated many blighted areas, provided
major sales tax generators for the community, resulted in workforce housing,
street improvements, parks and recreation facilities, and more. Sales tax dollars
can be used to provide city services.
A Redevelopment Plan is an implementation tool to a city’s General Plan and
must be consistent with that plan. Duarte’s Redevelopment Plan is consistent
with the General Plan and as will be seen in following sections has been the
most significant economic tool for the community.
Economic Development Element, August 2007 6               Duarte General Plan 2005-2020

CHAPTER 8
ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
Business Improvement Districts (BIDS)
BIDS are egally defined entities formed by property and business owners, where
an assessment or a tax is levied for capital or operating improvements, as a
means of supplementing city funding. The district is created by the public law or
ordinance but is administered by an entity responsible to the district’s members
or to the local governing body. Recent BID programs include economic and
social development, transportation, parking management, and conversion of
redeveloped commercial buildings for residential use.
Community Development Block Grants (CDBG)
CDBG is a federally funded system of unified block grants under which
communities are entitled to receive funding while other communities may apply
for discretionary funding. Its purpose is to encourage more broadly conceived
community development projects and expand housing opportunities for low- and
moderate-income persons. The three primary goals of CDBG are to serve low-
and moderate-income people, to eliminate slums and blight, and to address other
community development needs that pose a serious and immediate threat to the
health and welfare of the community. This program has provided significant
support for economic development projects.
CDC (Bank CDC)
CDCs are bank-sponsored community development corporations that are a way
for banks to contribute to economic revitalization by investing in local businesses
and real estate investment projects that benefit low- and moderate-income
groups. A community can establish a bank CDC by working with one or more
local banks, the Federal Reserve, the Comptroller, and its respective state
financial institutions’ regulators. In the case of consortium bank CDCs, where
several banks join together, the investors do not have to be just local banks.
Bank CDCs can purchase, construct, or rehabilitate property.
Local Universities, Colleges, and Trade Schools
Many universities, colleges and trade schools work with public entities and
organizations to provide workforce training. Often times if there is a significant
need in specific industries for certain skill-sets, curriculum can be established to
meet these skill-sets.
Economic Development Element, August 2007 7                 Duarte General Plan 2005-2020

CHAPTER 8
ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
Industrial Development Bonds (IDBs)
IDBs are used to finance acquisition, construction, expansion, or renovation of
manufacturing facilities and the purchase of machinery and equipment
depending upon state law. IDB financing is subject to state and local laws and
federal income tax laws and regulations if the interest on the bonds is expected
to be exempt from federal income taxation.
Minority Businesses Development Agency (MBDA)
As an agency of the U.S. Department of Commerce, MBDA was established in
1969. The MBDA provides assistance to socially or economically-disadvantaged
individuals who own or want to start a business. MBDA provides funding for
Minority Business Development Centers, Native American Business
Development Centers, Business Resource Centers, and Minority Business
Opportunity Committees.
Small Business Administration (SBA)
SBA was founded in 1953, SBA’s mission is to “aid, counsel, assist and protect,
insofar as is possible, the interests of small business concerns.” Its charter also
mandates that the SBA ensure small businesses a “fair proportion” of
government contracts and sales of surplus property. Since its inception, the SBA
has delivered more than 13 million loans, loan guarantees, contracts, and other
forms of assistance to small businesses.
Workforce Investment Act (WIA)
The Workforce Investment Act of 1998 is the federal government’s effort to adapt
workforce training system to current economic conditions. The economic
development impact of WIA includes: (1) decentralizing decision-making to the
local level; (2) allows local businesses to determine skill needs; (3) adapt training
to local growth patterns; (4) promotes inclusion of economic development
principles in plans; and (5) state requirements to submit economic development
plans with WIA implementation plan.
Economic Development Element, August 2007 8              Duarte General Plan 2005-2020

CHAPTER 8
ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
OVERVIEW OF DUARTE’S ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
RESOURCES AND CONSTRAINTS
Market Area
Duarte’s proximity to the San Gabriel Mountains, Santa Fe Dam, spread basins
and quarries in Irwindale create major challenges to the traditional market radius
retailers prefer. Instead of having the traditional 360 degree market radius,
because of the before mentioned constraints, Duarte has more of a 120 degree
market radius. This limits population areas preferred by retailers. On the other
hand, Duarte’s proximity to the 210 and 605 Freeways expands its market area
because drive time is reduced by these regional freeways. The 210 freeway
carries 250,000 ADT (average daily trips) through Duarte, as opposed to
Huntington Drive at Buena Vista which carries 23,810 ADT (counts taken in the
fall of 2005). The 605 Freeway feeds the 210 freeway from the south. Retailers
have and can continue to capitalize on the 210 freeway trips. Evidence of these
vehicle trips being important to retailers is the fact that Duarte’s four auto dealers,
Wal-Mart, Target, and Staples have direct visibility and access to the 210
freeway. These seven businesses generated 53% of the city’s total sales tax in
2005. Huntington Drive with only 23,310 ADT (fall 2005) has difficulty attracting
national retailers.
Duarte’s competitors within a five mile market area are Monrovia, Arcadia and,
Azusa. Pasadena, El Monte and West Covina are within a ten mile radius.
One way for low population cities to gain market share is to attract good paying
jobs into the community. This provides a daytime population local retailers can
capture.
Job Market
The City of Hope, one of the major employers in this part of San Gabriel Valley
includes 23 buildings dedicated to research and 13 to clinical research and
treatment. These buildings are located on 112 acres of landscaped property with
fountains and gardens within the City of Duarte. The facility has more than 300
physicians and scientists and more than 2,500 employees. The annual payroll
for the City of Hope Duarte facility is $160 million. This is an average salary of
$64,000 per employee. The Duarte median income from the 2000 census was
$50,744 in 1999 dollars. The latest effort to expand the City of Hope was the
state-of-the-art, 144-bed Helford Clinical Research Hospital which opened in
2005. More than 5,200 bone marrow transplants have been conducted at the
hospital. In 2003, the City of Hope was recognized as one of America’s best
Economic Development Element, August 2007 9                 Duarte General Plan 2005-2020

CHAPTER 8
ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
hospitals by U.S. News and World Report. In addition to its treatment facilities, at
least $2.5 million is invested each week in research at the City of Hope.
The City of Hope is proposing to build a 360,000 square foot Science Park on its
existing campus. The Park would house a research environment for
biotechnology, bioengineering and biodefense companies. It will be dedicated to
promoting the growth of research discoveries into commercial projects and
leveraging the City of Hope’s strengths in bioscience research, clinical trials and
biological manufacturing.
The Los Angeles Economic Development Corporation lists Biotechnology
(Biomedical and Health Services) as one of fifteen industry clusters in Los
Angeles County. The City of Duarte could expand its biotechnology industry
and/or attempt to attract one or more of the industry clusters already existing in
L.A. County.
The Duarte Unified School District employs 424 people. It has a yearly payroll of
about $19,671,000 (most teachers are 9 month employees). Santa Teresita
Medical Center, currently employs 250 people. While the medical center does
not employ physicians, Santa Teresita has a 133 bed skilled nursing facility, a 44
bed assisted living unit, 20 independent living units for very low income persons
and an urgent care center. Smith Engineering, located in the city’s industrial
area, is reported to employ 225 people.
Employment areas in Duarte are in three distinctive geographic areas. The
highest concentration of jobs is located at the City of Hope and adjacent
industrial area between Duarte Road and the 210 Freeway, generally east of
Highland. The most westerly portion of the 210 Freeway corridor, generally west
of Buena Vista, include most of the freeway oriented commercial retail jobs. The
neighborhood and general commercial retail center jobs tend to be located along
the Huntington Drive axis. Huntington Drive also includes most of the office jobs
in Duarte.
Redevelopment Efforts
Duarte’s redevelopment efforts have eliminated some blighted areas, provided
major sales tax generators for the community, resulted in workforce housing,
street improvements, parks and recreation facilities, and more.
CarMax, Advantage Ford, Performance Nissan, Assael Mitsubishi created over
400 new jobs and generate between $1.8 million to $2 million, per year, in sales
tax to the City of Duarte. Wal-Mart, another major sales tax generator brought
Economic Development Element, August 2007 10              Duarte General Plan 2005-2020

CHAPTER 8
ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
regional shoppers to Duarte. Sales tax dollars can be used to provide city
services.
Redevelopment Agency efforts began removing blighted residential units in
Duarte during the 1970’s. This resulted in the construction of approximately
1700 new dwelling units, during the 1990s, which provide quality housing for low
and moderate income households assisted by the Duarte Redevelopment
Agency. The resulting construction was chiefly responsible for raising the City’s
median income from below County averages to above the County average.
The Duarte Redevelopment Agency assisted in creating various neighborhood
shopping centers, a 25,000 sq. ft. R&D building on Huntington Drive, conversion
of the old Duarte High School Building, built in 1907, into the Old Spaghetti
Factory Restaurant, new facilities for Duarte Unified School District, including
administration offices, maintenance facility, a 500-seat auditorium for joint use by
the City and the District, a new middle school, and various street improvements.
City Revenues
Duarte is a contract city. Police services are provided by the Los Angeles
County Sheriffs Department. Fire protection is provided by the Los Angeles
County Fire Department.
Cities are like businesses. They require revenues in order to provide services to
the community. City budgets are usually adopted once a year, though many
cities have multi-year budgets which are reviewed at least one a year. The City
of Duarte adopts its budget every fiscal year beginning July 1 and like many
cities includes a mid-year revenue and expenditure projections review. Total
revenues and other resources received by the City of Duarte and the Duarte
Redevelopment Agency during fiscal year 2005-06 are estimated to be
$21,063,000.
City General Fund revenues, which are discretionary, totaled $10,518,000 for FY
2005-06. Sources of revenues are delineated in the pie chart that follows (Figure
Econ – 1). Approximately 73% of the taxes shown on that chart are from sales
taxes. As in prior years, because of the State’s revenue/expenditure gaps, the
State government continues to divert funds which would otherwise go to the
cities.
Not shown on this pie chart are Special Revenue funds which total $3,791,800.
These revenues are not discretionary and must therefore be spent on specific
activities. This will be discussed in more detail in the following section.
Economic Development Element, August 2007 11               Duarte General Plan 2005-2020

CHAPTER 8
ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
                                              Figure Econ -1
                  General Fund Operating Budget Fiscal Year 2005-06
                    Total Revenue $10,518,000 Comparison by Source
                                 Reimbursements
                                        8%
                            Miscellaneous
                                 1%
                Intergovernmental
                       15%
              Transfers In
                   3%
       Fines & Forfeitures                                         Taxes
               2%                                                   59%
           Service Charges
                   5%
                 Use of Money &
                     Property
                       2%
                  Licenses & Permits
                           4%
General Fund Expenditures
In total General Fund expenditures and other uses for fiscal year 2005-06 are
budgeted to be $10,518,000. These General Fund Expenditures are delineated
in the following pie chart (Figure Econ -2). As with most cities, the biggest single
portion of expenditures is in public safety.
While General Fund expenditures are discretionary, Special Revenue funds,
which totaled $3,791,800 are restricted to those activities related to the revenue
source. As an example, the City receives Community Development Block Grant
Funds (CDBG) which can only be spent for certain projects to assist low and
moderate income persons. The State Gasoline Tax and Proposition A
Transportation Funds must be spent on streets and transportation. Lighting &
Landscape District Assessment funds are restricted for those uses.
Economic Development Element, August 2007 12                 Duarte General Plan 2005-2020
CHAPTER 8
ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
                                          Figure Econ -2
              General Fund Operating Budget Fiscal Year 2005-06
          Total Expenditures $10,518,000 Comparison By Department
                                                     Promotions &
                                           Transfers Memberships
                                              4%         5%
                         Adm. Services
                              15%
                  Legal Services
                        1%                                                Public Safety
                                                                               37%
            Parks & Recreation
                   16%
                             City Council                         City Manager/City Clerk
                                  1%                                       7%
                                             Community
                                            Development
                                                14%
IMPLEMENTATION MEASURES
Government Code 65400 requires the legislative body to consider and adopt
reasonable and practical means for implementing the general plan. This is
necessary so that the plan will serve as an effective guide for orderly growth and
development, preservation and conservation of open-space land and natural
resources, and the efficient expenditure of public funds relating to the subjects
addressed in the general plan. The State also requires an annual report to the
legislative body, State Department of Housing and Community Development
(HCD) and State Office of Planning and Research on the status of the plan and
progress in implementing the plan. HCD checks to see if the city is making
progress in meeting its fair share of regional housing needs.
This section provides an implementation matrix for policies found in the
Economic Development chapter. The matrix identifies the policy to be
implemented, the implementation measure to be used for that policy, the
Economic Development Element, August 2007 13                           Duarte General Plan 2005-2020
  CHAPTER 8
  ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
  responsible agency or department that will be implementing the measure, the
  funding source and the estimated timeframe to complete the implementation.
  Responsible Agency:
           All = All Departments                             AS = Administrative Services
           CD = Community Development                        PS = Public Safety
           CM = City Manager                                 P&R = Parks and Recreation
  Funding Source:
           GF = General Fund                                 SF= State funds
           RA = Redevelopment Agency                         FF = Federal Funds
            G = Grants                                       OF = Other Funds
           DF = Development Fees
  Implementation Timeframe (or as resources provide):
           ST = Short-term by 2009                           LT = Long Term by 2020
           MT = Mid-term by 2015                             On = Ongoing
                                            Table ECON - 1
                    Economic Development Implementation Measures
                                                                Responsible     Funding       Time
 Policy #               Implementation Measure                    Agency         Source      frame
Econ 1.1.1    Within two years, develop a Fiscal Strategic     CM, AS, CD      GF, RA        ST
              Plan.
Econ 1.1.2    Inventory existing businesses to identify which  CM, AS, CD      GF            ST
              industry clusters already exist and perform an
              industry cluster analysis for those in the
              region.
Econ 1.1.3    Team with adjoining cities and businesses to     CM, CD          GF, RA        On
              promote the community and sub-region.
Econ 1.1.4    Every five years review development fee          AS, CD          GF            On
              schedule and amend to reflect State unfunded
              mandates, operating cost and new
              technologies.
Econ 1.1.5    During yearly budget preparation review          AS              GF            On
              existing and potential revenue sources and
              expenditures.
Econ 2.1.1    Devise a systematic program to monitor and       CD              GF, RA        ST
              maintain the visual character of the corridor.
Econ 2.1.2    Once every two years contact these               CD              GF, RA        On
              businesses to keep them in touch with
              business opportunities and to provide a city
              liaison for future needs or concerns.
Econ 2.1.3    Keep abreast of current economic                 CM              RA, GF        On
              development opportunities and pursue those
              which will implement this policy.
  Economic Development Element, August 2007 14                      Duarte General Plan 2005-2020
  CHAPTER 8
  ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
Econ 3.1.1  Work with individual business owners to           CD              GF, RA        ST
Econ 3.1.3  improve their appearance, provide better
            parking, access, marketing and expansion.
Econ 3.1.2 Conduct an annual review of activity on            CD              GF            On
            Huntington Drive to determine applicability of
            General Plan policies. Utilize the
            Redevelopment Agency’s authority to acquire
            incompatible activities.
Econ 4.1.1  Develop a workforce plan with the City of         CM, CD          GF            ST
            Hope which will be shared with local colleges,
            universities, DUSD and other workforce
            providers with the aim to help meet current
            and future City of Hope workforce needs.
Econ 4.1.2  Once every other year contact industrial          CM, CD          GF, RA        On
            businesses to keep them in touch with
            business opportunities, financing options, and
            to provide a city liaison for future needs or
            concerns.
Econ 4.1.3  Once every year contact brokers to keep on        CD              GF, RA        On
            top of vacancy rates, lease expirations, move
            ins and move outs. Post vacant property and
            building opportunities on the City’s web site.
            Periodically review typical tax revenues
            generated by Duarte business by types to
            determine the kinds of businesses that are
            advantageous for Duarte to attract and/or
            grow. Review the permitted and conditionally
            permitted uses in the various zoning districts
            with respect to commercial vitality.
Econ 4.1.4  Review DUSD curriculum with local workforce       CD, P&R         GF            On
            needs to prepare Duarte youth and residents
            for ultimate local jobs if desired. Work with
            DUSD on Career Day to help sell local
            businesses.
Econ 4.1.5  Work to establish educational opportunities       CM, CD          GF            On
            available at these institutions, especially those
            that are consistent with local employers
            workforce needs, and post regularly on City
            web site and other local media or publications.
Econ 4.1.6  Establish number of jobs in Duarte, exported      CD              GF, RA        MT
            and imported workforce, and set goals for a
            balance. Aggressively pursue grants from
            state and federal sources.
Econ 4.1.7  Work to retain the skills of retiring Baby        AS              GF            ST
            Boomers through mentoring programs, rehire
            programs, flexible work hours, job sharing,
            telecommuting, etc.
Econ 4.1.8  Twice a year honor top sales tax and top job      CD              GF            On
            generators.
  Economic Development Element, August 2007 15                     Duarte General Plan 2005-2020

  CHAPTER 8
  ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
Econ. 4.1.9 Work to create good paying jobs and or         CM, CD         RA, GF, G     ST
            revenue producing businesses incubators.
Econ 5.1.1  Work with existing property owners to develop  CD             G, RA, GF     MT
            a Specific and Strategic Plan for the area
            immediately after the General Plan is
            adopted.
Econ 5.1.2  Once Gold Line is operative meet with          CD             G, RA, GF     MT
            employers within a half mile radius to develop
            rider-ship program.
Econ 6.1.1  Provide for vertical and horizontal mixed use  CD             GF, RA        ST
            with unique parking and design standards.
            Encourage land use intensification of the
            proposed City Center area for mixed-use
            development with an emphasis on retail
            development on the ground floor. Work to
            improve parking issues relative to overall
            numbers and proximity to businesses.
Econ 6.1.2  Continue to perform studies relative to land,  CM             GF, RA        ST
            relocation, demolition, remediation and
            construction cost. Identify potential
            businesses to locate in the City Center area.
  Economic Development Element, August 2007 16                 Duarte General Plan 2005-2020
CHAPTER 9
CIRCULATION
Table of Contents
INTRODUCTION
Circulation Element Statutory Requirements                                1
Relationship to other General Plan Elements and Program EIR               1
GOALS, OBJECTIVES & POLICIES
Circulation Goals, Objectives and Policies                                2
RELATED AGENCIES, LAWS AND PLANS
California Department of Transportation (Caltrans)                        4
Los Angeles County Metropolitan Transportation Authority (MTA)            4
Southern California Association of Governments (SCAG)                     4
Los Angeles County Congestion Management Program (CMP)                    5
Long Range Transportation Plan (LRTP)                                     5
Regional Transportation Plan (RTP)                                        5
Regional Mobility Plan (RMP)                                              5
Highway Performance Monitoring System (HPMS)                              6
Foothill Transit                                                          6
Access Services                                                           6
TRANSPORTATION/CIRCULATION ANALYSIS
Existing Circulation System                                               7
         Principal Arterial Interstate                                    7
         Other Principal Arterial                                         8
         Minor Arterial                                                   8
         Collector                                                       10
         Local                                                           10
         Bicycle Trails                                                  10
         Duarte’s Transit System                                         12
Existing Traffic Conditions                                              15
Projected Future Traffic Conditions                                      17
         Ambient Traffic Growth                                          18
         Short-Range Traffic Generation                                  18
         Long-Range Traffic Generation                                   19
         Future Traffic Forecasts                                        21
Recommended Circulation Plan                                             23
Circulation Element                      i          Duarte General Plan 2005-2020
Table of Contents

CHAPTER 9
CIRCULATION
IMPLEMENTATION MEASURES                            27
List of Tables
Table CIRC – 1                                     16
Table CIRC – 2                                     17
Table CIRC – 3                                     19
Table CIRC – 4                                     21
Table CIRC – 5                                     22
Table CIRC – 6                                     27
List of Diagrams and Figures
Diagram CIRC - 1                                    9
Diagram CIRC - 2                                   11
Diagram CIRC - 3                                   14
Diagram CIRC - 4                                   25
Figure CIRC - 1                                    26
Circulation Element        ii Duarte General Plan 2005-2020
Table of Contents

CHAPTER 9
CIRCULATION
INTRODUCTION
The Circulation Element establishes a program that is intended to provide a
balanced transportation/circulation system that will support the anticipated growth
in local and regional land uses. The City of Duarte is committed to providing a
safe and efficient circulation system that improves the flow of traffic while
enhancing pedestrian and vehicular safety, promoting commerce, and providing
for alternative modes of transportation. The Circulation Element outlines the
goals, objectives, and policies for meeting Duarte’s existing and future
transportation needs and describes the future circulation system needed to
support the Land Use Element.
The methodology for developing the Circulation Element was to assess existing
conditions, forecast future conditions based on regional growth and anticipated
changes in land use densities and intensities in Duarte, then identify the
transportation infrastructure needed to serve the projected demands. The
Circulation Element establishes a hierarchy of roadways with specific geometric
standards for each roadway category. The recommended roadway system is
based on traffic volume forecasts and projected volume/capacity ratios for the
General Plan buildout year of 2020. While the primary focus of the Circulation
Element is the Duarte street and roadway network, alternative modes of travel
such as bus transit, rail transit, bicycles, and pedestrians are also addressed and
become more significant as congestion continues to mount in the Los Angeles
basin.
Circulation Element Statutory Requirements
California law requires a general plan to contain a Circulation Element that shall
meet specific minimum standards. More specifically, Government Code Section
65302(b) states that the general plan shall include “a circulation element
consisting of the general location and extent of existing and proposed major
thoroughfares, transportation routes, terminals, and other local public utilities and
facilities, all correlated with the land use element of the plan.”
Relationship to other General Plan Elements and Program EIR
California law requires that all elements of the General Plan be consistent. While
each of the General Plan elements could be characterized as independent
documents, they are also interrelated in the common goal of providing a long-
range integrated plan for the ongoing development of the city. The Circulation
Circulation Element, August 2007            1              Duarte General Plan 2005-2020

CHAPTER 9
CIRCULATION
Element is most directly related to the Land Use, Noise, and Air Quality section
of the Open Space and Conservation Elements.
A Program Environmental Impact Report (EIR) will be prepared in conjunction
with the Duarte General Plan. Mitigation measures presented in the Circulation
Element will also be presented as mitigation measures in the Program EIR.
GOALS, OBJECTIVES AND POLICIES
This section presents the goals, objectives, and policies for the Circulation
Element of the Duarte General Plan.
Circulation Goal 1:            To provide a sustainable, convenient, efficient, and
cost effective circulation system to serve the present and future transportation
needs of the Duarte community.
Objective 1.1:          Maintain the existing transportation infrastructure in Duarte
                        and upgrade the system when appropriate to improve traffic
                        conditions through enhanced traffic control measures,
                        roadway improvements, and effective planning for new
                        development.
Policies
         Circ 1.1.1     Develop, implement, and refine local east/west traffic flow
                        elements to allow traffic to move through and within Duarte
                        in an expeditious manner including improving the Huntington
                        Drive bridge over the San Gabriel River.
         Circ 1.1.2     Implement the roadway plan provided in the Circulation
                        Element to meet the transportation needs of the citizens.
         Circ 1.1.3     Widen substandard streets and alleys to meet the city
                        standards where feasible.
         Circ 1.1.4     Evaluate the traffic impacts of new development and require
                        developers to employ appropriate mitigation measures to
                        reduce traffic or improve roadway and traffic conditions.
         Circ 1.1.5     Evaluate the traffic impacts from development projects in
                        adjacent cities and work cooperatively with these cities to
                        develop mitigation measures that will improve traffic
                        conditions in Duarte.
Circulation Element, August 2007             2             Duarte General Plan 2005-2020
CHAPTER 9
CIRCULATION
         Circ 1.1.6     Pursue and provide adequate right-of-way to accommodate
                        future circulation system improvements.
Circulation Goal 2:              To protect local residential neighborhoods from the
impacts of through traffic and trucks.
Objective 2.1:          Minimize the intrusion of through traffic, commuter traffic,
                        and/or trucks on local streets in residential neighborhoods.
Policies
         Circ 2.1.1     Discourage through traffic on local streets that are located in
                        residential neighborhoods.
         Circ 2.1.2     Restrict heavy duty truck traffic to arterial roadways.
         Circ 2.1.3     Continue the practice of responding to resident complaints
                        and requests regarding residential street traffic problems.
         Circ 2.1.4     Discourage non-resident motorists from traveling through
                        residential neighborhoods.
         Circ 2.1.5     Appropriate mitigation measures should be implemented to
                        ensure that the adverse impacts from trucks and employee
                        traffic can be reduced.
Circulation Goal 3:              To increase the use of alternative modes of
transportation for traveling to, from, or through Duarte.
Objective 3.1:          Encourage and promote the use of travel modes other than
                        the single occupancy vehicle, such as bus transit, rail transit,
                        carpools, vanpools, bicycling, and walking.
Policies
         Circ 3.1.1     Continue to promote the development of the MTA Gold Line
                        and a Duarte station.
         Circ 3.1.2     Coordinate Duarte Transit System with MTA, Foothill Transit
                        and to service major destinations within Duarte including City
                        of Hope, Duarte Gold Line Station and proposed City Center
                        area.
Circulation Element, August 2007             3               Duarte General Plan 2005-2020
CHAPTER 9
CIRCULATION
         Circ 3.1.3     Promote the linking of local public transit routes with that of
                        adjacent jurisdictions and other transit agencies.
         Circ 3.1.4     Ensure that new developments incorporate both local and
                        regional transit measures into the project design that
                        promote the use of alternate modes of transportation.
         Circ 3.1.5     Provide incentives for appropriate pedestrian and bicycle
                        facilities throughout Duarte, particularly for bike lanes to the
                        Gold Line Station.
RELATED AGENCIES, LAWS AND PLANS
California Department of Transportation (Caltrans)
Caltrans is the state agency that has jurisdiction over the Foothill Freeway
(Interstate 210) and the San Gabriel River Freeway (Interstate 605). The I-210
Freeway runs through Duarte in an east-west direction and has on/off ramps that
link the freeway to Mountain Avenue, Buena Vista Street, and Mount Olive Drive.
The I-605 Freeway runs north-south and has an interchange with the I-210
Freeway near the southeast corner of Duarte. The I-605/I-210 interchange
includes ramps to the north that link with Mount Olive Drive and provide a direct
connection to Huntington Drive. Caltrans has jurisdiction over the freeways, the
freeway on/off ramps, and the intersections where the ramps meet with the
Duarte street system.
Los Angeles County Metropolitan Transportation Authority (MTA)
The Los Angeles County Metropolitan Transportation Authority (MTA) is the
agency that operates the MTA bus transit lines and the Metrorail facilities,
including the proposed Gold Line through Duarte. MTA also administers the Los
Angeles County Congestion Management Program (CMP) and prepares the
Long Range Transportation Plan (LRTP).
Southern California Association of Governments (SCAG)
The Southern California Association of Governments (SCAG) is an agency that is
responsible for transportation planning in Los Angeles County at the regional
level. It is the designated Metropolitan Planning Organization (MPO) for a six-
county region, which includes Los Angeles, Orange, Riverside, San Bernardino,
Ventura, and Imperial Counties. SCAG is responsible for preparing a Regional
Transportation Plan (RTP)
Circulation Element, August 2007             4              Duarte General Plan 2005-2020
CHAPTER 9
CIRCULATION
Los Angeles County Congestion Management Program (CMP)
The Los Angeles County Congestion Management Program (CMP) is mandated
by State of California law. This law is administered locally by MTA and requires
that the traffic generated by individual development projects be analyzed for
potential impacts to the regional roadway system. It also requires that local
jurisdictions (cities and counties) maintain CMP conformance by monitoring
development activity, reporting the results annually to MTA, and adopting a CMP
transportation demand management ordinance. The only two CMP highways in
or near Duarte are the I-210 and I-605 Freeways. There are no CMP arterial
roadways in Duarte.
Long Range Transportation Plan (LRTP)
The Long Range Transportation Plan (LRTP), which is prepared by MTA, is the
blueprint for implementing future transportation improvements in Los Angeles
County. It is a program of recommended transportation projects that assists
decision-makers in understanding the options that are available for improving the
transportation system. The LRTP recommends a balanced transportation
program with a strong emphasis on public transit to meet the region’s growing
travel demands.
Regional Transportation Plan (RTP)
Under federal law, SCAG must prepare a Regional Transportation Plan (RTP),
which demonstrates how the region will meet federal mandates, particularly air
quality requirements. The RTP must be approved by federal agencies in order to
receive federal transportation funds. Only projects and programs included in the
RTP are eligible for federal funding.
Regional Mobility Plan (RMP)
The Regional Mobility Plan (RMP) is part of an overall regional planning process
that is linked directly to SCAG’s Growth Management Plan, the Housing
Allocation Process, and the South Coast Air Quality Management District’s Air
Quality Management Plan. The RMP consists of four elements: Growth
Management, Transportation Demand Management, Transportation System
Management, and Facilities Development. The active participation of local
governments in transportation conformity is important to ensure that there is
consistency between local general plans and the conformity criteria described in
the regional Air Quality Management Plan (AQMP). The primary goal of the
RMP is to improve transportation mobility levels.
Circulation Element, August 2007         5              Duarte General Plan 2005-2020

CHAPTER 9
CIRCULATION
Highway Performance Monitoring System (HPMS)
The Highway Performance Monitoring System (HPMS) is a federally mandated
inventory system and planning tool designed to assess the nation’s highway
system. HPMS is used as a management tool by state and federal governments
and local agencies to analyze the system’s condition and performance. The
HPMS data are used for allocation of federal funds, identification of travel trends
and future forecasts, Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) air quality
conformity tracking, and biennial reports to the U.S. Congress on the state of the
nation’s highways. The HPMS is administered by Caltrans, with technical data
provided by local agencies.
Foothill Transit
Foothill Transit, created in 1988, is one of the largest and most successful transit
competitive contracting efforts ever undertaken in the United States. Providing
bus service to the San Gabriel and Pomona Valleys, the agency contracts out all
services - from administration to bus driving and maintenance. Foothill Transit is
governed by a five-person Executive Board.
Four members are elected by the general zone membership, and the fifth
member is appointed by the Los Angeles County Board of Supervisors. General
membership includes one city council member from each of 21 cities in the
Foothill Transit Zone and three appointed representatives from the County of Los
Angeles. Foothill Transit interfaces with Duarte Transit.
Access Services
Access Services is a state mandated local governmental agency created by Los
Angeles County's public transit agencies to administer and manage the delivery
of regional American with Disabilities Act (ADA) paratransit service. Access
Services was established by forty-four public fixed route transit operators in Los
Angeles County. It is governed by a nine member board appointed by the Los
Angeles County municipal fixed route operators, the Los Angeles County local
fixed route operators, the City of Los Angeles, the County of Los Angeles, the
Transportation Corridor Representatives of the Los Angeles branch of the
League of Cities, the Los Angeles County Commission on Disabilities, and the
Coalition of Independent Living Centers. Access Services promotes access to all
modes of transportation and provides quality ADA paratransit service on behalf of
public transit agencies in Los Angeles County, including those serving Duarte.
Circulation Element, August 2007          6               Duarte General Plan 2005-2020

CHAPTER 9
CIRCULATION
Access’s primary mission is to provide ADA mandated paratransit services for
people with disabilities who are unable to use public fixed route transportation
systems and to coordinate various paratransit operators within Los Angeles
County to provide efficient and cost effective paratransit services. Access’s
funding sources are the local Proposition C Discretionary sales tax, Federal
Transit Administration Section 16 and 5310 grants, passenger fares and other
associated sources.
TRANSPORTATION/CIRCULATION ANALYSIS
The following sections describe the existing roadway system and traffic
conditions, present the projected traffic conditions for the future buildout year of
2020, and outline the recommended circulation element master plan.
Existing Circulation System
Duarte is served by the network of roadways shown on Diagram CIRC – 1, which
is the circulation system from the current General Plan (City of Duarte, June
1989). The existing roadway network is essentially a grid system of north/south
and east/west roads. According to the 1989 General Plan, the roadways are
classified into four circulation system categories: 1) freeway, 2) arterial roadway,
3) collector street, and 4) local street. The roadways in Duarte have also been
classified by the Highway Performance Monitoring System (HPMS). According
to the Caltrans-administered HPMS, the roadways in Duarte are categorized into
five functional classifications: 1) Principal Arterial Interstate, 2) Other Principal
Arterial, 3) Minor Arterial, 4) Collector, and 5) Local.              These roadway
classifications are described below.
Principal Arterial Interstate
A Principal Arterial Interstate (functional classification code 11 from the HPMS) is
a freeway that is included as part of the interstate highway system. It is a
controlled access, divided highway that is intended to accommodate high-speed
regional travel. Freeways have grade-separated interchanges that provide
access from freeway to freeway or between freeways and the arterial street
system. The freeways that provide regional access to Duarte are the Foothill
Freeway (Interstate 210) and the San Gabriel River Freeway (Interstate 605).
The I-210 Freeway runs east-west through Duarte and acts as a barrier that
divides the city into a north and south area. The I-210 Freeway carried 254,000
average daily trips in 2004 through Duarte (Source: Caltrans). The I-605
Circulation Element, August 2007           7                Duarte General Plan 2005-2020

CHAPTER 9
CIRCULATION
Freeway runs north-south and connects with the I-210 Freeway near the
southeast corner of Duarte. It is not located within the city boundary of Duarte.
Planning, design, construction, and maintenance of freeways in California are the
responsibility of the State of California Department of Transportation (Caltrans).
So even though the I-210 Freeway is physically located within the boundaries of
Duarte, it is not under the jurisdiction of the City of Duarte.
The HPMS also has a classification of Principal Arterial – Other Freeways and
Expressways (functional classification code 12). This category includes the
freeways and expressways that are not designated as part of the interstate
highway system. There are no such facilities within Duarte.
Other Principal Arterial
The Other Principal Arterial category (functional classification code 14 from the
HPMS) is comparable to a major arterial roadway. It accommodates regional,
sub-regional, and intercity travel and generally has four to six through travel
lanes with a raised median and/or a center left-turn lane. While Other Principal
Arterials accommodate through traffic, they also provide direct access to
adjacent properties and intersecting streets. The right-of-way widths for Other
Principal Arterial roadways in Duarte range from 80 to 108 feet, while the
pavement widths range from 60 to 80 feet. The Other Principal Arterials in
Duarte are Huntington Drive, which is an east-west roadway, and Mountain
Avenue, which is a north-south roadway. Huntington Drive is included as a
component of Historic U.S. Route 66.
Minor Arterial
A Minor Arterial (functional classification code 16 from the HPMS) is an arterial
roadway that has less of a regional significance than Other Principal Arterial
roadways. It accommodates sub-regional and intercity travel and generally has
four to six through travel lanes with a raised median and/or a center left-turn lane.
Minor Arterials accommodate through traffic while also providing direct access to
adjacent properties and intersecting streets. The right-of-way widths for Minor
Arterial roadways in Duarte range from 80 to 100 feet, while the pavement widths
range from 60 to 80 feet. The east-west Minor Arterial roadways in Duarte are
Duarte Road and Royal Oaks Drive. The north-south Minor Arterial roadways in
Duarte are Buena Vista Street, Highland Avenue, Las Lomas Road, Mount Olive
Drive and Mountain Avenue south of Duarte Road.
Circulation Element, August 2007            8              Duarte General Plan 2005-2020

Diagram CIRC - 1
CIRCULATION SYSTEM
1989 DUARTE GENERAL PLAN
CHAPTER 9
CIRCULATION
Collector
A Collector (functional classification code 17 from the HPMS) is a street that is
intended to serve as an intermediate route to accommodate travel between local
streets and arterial roadways and to provide access to the abutting properties.
Collector streets generally have two travel lanes, although four lanes may be
provided at certain locations. The right-of-way width for collector streets in
Duarte is typically 60 feet, while the pavement widths range from 35 to 52 feet.
The east-west collector streets in Duarte are Central Avenue, Evergreen Street,
Fernley Drive, Fish Canyon Road, Galen Street, Hurstview Street, and Royal
Oaks Drive east of Las Lomas Road. The north-south collector streets in Duarte
are Bradbourne Avenue, Cotter Avenue, Hurlock Avenue, part of Fernley Drive,
and Las Lomas Road south of Huntington Drive.
Local
A Local (functional classification code 19 from the HPMS) is a low speed street
that is primarily intended to provide direct access to the abutting properties.
Local streets generally have two travel lanes with parking along both sides of the
street. The right-of-way widths for local streets in Duarte range from 50 to 60
feet, while the pavement widths range from 32 to 40 feet. Most of the streets in
Duarte that are not otherwise classified as arterial roadways or collector streets
are included in the local street category.
Bicycle Trails
The Duarte Bike Trail extends essentially along Royal Oaks Drive and is 1.6 mile
long and consists of 9.96 acres. The majority of the trail is a Class 1 bike trail
(intended for the exclusive use of bicycles and separated from motor vehicles
traffic by lateral space or a physical barrier.) and is improved with asphalt with
parallel dirt treadway from Buena Vista Street to Vineyard Avenue. A Class II
facility is a bicycle lane where a portion of the paved roadway area is marked as
a lane for the use of bicycles. It is identified by BIKE LANE signs, pavement
markings, and lane line stripes. The bike trail becomes a Class III bike trail (a
bicycle route that is designated along a public roadway with BIKE ROUTE signs.
Bicycles share the right-of-way with motorized vehicles and there are no special
markings on the pavement from Vineyard Avenue to the easterly city limit line.
This trail provides regional bicycle assess through Duarte and to the San Gabriel
River bicycle path. Diagram CIRC -2 identifies the location of Duarte Bike Trail.
Circulation Element, August 2007          10             Duarte General Plan 2005-2020
                     Class 1 Bike Trail
                     Class 3 Bike Trail
Diagram CIRC - 2 DUARTE BIKE Trails
CHAPTER 9
CIRCULATION
Duarte’s Transit System
The City of Duarte has operated a “fixed route” [bus] transit system since 1984.
Buses operate along two main routes, weekdays and a single route on
Saturdays. There is no Sunday / Holiday service provided.
The bus fleet consists of “medium duty”, diesel powered vehicles, approximately
30’ in length. The buses are air-conditioned and all vehicles are “accessible” to
the disabled. Two of the buses are “low-floor” vehicles which utilize an on-board
accommodation ramp that eliminates the wheelchair lift apparatus.
The two main transit routes operated by Duarte Transit System are known as the
“Blue” and “Green” routes. Both routes are designed to operate essentially a
circular route of line and serve virtually every venue within the City of Duarte
considered to be of importance. The “Blue “route operates in a “clockwise”
direction and the “Green” route operates in a “counter-clockwise” direction. As
the two routes essentially “overlay” each other, patrons may easily move in either
direction along the route of line.
The routes connect with every transit route operated to and through the City of
Duarte, operated by Foothill Transit (Lines: 184; 187; 272; 494 plus a “Transit
Store” located at #1740 E. Huntington Drive) and MTA (Line 264) which provide
inter-community public transit service to / from points outside of Duarte. The main
transfer connection point is located along Huntington Drive at the intersection of
Highland Avenue. Historically, this location was to be a “purpose developed”
transit center, but to date, this has not been accomplished. The Duarte Transit
System routes also have a timed inter-connection at the Target Shopping Center
which further provides a location for a short layover period.
On weekdays, both “Blue” and “Green” routes operate an approximate 12 hour
spread of service between the hours of 7:00 AM and 7:00 PM. Both routes
operate on an hourly frequency; that is, there is a bus passing by a specific
location on each route every 60 minutes – an easy schedule to recall. On
Saturdays, only the “Blue” (“clockwise”) route is operated on an approximate 10
hour spread of service between the hours of 8:00 AM to 6:00 PM. The frequency
of service is hourly.
A third route, “Commuter” operates on weekdays between 5:30 AM and 7:00 AM
(two westbound trips only). The “Commuter” route is omni-directional and
basically overlays the “Green” route in easterly Duarte and overlays the “Blue”
route in westerly Duarte. The purpose of the “Commuter” route is to provide
home – to – transit transfer connection point service for Duarte residents who
utilize public transit to / from their place of employment. In the PM, regular “Blue”
Circulation Element, August 2007             12           Duarte General Plan 2005-2020

CHAPTER 9
CIRCULATION
and “Green” route service provides the distribution from the transit transfer
connection points to residential locations.
Funding for the Duarte Transit System is derived from three sources: The
Proposition ‘A’ Transportation Fund (a ¼ cent sales tax surcharge approved by
the California voters); the Proposition ‘C’ Transportation Fund and the Air Quality
Management Fund. To date, the Duarte Transit System has not required
General Fund support.
A point of concern pertains to the December, 2005 discontinuance of Line 177 by
MTA, which eliminated public transit service east of Pasadena along Foothill
Boulevard through the cities of Arcadia and Monrovia and subsequently
eliminated public transit service along portions of Royal Oaks Drive in Duarte, the
Duarte main transfer connection point and City of Hope. At the same time, MTA
Line 264, which operates along Duarte Road with a terminal at the City of Hope,
was re-configured to not serve the Duarte main transfer point by having the Line
264 turnback point occur at Highland Avenue and Business Center Drive; some
distance from the Duarte main transfer point. In particular, it is important that
Line 264 be restored to its former route of line to provide a convenient and
efficient connection to / from other public transit routes serving Duarte, including
the Duarte Transit System.
Circulation Element, August 2007          13               Duarte General Plan 2005-2020

                                                                     Diagram CIRC - 3 TRANSIT SYSTEM ROUTE                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        RD
                                                                                                                  HOLIDAY SCHEDULE                                                                                                                                                                                                            IDG
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  E
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               GRRENBANK
                                                                                                                   NO SERVICE ON:                                                                                                                                                                                                    OKR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  RO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 B                                             ES
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           CR
        Martin L. King Day, Presidents Day, Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day,                                                                                                                                                                                     SUNNYDALE DR.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ➞                                     NE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          N
                     Thanksgiving Day, Christmas Day, and New Years Day.                                                                                                                                                                                                             ➞                                           ➞                 TA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      N
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   MOUNTAINCREST RD.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            DEERLANE DR.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ➞ VINEYARD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           LAS LOMAS
                                    HALF DAY SERVICE ON:                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ➞     ➞
        Christmas Eve (Last run is 2:00 pm)     New Year’s Eve (Last run is 2:00 pm)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ➞
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ➞                       ➞
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ➞
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ➞
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ➞ AKS DR.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ROYAL OAKS DR.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ➞                                                  ➞
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              D
                                                                                                                                                                                    ➞                                                                                                                                                             ➞
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             O                                                             R
                                                                                                                                                              HIGHLAND
                                                                                                                                    ROYAL OAKS DR.
                                MOUNTAIN AVE.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          AL                                                           W
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        OY                                                              AY
                                                                                        HS
                                                                                      LP ING                           Junipero                                                     ➞                                                     Mt. Olive
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ➞                                                R
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ➞                    R
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               K
                                                                                                                                                                                                           Bradbourne
                                                                                                                                                ➞
                                                                                                                                       3RD STREET                                                                                                                                                                                                 PA
                                                                                    RA RK
                                                                                     PA LOT         ➞                              ➞                                                                                                                                                                   ➞                                      TO
                                                                                                    ➞
                                                                                                                                              ➞                                 ➞                                                                     ➞
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       HACIENDA DR.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ➞            N
                                                                                                                  ➞
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          A
                                                                           ➞                                                       ➞                                                                                                                                                                   ➞ ➞
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      C
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     EN
                                                                ➞                                                                             ➞                              ➞                                                                        ➞
                                                                                                                       Brycedale
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Elmhurst Ave.
                                                                                                                                                         Pops Rd.
                                                                    ➞
                                                                                                    ➞
                                                                                                                                                                                      1900 Block
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          CRESTFIELD DR.
                                                          ➞         ➞                                                              CITY FIT. SR. D.U.                    HUNTINGTON                DRIVE
                                                          ➞                                                                        HALL CTR. CTR. S.D.
                                                                                                    ➞                                                                                                                                                                                      ➞      .
                                                          TARGET                                                       TEEN                                                                                                                                                              Y DR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     NLE
               MOUNTAIN AVE.
                                                                                      LIBRARY                                              CENTRAL AVE.
                                                                                                                      CENTER                                                                                                                                                 FER
                                                                                                                                                                         HIGHLAND
                         ➞                                WAL                                                                              EVERGREEN ST.
                                                          MART
                         ➞                                                 THREE RANCH RD.
                                                                                                                      DUARTE RD.
                                                                                                    BUENA VISTA
                                                                                                                      ➞
                                                                              BROADLAND
                                                         HURSTVIEW
              ➞                                                                                                   ➞
NEWINGTON
                                                LE
                                                  W
                                                                                                    ➞              KELLWIL WAY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      N
                                                     IS
                                                         TO         ➞
                                                                                          DELFORD
              ➞
                                                            N
                                                                     ➞
                 ➞
                                                                    HU
                                                                      RL
                                                                         OC
                                                                                                    ➞             GALEN ST.                                                                                                                                                                                                L E G E N D
                                                                           K
             BE➞
                                                                H
   IN A                                                   A
                                                             C                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Green Line Bus Stop
       VE.     C                                      R
                                                         O
                KV                                   B                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Blue Line Bus Stop
                               ILL
  NTA                                           ES
                                                     T.                                                                                                                                                                                  MAP NOT TO SCALE
 MOU                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Commuter Line Stop

CHAPTER 9
CIRCULATION
Existing Traffic Conditions
The existing traffic conditions on the arterial roadways and collector streets in
Duarte have been evaluated in terms of daily traffic volumes, roadway capacities,
and levels of service for each roadway link in the circulation system. Traffic
volume counts were taken in November 2005 at representative locations
throughout the city to quantify the existing 24-hour traffic volumes. The traffic
conditions on each roadway link were evaluated by comparing the existing traffic
volumes to the current capacity provided by each roadway to determine the
volume/capacity ratios and levels of service. The daily traffic volumes, number of
lanes, capacity values, volume/capacity ratios, and levels of service for existing
conditions on the Duarte roadway network are shown in Table CIRC -1. The
locations surveyed represent the roadways that were included in the 1989
General Plan.
The capacity values represent the maximum number of daily vehicle trips that
can adequately be accommodated on each type of roadway facility. The
capacity values are based on the number of through travel lanes and the
assumption that each lane has a capacity of 8,000 vehicles per day. The
capacity assumptions for the arterial roadways and collector streets are as
follows: 2 lanes – 16,000 vehicles per day, 4 lanes – 32,000 vehicles per day, 6
lanes – 48,000 vehicles per day.
Table CIRC -1 indicates that all of the roadway segments in Duarte are currently
operating at acceptable levels of service (LOS A through D) except for Mountain
Avenue between the I-210 Freeway and Duarte Road, which operates at LOS E.
Circulation Element, August 2007         15             Duarte General Plan 2005-2020

CHAPTER 9
CIRCULATION
                                       Table CIRC – 1
                        Existing Traffic Conditions November 2005
                                        Daily Traffic  # of Lanes        V/C       Level of
Roadway/Location                          Volume      & Capacity        Ratio      Service
                                     ARTERIAL ROADWAYS
Huntington Drive
  Mountain Ave to Buena Vista St          26,530       4 – 32,000       0.83          D
  Buena Vista St to Highland Ave          23,810       4 – 32,000       0.74          C
  Highland Ave to Bradbourne Ave          26,460       4 – 32,000       0.83          D
  Bradbourne Ave to Mt Olive Dr           28,640       4 – 32,000       0.90          E
  Mt. Olive Dr to Las Lomas Rd            26,750       4 – 32,000       0.84          D
  East of Las Lomas Rd                    26,170       4 – 32,000       0.82          D
Duarte Road
  Mountain Ave to Buena Vista St          11,950       4 – 32,000       0.37          A
  Buena Vista St to Highland Ave          12,740       4 – 32,000       0.40          A
Mountain Avenue
  Huntington Dr to I-210 Freeway          24,500       4 – 32,000       0.77          C
  I-210 Freeway to Duarte Rd              31,040       4 – 32,000       0.97          E
  South of Duarte Rd                       9,550       4 – 32,000       0.30          A
Buena Vista Street
  Royal Oaks Dr to Huntington Dr          11,310       4 – 32,000       0.35          A
  Huntington Dr to I-210 Freeway          18,860       4 – 32,000       0.59          A
  I-210 Freeway to Duarte Rd              15,170       4 – 32,000       0.47          A
  South of Duarte Rd                       7,860       4 – 32,000       0.25          A
Highland Avenue
  Royal Oaks Dr to Huntington Dr           3,750       4 – 32,000       0.12          A
  Huntington Dr to I-210 Freeway          11,480       2 – 16,000       0.72          C
  I-210 Freeway to Duarte Rd               9,650       2 – 16,000       0.60          B
Las Lomas Road
  Royal Oaks Dr to Huntington Dr           9,440       4 – 32,000       0.30          A
Mount Olive Drive
  Royal Oaks Dr to Huntington Dr          10,230       2 – 16,000       0.64          B
  South of Huntington Dr                  23,870       4 – 32,000       0.75          C
Royal Oaks Drive
  West of Buena Vista St                  10,650       2 – 16,000       0.67          B
  Buena Vista St to Highland Ave           8,550       2 – 16,000       0.53          A
  Highland Ave to Bradbourne Ave           7,610       2 – 16,000       0.48          A
  Bradbourne Ave to Mt Olive Dr            7,870       2 – 16,000       0.49          A
  Mt. Olive Dr to Las Lomas Rd            10,380       2 – 16,000       0.65          B
                                     COLLECTOR STREETS
Royal Oaks Drive
  East of Las Lomas Rd                     8,000       2 – 16,000       0.50          A
  West of Encanto Parkway                  1,400       2 – 16,000       0.09          A
Central Avenue
  West of Buena Vista St                   3,880       2 – 16,000       0.24          A
  East of Buena Vista St                  12,200       2 – 16,000       0.76          C
  West of Highland Ave                     3,550       2 – 16,000       0.22          A
  Highland Ave to Bradbourne Ave           7,100       2 – 16,000       0.44          A
Bradbourne Avenue
  Royal Oaks Dr to Huntington Dr           1,260       2 – 16,000       0.08          A
Las Lomas Road
  South of Huntington Dr                   4,080       2 – 16,000       0.26          A
Circulation Element, August 2007               16            Duarte General Plan 2005-2020

CHAPTER 9
CIRCULATION
Level of service (LOS) is a qualitative indicator that is used to describe the
prevailing operating conditions on a roadway. It is a comprehensive measure
that is representative of the various levels of congestion and delay experienced
by motorists. Level of service ranges from LOS A (excellent conditions) to LOS F
(extreme congestion), with LOS A through D generally considered to represent
acceptable conditions in an urban area. Table CIRC - 2 presents a description of
the six levels of service and shows the relationship between LOS and
volume/capacity ratios for a roadway link.
                                           Table CIRC – 2
                                 Level of Service Descriptions
Level of                                    Description                         Volume/Capacity
Service                                                                                Ratio
                Excellent operation. Little or no congestion and delay.
      A         Turning movements are easily made and most drivers have                < 0.60
                freedom of movement in traffic. All approaches to the
                intersections appear quite open.
                Very good operation. Little congestion and delay. Many
      B         drivers begin to feel somewhat restricted within platoons of        0.60 to 0.70
                vehicles. Approaches to the intersections may occasionally
                be fully utilized and traffic queues start to form.
                Good operation. Light congestion and minor delays.
                Occasional backups on critical approaches at intersections.
      C         Occasionally drivers may have to wait more than 60 seconds          0.70 to 0.80
                and back-ups may develop behind turning vehicles. Most
                drivers feel somewhat restricted.
                Fair operation. Congestion and delays on critical
      D         approaches, but intersections functional. Vehicles are              0.80 to 0.90
                sometimes required to wait more than 60 seconds during
                short peaks and wait through more than one signal cycle.
                There are no long-standing traffic queues.
                Poor operation. Severe congestion and long delays. Some
      E         long-standing vehicular queues develop on critical                  0.90 to 1.00
                approaches to intersections. Delays may be up to several
                minutes. Blockage of intersections may occur.
                Forced flow. Jammed conditions. Total breakdown of traffic
      F         flows with stop-and-go operation. Backups from downstream              > 1.00
                locations or on cross streets may restrict or prevent
                movement of vehicles out of the intersection approach lanes.
Projected Future Traffic Conditions
The future traffic volume forecasts for the buildout year of 2020 are based on
overall regional ambient growth factors, the traffic that would be generated by
Circulation Element, August 2007                  17                Duarte General Plan 2005-2020

CHAPTER 9
CIRCULATION
several proposed short-range development projects, and the traffic that would be
generated by three potential long-range development concepts.
Ambient Traffic Growth
Ambient traffic growth represents the overall increase in traffic volumes that
would occur as a result of general growth in population, employment, and
commerce in the region. Ambient growth would occur on the Duarte roadway
system even if there were no change in housing, employment, or land use within
Duarte because of the increases in through traffic volumes and the traffic that
would be generated from outside the Duarte city boundaries. For purposes of
this General Plan update, it has been assumed that the existing 2005 traffic
levels would increase by a factor of 1.119 by the year 2020. This growth factor
was obtained from the 2004 Congestion Management Program for Los Angeles
County (Los Angeles County Metropolitan Transportation Authority; July 22,
2004).
Short-Range Traffic Generation
Short-range traffic growth would occur as a result of traffic that would be
generated by development projects that are currently proposed in Duarte. These
projects and the volumes of daily traffic that would be generated by the
developments are shown in Table CIRC - 3. The trip generation rates used for
the traffic estimates are from the Trip Generation manual (Institute of
Transportation Engineers, 7th Edition, 2003) or from traffic studies that were
conducted for each project. As shown, the six projects would generate a
cumulative total of 4,527 vehicle trips per day. This traffic was geographically
distributed onto the roadway network in accordance with the assumptions
outlined in the traffic report for each project to quantify the anticipated increases
in traffic volumes on each roadway segment.
Circulation Element, August 2007          18              Duarte General Plan 2005-2020
CHAPTER 9
CIRCULATION
                                     Table CIRC – 3
            Generated Traffic from Short-Range Development Projects
                                                                           Generated
           Project/Land Use             Quantity    Trip Generation       Daily Traffic
                                                          Rate              Volume
Swiss Trail/Huntington Drive Project
   Residential Detached Condos           29 units       9.57/unit               278
Mountain Ave/Hamilton Road Retail
Center
   Furniture Store                      18,630 sf        5.06/ksf                94
   High Turnover Restaurant              4,684 sf      130.34/ksf               611
   Retail                                6,030 sf       42.94/ksf               259
   Fast Food Restaurant                  4,400 sf        716/ksf              3,150
   Total                                33,744 sf                             4,114
   Net Trips w/20% Passby Reduction                                           3,291
Huntington Courts
   Single Family Residential             51 units       9.57/unit               488
Attallah Ranch Residential
Development
   Single Family Residential             15 units       9.57/unit               144
Duarte Gardens                           17 units       9.57/unit               163
   Single Family Residential
1600 block of Huntington Drive           17 units       9.57/unit               163
                TOTAL                       -               -                 4,527
Long-Range Traffic Generation
The Land Use Element of the General Plan update indicates that two areas of
Duarte that are currently underdeveloped could potentially be developed with
mixed-use projects. One is a City Center project located in the northeast and
southeast corners of Buena Vista Street and Huntington Drive. While the levels
of proposed development have not yet been finalized, it has been assumed for
the traffic analysis that it would have an estimated 165,000 square feet of retail
space and 165 multi-family dwelling units.
The other development area is located north of Duarte Road and west of
Highland Avenue adjacent to the proposed Gold Line Metro station. It has been
assumed that this development would have 120 multi-family dwelling units and
100,000 square feet of mixed retail and office space. In addition, it has been
assumed for the long-range analysis scenario that the Duarte Gold Line Metro
station will have been completed and is anticipated to attract a ridership of 500
passengers per day. The Gold Line would reduce the overall volume of vehicular
traffic on the roadway network because some of the rail transit users would
otherwise have been traveling in automobiles. It has been assumed for the traffic
Circulation Element, August 2007           19             Duarte General Plan 2005-2020

CHAPTER 9
CIRCULATION
analysis, however, that the traffic generated by the Gold Line would be added to
the roadway network, which thereby results in a conservative (over-estimated)
traffic forecast. It is also likely that the mixed use development adjacent to the
Gold Line station would generate less traffic than what is shown in Table CIRC –
4 because the trip generation rates are typically lower for transit-oriented
developments located within walking distance of a transit station.
The City of Hope anticipates building 360,000 sq. ft. of new Science Park on their
campus sometime before 2020. In addition, a five story 108,000 sq. ft. Cancer
Immunotherapeutics and Tumor Immunology Center (CITI) broke ground in early
2007. Employees for the CITI will come from existing portable trailers on the City
of Hope campus so no additional trips will be generated.
The traffic generation estimates for these long-range development projects are
shown in Table CIRC - 4. As shown, the three planned developments, would
generate an estimated 13,772 daily vehicle trips. This total includes a 20 percent
reduction in the number of retail trips to account for passby traffic. Passby traffic
represents the motorists who elect to stop and patronize one or more of the retail
establishments while driving by the project site. As this traffic would already be
traveling on the roadway system, it would not result in a net increase in traffic
volumes on the roadways that serve the site.
The traffic volumes shown in Table CIRC - 4 were geographically distributed onto
the roadway network in accordance with the trip distribution percentages
presented in Exhibit B-3, of the “Regional Daily Trip Distribution Factors,” of the
“Congestion Management Program for Los Angeles County” (LACMTA, July 22,
2004).
Circulation Element, August 2007            20           Duarte General Plan 2005-2020

CHAPTER 9
CIRCULATION
                                    Table CIRC – 4
            Generated Traffic from Long-Range Development Projects
                                                                             Generated
           Project/Land Use            Quantity     Trip Generation         Daily Traffic
                                                           Rate               Volume
City Center Mixed Use Development
   Residential – Apartments/Condos     165 units         6.72/unit              1,109
   Retail                             165,000 sf         42.94/ksf              7,085
   Passby Reduction (20% of Retail)                                           (1,417)
   Total                                                                        6,777
Gold Line Mixed Use Development
   Residential – Apartments/Condos     120 units         6.72/unit                806
   Office                              50,000 sf         11.01/ksf                551
   Retail                              50,000 sf         42.94/ksf              2,147
   Passby Reduction (20% of Retail)                                             (429)
   Total                                                                        3,075
Gold Line Metro Station                500 daily    2 trips/passenger           1,000
                                      passengers
City of Hope Science Park            360,000 sq. ft       8.11/ksf              2,920
                TOTAL                      -                 -                13,772
Future Traffic Forecasts
The future traffic volume forecasts were projected by expanding the existing
traffic volumes by the ambient growth factor discussed previously, then adding
the traffic that would be generated by the short-range and long-range
development projects presented above in Tables CIRC - 3 and CIRC - 4. The
projected daily traffic volumes for the year 2020, the proposed number of lanes
according to the current Circulation Element, the roadway capacity values, the
volume/capacity ratios, and the levels of service for each roadway segment are
shown in Table CIRC - 5. All of the roadway segments are projected to operate
at acceptable levels of service (LOS A through D) except for Huntington Drive (all
of the segments except one) and Mountain Avenue between the I-210 Freeway
and Duarte Road.
Circulation Element, August 2007           21               Duarte General Plan 2005-2020

CHAPTER 9
CIRCULATION
                                        Table CIRC – 5
                               Projected 2020 Traffic Conditions
                                         Daily Traffic   # of Lanes        V/C       Level of
Roadway/Location                           Volume        & Capacity       Ratio      Service
                                      ARTERIAL ROADWAYS
Huntington Drive
  Mountain Ave to Buena Vista St           30,900        4 – 32,000       0.97          E
  Buena Vista St to Highland Ave           27,500        4 – 32,000       0.86          D
  Highland Ave to Bradbourne Ave           32,000        4 – 32,000       1.00          F
  Bradbourne Ave to Mt Olive Dr            34,100        4 – 32,000       1.07          F
  Mt. Olive Dr to Las Lomas Rd             31,500        4 – 32,000       0.98          E
  East of Las Lomas Rd                     30,000        4 – 32,000       0.94          E
Duarte Road
  Mountain Ave to Buena Vista St           14,200        4 – 32,000       0.44          A
  Buena Vista St to Highland Ave           18,800        4 – 32,000       0.59          A
Mountain Avenue
  Huntington Dr to I-210 Freeway           28,200        4 – 32,000       0.88          D
  I-210 Freeway to Duarte Rd               36,300        4 – 32,000       1.13          F
  South of Duarte Rd                       12,000        4 – 32,000       0.38          A
Buena Vista Street
  Royal Oaks Dr to Huntington Dr           13,800        4 – 32,000       0.43          A
  Huntington Dr to I-210 Freeway           23,600        4 – 32,000       0.74          C
  I-210 Freeway to Duarte Rd               20,400        4 – 32,000       0.64          B
  South of Duarte Rd                        9,300        4 – 32,000       0.29          A
Highland Avenue
  Royal Oaks Dr to Huntington Dr            5,100        4 – 32,000       0.16          A
  Huntington Dr to I-210 Freeway           14,600        4 – 32,000       0.46          A
  I-210 Freeway to Duarte Rd               14,000        4 – 32,000       0.44          A
Las Lomas Road
  Royal Oaks Dr to Huntington Dr           11,000        4 – 32,000       0.34          A
Mount Olive Drive
  Royal Oaks Dr to Huntington Dr           11,700        4 – 32,000       0.37          A
  South of Huntington Dr                   28,200        4 – 32,000       0.88          D
Royal Oaks Drive
  West of Buena Vista St                   12,200        4 – 32,000       0.38          A
  Buena Vista St to Highland Ave           10,300        4 – 32,000       0.32          A
  Highland Ave to Bradbourne Ave            9,300        4 – 32,000       0.29          A
  Bradbourne Ave to Mt Olive Dr             9,400        4 – 32,000       0.29          A
  Mt. Olive Dr to Las Lomas Rd             12,100        4 – 32,000       0.38          A
                                      COLLECTOR STREETS
Royal Oaks Drive
  East of Las Lomas Rd                      9,100        2 – 16,000       0.57          A
  West of Encanto Parkway                   1,700        2 – 16,000       0.11          A
Central Avenue
  West of Buena Vista St                    4,900        2 – 16,000       0.31          A
  East of Buena Vista St                   14,000        2 – 16,000       0.88          D
  West of Highland Ave                      4,300        2 – 16,000       0.27          A
  Highland Ave to Bradbourne Ave            8,200        2 – 16,000       0.51          A
Bradbourne Avenue
  Royal Oaks Dr to Huntington Dr            1,700        2 – 16,000       0.11          A
Las Lomas Road
  South of Huntington Dr                    4,700        2 – 16,000       0.29          A
Circulation Element, August 2007                22             Duarte General Plan 2005-2020

CHAPTER 9
CIRCULATION
Recommended Circulation Plan
Based on the traffic forecasts and the projected traffic conditions for the year
2020, it has been determined that the overall plan for the circulation system
should be essentially the same as the HPMS functional classification system. It
is recommended, therefore, that the roadway classification system presented in
the 1989 General Plan be revised so that the updated General Plan will be
consistent with HPMS functional classification system, which categorizes the
roadways as Principal Arterial Interstate, Other Principal Arterial, Minor Arterial,
Collector, and Local streets.
Two of the arterial roadways are projected to operate at unacceptable conditions;
i.e., nearly the entire length of Huntington Drive and Mountain Avenue between
the I-210 Freeway and Duarte Road. As these roadway links are shown to
operate only slightly above the capacity levels, it would not be necessary to
widen the roadways to a six-lane cross section. It is recommended, however,
that measures be taken to increase the capacity and enhance traffic flow along
these two roadways. Such measures that could potentially be considered
include peak period parking restrictions to provide an additional travel lane,
intersection improvements to provide double left-turn lanes and exclusive right-
turn lanes at major intersections, and traffic signal coordination.
It is also recommended that the roadway cross-sections be standardized for each
roadway classification. The 1989 General Plan shows ranges for the right-of-way
and pavement widths. While it is acceptable for roadways of the same
classification to have varying right-of-way and pavement widths for existing
conditions, it would be advantageous to have a consistent standard cross-section
that would be applicable to development proposals and dedication requirements.
The recommended Year 2020 Circulation System Master Plan Diagram is shown
on Diagram CIRC - 4 and the recommended Standard Roadway Cross-Sections
are shown on Figure CIRC - 1. It is also recommended that the following
measures be implemented.
     •   For the entire length of Huntington Drive, for Mountain Avenue between
         Huntington Drive and Duarte Road, and for any other arterial roadways
         that are determined to operate at unacceptable conditions, measures
         should be taken to increase the capacity and enhance traffic flow during
         peak periods. Such measures that could be considered include, but are
         not limited to:
Circulation Element, August 2007         23               Duarte General Plan 2005-2020

CHAPTER 9
CIRCULATION
             -  Peak period parking restrictions to provide an additional travel lane
                in the peak direction of traffic flow (e.g. 6:00 to 9:00 a.m. on one
                side of the street and 3:30 to 6:30 p.m. on the other side).
             -  Intersection improvements to provide double left-turn lanes and
                exclusive right-turn lanes at major intersections.               A major
                intersection is an intersection of two roadways that are designated
                as arterials and/or collectors in this Circulation Element.
             -  Traffic signal coordination.
    •    Right-of-way dedications should be required of development applicants to
         accommodate the recommended roadway cross-sections and the
         enhanced intersection improvements at major intersections.
    •    The City of Duarte should consider the implementation of a traffic impact
         fee program that would require developers to provide a fair-share
         contribution to a pool of funds that could be used for future transportation
         system improvements.
Circulation Element, August 2007            24               Duarte General Plan 2005-2020

ROADWAY TYPE
   FREEWAY
   PRINCIPAL ARTERIAL
   MINOR ARTERIAL
   COLLECTOR
                                                                                                                                         BRA DBO URNE AVE   MOUNT O LIVE D R
   LOCAL STREET
                                                                       BUE NA V ISTA S T                      HIG HLA ND AV E
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ON
                                                                                           COTTE R AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Y
                                                                                                                                                                                                               H   C AN
                                                                                                                                                                                                          FI S
                                                                                                                                                                                LAS LO MAS RD
                           ROYA L O AK S DR
                                                                                                         HUN TING TON DR
                                                                                                                                                                                                      R
                                                                                                                                                                                                  D
                                                                                                                                CEN TRA L AVE                                                 Y
    FO O THIL L FREE WAY                                                                                                                                                                    LE
                                                                                                                                                                                        N
           (I- 21 0)                                                                                                                                                                R
                                                                                                                                                                               FE
                                     EV ERG REE N ST
                                                                       DUAR TE RD
                                                                                                                                       AY
                             H
                                 U
                                                                                                                                      W
                                     R
                                                                                                                                    EE
                                         ST                                                                                        R
                                            V
                                                IE                                                                  IE
               NTA                                   W                                                                 L
                                                                                                                    (I- R I V
                  IN A                                    ST                                                           60 E
                      VE
                                                                                                                         5) R
                                                           GA LE N S T                                                        F
                                                                                                                R
                                                                                                           AB
              M OU
                                                         HURLOCK AVE
                                                                                                          G
                                                                                                         N
                                                                                                         SA
                                                                                                                                                                  Diagram CIRC - 4
                                                                                                                                                                  CIRCULATION SYSTEM
                                                                                                                                                                  2020 MASTER PLAN
                                  108' Right of Way
                                   80' Pavement
                                    14' Median
                                Principal Arterial
                                     100' Right of Way
                                      80' Pavement
                                        14' Median
                                  Minor Arterial
                                 60' Right of Way
                                   40' Pavement
                                 Collector Street
                                    50'-60' Right of Way
                                     35'-40' Pavement
                                       Local Street
Figure CIRC - 1
Standard Roadway Cross-Sections
CHAPTER 9
CIRCULATION
IMPLEMENTATION MEASURES
Government Code 65400 requires the legislative body to consider and adopt
reasonable and practical means for implementing the general plan. This is
necessary so that the plan will serve as an effective guide for orderly growth and
development, preservation and conservation of open-space land and natural
resources, and the efficient expenditure of public funds relating to the subjects
addressed in the general plan. The State also requires an annual report to the
legislative body, State Department of Housing and Community Development
(HCD) and State Office of Planning and Research on the status of the plan and
progress in implementing the plan. HCD checks to see if the city is making
progress in meeting its fair share of regional housing needs.
This section provides an implementation matrix for policies found in the
Circulation chapter. The matrix identifies the policy to be implemented, the
implementation measure to be used for that policy, the responsible agency or
department that will be implementing the measure, the funding source and the
estimated timeframe to complete the implementation.
Responsible Agency:
         All = All Departments                   AS = Administrative Services
         CD = Community Development              PS = Public Safety
         CM = City Manager                       P&R = Parks and Recreation
Funding Source:
         GF = General Fund                       SF= State funds
         RA = Redevelopment Agency               FF = Federal Funds
          G = Grants                             OF = Other Funds
         DF = Development Fees
Implementation Timeframe (or as resources provide):
         ST = Short-term by 2009                 LT = Long Term by 2020
         MT = Mid-term by 2015                   On = Ongoing
Circulation Element, August 2007         27             Duarte General Plan 2005-2020
   CHAPTER 9
   CIRCULATION
                                               Table Circ – 6
                               Circulation Implementation Measures
                                                                  Responsible     Funding       Time
 Policy #                 Implementation Measure                     Agency        Source      frame
Circ 1.1.1     Monitor traffic conditions on Huntington Drive,    CD             GF, FF        On
               Royal Oaks Drive, Duarte Road, Evergreen
               Street, and Central Avenue and develop
               measures to improve traffic flow and mitigate
               adverse traffic impacts where necessary.
               Install protected/permissive left-turn phases at
               the left-turn lanes of signalized intersections,
               where feasible, so that the signal would
               display a green arrow followed by a green ball
               to increase the capacity of the left-turn
               movements. Employ strategies to enhance
               traffic flow on Duarte streets at times when
               freeway traffic is diverted onto the city streets
               during incidents, which may include the
               overriding of traffic signals by police personnel
               and the temporary use of the travel lanes on
               the opposing side of the street.
Circ 1.1.2     Evaluate roadways that are not constructed to      CD             GF, FF        On
Circ 1.1.3     General Plan standards and program
               improvements into the city’s capital
               improvements program (CIP) that are
               necessary to render the roadways consistent
               with the General Plan. Incorporate design
               features and measures to preserve and
               maintain adequate visibility at intersections.
               Seek to Stagger school hours where traffic
               conflicts exist between schools.
Circ 1.1.4     Traffic impacts from proposed development          CD             OF, DF        On
               projects should be analyzed and any
               significant adverse impacts shall be mitigated
               in     accordance        with    the    California
               Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) and the
               Los Angeles County Congestion Management
               Program (CMP).
Circ 1.1.5     Evaluate the traffic impacts from proposed         CD             GF            On
               development projects in adjacent cities as part
               of the environmental (CEQA) and project
               review process and implement measures to
               mitigate any significant traffic impacts.
Circ 1.1.6     Require developers/property owners to              CD             DF, OF        On
               dedicate sufficient right-of-way, in conjunction
               with proposed development projects, where
               current right-of-way widths are substandard
               according to the General Plan.
Circ 2.1.1     Establish an acceptable level of service or        CD             GF            ST
               traffic volume on local residential streets. If
               these standards are exceeded, traffic
   Circulation Element, August 2007                   28              Duarte General Plan 2005-2020

   CHAPTER 9
   CIRCULATION
               reduction and/or traffic calming measures may
               be considered. Such measures may include
               but are not limited to lane narrowing,
               pedestrian crossing lights in the pavement,
               stop signs, specialized pavement design
               (color and texture), lane and/or crosswalk
               striping, and turn restrictions. Strictly enforce
               posted or prima facie speed limits in
               residential neighborhoods.
Circ 2.1.2     Post signs to designate the arterial roadways     CD            GF            On
               that are legal truck routes and strictly enforce
               all truck route laws on city streets.
Circ 2.1.3     In response to resident complaints or             CD            GF            On
Circ 2.1.4     requests, conduct neighborhood traffic studies
               to determine the nature and extent of actual
               and perceived traffic problems and consider
               implementing traffic control and/or traffic
               calming measures where appropriate.
Circ 2.1.5     As part of the environmental review process,      CD            GF            On
               project generated traffic must be reduced
               through appropriate mitigation measures
Circ 3.1.1     Actively participate as a prime advocate in the   CM            GF, G         ST
               planning process undertaken by MTA to
               develop and implement the Gold Line rail
               transit facility with a station in Duarte.
Circ 3.1.2     Continue to assess transit dependent needs        CD            FF            On
               to better serve patrons wishing to travel
               between major destinations and adjust transit
               routes accordingly.
Circ 3.1.3     Duarte will continue to cooperate with            CM            FF, SF        On
               surrounding cities, MTA, and Foothill Transit
               in developing schedules and routes for the
               Duarte Transit System. If and when the MTA
               Gold Line station is developed in Duarte, the
               Duarte Transit System should modify the
               schedules and routes as needed to serve as a
               feeder to the rail transit station.
Circ 3.1.4     Major developments in Duarte should be            CD            DF, OF        On
               required to provide bike racks, bus stops and
               shelters where appropriate, and information
               regarding the availability of transit systems
               and rideshare services. Incorporate local and
               regional transit measures into the design and
               implementation of development projects.
Circ 3.1.5     Include the installation of sidewalks in all      CD            GF, SF,       On
               future     roadway        widening     and   new                FF, DF, OF
               construction projects to provide a continuous
               and convenient link for pedestrians. Require
               applicants to provide sidewalks adjacent to
               the project site along the frontage of all
               development projects and to provide
               pedestrian walkways to serve as links
               between the public sidewalks and the on-site
   Circulation Element, August 2007                    29           Duarte General Plan 2005-2020
CHAPTER 9
CIRCULATION
            developments. Support programs and projects
            to provide convenient pedestrian linkages
            between adjacent properties, within individual
            developments, and from the public right-of-
            way to the private developments. Prepare a
            bicycle plan and implement it as availability
            arises    in   conjunction     with    private
            development, street improvement projects,
            and funding grants.          Incorporate the
            construction of bicycle routes or bike lanes
            into future roadway improvement projects,
            where feasible. Incorporate measures into
            the    public   right-of-way    and    private
            development projects to ensure that the
            Duarte downtown area is pedestrian friendly.
Circulation Element, August 2007                30         Duarte General Plan 2005-2020
